CATALOGUING A MAN'S LOVE OF MID TO LATE 20th CENTURY POSTERS The Guy McKone Collection at the TIFF Film Reference Library

By Sasha Danielle Blais, Honours BA Near Eastern and Classical Archaeology, Wilfrid Laurier University, 2014

A Thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in the Program of Film and Photographic Preservation and Collections Management

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2016 © Sasha Danielle Blais 2016

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. This is a true copy of the thesis, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my thesis may be made electronically available to the public.

ii

Cataloguing a Man's Love of Mid to Late 20th Century Posters: The Guy McKone Collection at the TIFF Film Reference Library Sasha Danielle Blais Master of Arts, Film & Photographic Preservation and Collections Management, Fall 2016 Ryerson University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Abstract Despite the renewed interest in ephemera, there is limited research available on film ephemera. A survey of current literature shows there is a clear lack of work being done to study and preserve this material in public institutions. This thesis looked at the management and care of ephemera collections, specifically poster collections. The Toronto International Film Festival's Film Reference Library (FRL) has developed a large reference collection as well as numerous special collections from various directors, artists, and donors. The Guy McKone Collection has over 900 posters in various formats. The goal of this project included: organizing, cataloguing, describing, and partial digitization of the material. By creating a comprehensive catalogue, I have identified and discussed issues that arise while processing a poster collection. Policies, procedures, storage space, and management systems affect how these collections are ultimately handled. My goal is to start a conversation on the importance of film ephemera and to show how vital ephemera is for collections and historical narratives. I also identify issues that arise when managing collections of this type, and provide initial suggestions for the management and preservation of poster collections.

iii

Acknowledgements I would like to thank Jason Cheong and Kate Watson in the Special Collections department of the Film Reference Library who were very supportive throughout this project. Thank you to the rest of the team in the FRL for all their help. This project could not have been completed without all of you. Thank you Asen Ivanov for being my first reader and supporting me during this process. Thank you to the Image Art Department for their continued work to create a quality FPPCM Master's program. Finally, thank you to all those outside of Ryerson who supported me throughout this process, I truly appreciate it. You kept me from going insane during the writing of this project.

iv

Table of Contents Analytical Paper 1. Introduction 1.1 Guy McKone Collection 2. Institutional History 2.1 TIFF Film Reference Library 3. Literature Review 3.1 Reference Material 3.2 Cataloguing Ephemera 3.3 Poster Collecting 4. System Requirements and Limitations 5. Methodology 6. The Unique Case of Lobby Cards 7. Conclusions and Comments 7.1 Management of Poster Collection 7.2 Cataloguing a Poster Collection Bibliography Appendices 1 ­ Glossary 2 ­ Processing Plan 3 ­ Timeline 4 ­ Catalogue Template 5 ­ Data Dictionary 6 ­ Current TIFF Poster Record 7 ­ Graphs Reflecting Object Density in the McKone Collection Illustrations Catalogue 24 25 27 30 32 35 36 42 46 1 2 4 4 5 5 6 9 11 12 16 17 17 20 22

v

1. Introduction Priorities of each institution can define what gets acquired, catalogued, and organized. This is especially true for a department that is both a library and archive within a corporate style film institution. It is also true for the management of ephemeral material within special collections. Ephemera are materials that have a single or limited use that were often made of disposable material such as paper. Ephemera is used as a means to convey information, to advertise, as well as a method of communication in the case of postcards. Although they have a limited lifespan, ephemera can provide insight into the development of culture and society. Ephemera developed through the decades and adapted to the needs of society. By using ephemera as a new avenue of historical investigation, scholars can track how information was shared and how it affected the way society functioned. Furthermore, ephemera's research potential enables scholars to study everyday events and create non-traditional historical narratives. For instance, ephemera helps to "delineat[e] and describ[e] certain areas of popular thought and culture that may not be captured in other media and formats."1 Thus, ephemera provides an opportunity to examine part of social history that has previously been neglected. Film was a development of modern industrial society and followed the evolution of society during the 20th century. Ephemera and other contemporary materials can show the evolution of the perception of film and how it was advertised to society. Film was originally considered an ephemeral material but in time received recognition as a cultural object. 2 Some archivists and collectors believed that film ephemera was simply memorabilia but has since developed a more substantial part of the cultural history of film. Film ephemera includes posters, scripts, props, and other material of a limited lifespan. As I will discuss below, there are limited resources on the cataloguing of film ephemera. This project provides an opportunity to create a dialogue about the state of ephemera collections. TIFF's Film Reference Library (FRL) has "the world's largest resource of English-language Canadian film related material"3 as well as resources for local, national, and international film. Their collection has material that dates back to the silent era. Although the collection is broad and accessible, the

1 2

Jim Burant, "Ephemera, Archives, and Another View of History," Archivaria 40 (1995): 191. Justin McKinney, "From Ephemera to Art: The Birth of Film Preservation and the Museum of Modern Art Film Library," Art Documentation: Journal of Art Libraries Society of North America 33.2 (2014): 295. 3 "Film Reference Library," Toronto International Film Festival, accessed April 12, 2016. http://tiff.net/education/film-reference-library/about.

1

special collections are poorly catalogued and under-utilized. Most of the 20,000 posters in the collection are not catalogued and those that have cataloguing records have limited information. Therefore, researchers are not always able to identify the specific material they are attempting to access. To facilitate access to the material, I will create a full and complete catalogue for a special collection of poster material. With these complete records, scholars will have the most contextual information from which to begin their research. In the future, these cataloguing methods can aid the creation of a workflow at the FRL. Furthermore, management of poster collections can be difficult due to the nature of the material. There are many issues that arise when accepting a donation of this type. There are important considerations related to storage, organization, and description of the material. It is simple to house the materials in archival envelopes with their titles, but this lacks the right level of description for accessibility. The management of large ephemeral collections can be difficult but with the knowledge gathered by detailed cataloguing, a proper organization can be achieved. Through my project I will identify issues that arise when managing collections of this type. My process began by familiarizing myself with the proper terms and uses for the different material in the collection. From there, the appropriate information was used to create a template for the cataloguing of the material. This cataloguing project described 971 posters as well as identified any condition issues. Once I catalogued all the items, I scanned the smaller format material, linked the scanned material in the database and then uploaded it to the online collection. From this catalogue, a collection record can be generated and made available on the FRL collection website.4 From this collection record, all items will be accessible and researchers will be able to make requests to look at the material from the manager of Special Collections. 1.1 Guy McKone Collection TIFF acquired the Guy McKone collection in 2012 with the intention of integrating it into the general library collection. After his death, McKone's brothers donated the material to the FRL. There is no information available about Guy McKone, no donation agreements or provenance materials associated with the collection and there were no restrictions placed on the material.

4

The Film Reference Library's online catalogue was launched in October 2015. It currently shows 80% of the general collections holdings and approximately 25% of special collections.

2

Therefore, the FRL can choose to display the items, provide or restrict access. The collection includes a variety of materials such as books, video, vinyl, stills, press materials, and various posters. There are a total over 5,000 individual items in the collection. Most of the non-graphic material has been either integrated into the library collection or returned to the donor. Some of the lobby cards were integrated into the FRL film production files with the assumption that they would be more accessible to the public. Other graphic materials, including posters in various formats have not been catalogued and will be the focus of my project.

3

2. Institutional History Originally named The Festival of Festivals, TIFF began in 1976 to show the best films to Toronto audiences. The first year 35,000 filmgoers' watched 127 films from thirty countries. In 1995, the festival was renamed the Toronto International Film Festival. TIFF is able to bring a mix of Hollywood films as well as art house and independent films to passionate public audiences as well as industry members.5 In their forty-year history, TIFF has expanded to include several important initiatives.6 TIFF Cinematheque showcases restored Canadian and international classics, favourites, and artist retrospectives.7 Film Circuit and TIFF Kids bring film to under-serviced cities and to children in Canada.8 TIFF is dedicated to film education with various screenings, workshops, and master classes. TIFF has become one of the most respected and important film institutions in the world.9 Since TIFF Bell Lightbox opened in 2010, TIFF has been able to bring film culture to Canadian and international audiences all year round. 2.1 TIFF Film Reference Library The TIFF Film Reference Library opened in 1990 and has since amassed a major collection of books, periodicals, photographs, graphic material, videos, and both film and biographical research files. These files contain newspaper clippings, press information, images, and other contemporary materials. It is a free resource for filmmakers, students, researchers, screenwriters, and film and television professionals. Its goal is to promote Canadian and global film scholarship "by collecting, preserving, and providing access to a comprehensive collection of film-related reference resources, and film prints."10 The FRL includes a Reference Collection as well as Special Collections. TIFF houses more than 30 Special Collections including David Cronenberg's private collection as well as a unique collection of Cuban posters.11 The FRL is committed to providing unique research materials to the public and to raise awareness of their collection through their online collection catalogue.
5

History, "Toronto International Film Festival," last modified 2014, a ccessed April 12, 2016. http://tiff.net/explore/history. 6 Ibid. 7 Ibid. 8 Film Circuit, "Toronto International Film Festival," last modified 2014, accessed April 12, 2016, http://tiff.net/filmcircuit-about. 9 History. 10 Film Reference Library. 11 Ibid.

4

3. Literature Review Film ephemeral materials have long been neglected in institutions and in the literature. In the last thirty years, scholars from various disciplines developed a new interest in the study of ephemera. As previously stated, ephemera are all material that have a limited use lifespan.12 Ephemera collections include items such as posters, lobby cards, postcards, bulletins, newspapers, and other transitory materials. Ephemera are evidence of the development of culture and society.13 This material provides the opportunity to study everyday life and develop non-traditional historical narratives.14 Posters, and other advertising material, show how the public perceived and interacted with films. Also, posters show the development of advertising in the Motion Picture Industry. Posters had to communicate effectively, efficiently, and powerfully15 the essence of the film. As Stephen Parmelee says in his 2009 article, film posters "trigger the viewer's memory of past films and, with them, past eras and events in our personal and collective history and culture."16 Design strategies have developed through decades to reflect contemporary art movements. Poster designs have become so recognizable that the "images act as embodiments of their films for collective memory."17 Thus poster designs can be used as a research tool to understand the development of communication and cultural memory. With the renewed interest in these unique materials, there has been a development in literature on the understanding, cataloguing and preservation of ephemeral material. 3.1 Reference Material Before I looked at specific cataloguing practices, it was important for me to get a general idea of the evolution and function of film poster art and other ephemeral materials. Books on the history of posters and of private collections are valuable sources for continued reference. They often include general information on poster sizes, uses, and development.18 For example, Ira Resnick ­ founder of the Motion Picture Arts Gallery in Boston­ released Starstruck: Vintage

12 13

Walter S. Dunn, Jr., "Cataloging Ephemera: A Procedure for Small Libraries," History News 27.1 (1972): 9. Diane DeBlois and Robert D. Harris, "The Appraisal of Ephemera," Popular Culture in Libraries 4.2 (1997): 48. 14 Ibid. 15 Susan Tschabrun, "Off the Wall and Into a Drawer: Managing a Research Collection of Political Posters," The American Archivist 66.2 (2003): 303. 16 Stephen Parmelee, "Remembrance of Films Past: Film Posters on Film," Historic Journal Film, Radio and Television 29.2 (2009): 181. 17 Parmalee, 182. 18 See appendix 1 for glossary.

5

Movie Posters From Classic Hollywood, a book that traces poster history through his own extensive collection. He provides several instructions on how to differentiate the levels of deterioration of posters.19 This is valuable when creating condition reports during this project. Further resources of this type include Neil Harris' 1998 article "American Poster Collecting: A Fitful History," which details the history of collecting from Toulouse-Lautrec's Moulin Rouge posters to theatre and film posters. It is also useful for the study of printing methods and distribution in the 19th and 20th century such as block printing and lithography. 20 These sources are useful for reference but also for identifying the materials of production, and the condition of posters. Other resources are the pamphlets released by libraries for the handling of material. 21 These sources are practical manuals for the use and understanding of paper and ephemeral material. Early in the conceptualization of the project it was decided that, a combination of theoretical and practical sources is the most useful bibliography for this project. Theoretical articles provide ideas that can be combined with practical knowledge for a well-rounded project. 3.2 Cataloguing Ephemera Though I am cataloguing film posters, I looked at sources on the appraisal, cataloguing, and organization of general ephemeral collections due to the lack of specific film poster related resources. Susan Tschaburn's "Off the Wall and into a Drawer: Managing a Research Collection of Political Posters" is an extensive study of the necessities of cataloguing, preserving, and digitizing collections. While it does focus on political posters, the practical knowledge it offers is useful for this project. The author divides the article into sections to better assess all aspects of poster collections. The sections include research value, acquisitions, cataloguing, preservation, and digitization. The section on cataloguing provides tools for subject indexing, vocabulary, as well as other tools for organization and naming.22 It is not as dated as many other articles in this bibliography and puts in perspective the practices of different collecting institutions. The TIFF Reference Library is both a public library and an archive, which affects the way collections are

19

Ira M. Resnick, Starstruck: Vintage Movie Posters from Classic Hollywood (London: Abbeville Press, 2010), 262-263. 20 Neil Harris, "American Poster Collecting: A Fitful History," American Art 12.1 (1998): 10-39. 21 California Historical Society. 22 Tschabrun, 309-317.

6

organized: e.g. intellectually, by material type, or by research value. It is imperative to understand how to organize and make accessible the collection. During the 1990's, the resurgence of interest in ephemera meant a renewed interest in scholarship on the effectiveness of caring for ephemeral collections. This is especially true in the case of library science. The journal Popular Culture in Libraries contains several articles related to ephemera published in 1996 and 1997. These articles focus specifically on cataloguing one type of material or on one cataloguing system, such as broadsheets or an internal nomenclature cataloguing structure.23 Authors do not advocate for a specific system but outline conceptually how individual systems can be used for ephemeral collections. This is a severe deficiency when attempting to determine the best method a for cataloguing a collection. For instance, Jane Greenberg's article on the subject control of ephemera focuses only on how to use MARC. 24 MARC may not be efficient for every institution but subject indexing and intellectual control should be considered.25 Since TIFF does not have an established system for cataloguing posters, I decided it is appropriate to use Greenberg's article to identify elements and fields in MARC that I can adapt to my own project such as title, physical description, genre, and subject terms. I used common elements and fields in order to keep the catalogue simple and consistent for future use. Intellectual control, which "includes organization, arrangement, and description,"26 of collections, is further defined in Deborah A. Smith's article. The article concerns The Strong Museum's ­ now the Museum of Play's ­ collection of 75,000 items and how their collecting experience may benefit other institutions.27 The author sets out to show the issues and the solutions related to cataloguing a collection that has been neglected and also catalogued piecemeal in the past.28 It includes information on how the collection should be organized (by size, material type, and frequency of requests) as well as a system of nomenclature that the institution created.29 Many
23

Deborah A. Smith, "Intellectual Control of Ephemera ­ A Museum's Perspective," Popular Culture 4.1 (1996): 63. 24 MARC stands for Machine-Readable Cataloguing and is a method for communicating and exchanging bibliographic and other descriptive data between libraries. The fields and subfields can be used to create full records that can be read by computers. It was created by the Library of Congress and continues to be used by institutions such as libraries, museums, and archives. (Library of Congress Marc Standards; https://www.loc.gov/marc/faq.html) 25 Jane Greenberg, "Subject Control of Ephemera: MARC Format Options," Popular Culture in Libraries 4.1 (1996): 76-77. 26 Smith, 63. 27 Smith, 64. 28 Ibid. 29 Smith, 64-66.

7

institutions in the 80's and 90's used this system of nomenclature.30 It is out-dated in relation to technology and digitization, yet the methods for processing and cataloguing are relevant to my research. Furthermore, it addresses the importance of access through cataloguing,31 which is often a process that is neglected in institutions and creates a large backlog of unprocessed material. The journal also includes articles on the appraisal of ephemera as well as other aspects of collecting ephemera, which can be used as reference material. The Popular Culture 1997 issue includes Nineteenth-Century paper ephemera expert Katherine Ott's article "Reading Paper Ephemera: Issues in Interpreting Nineteenth-Century Graphics," which is a consideration of the graphics related to advertising. It is an important resource for that proves the impact of item-level description of items. Ott identifies the difficulty for researchers to use ephemera as the lack of contextual information available related to the objects.32 This is an important consideration when cataloguing material in a reference library. Without context or proper description, researchers cannot ascertain the scope and importance of materials. This limits the way researchers will understand and read the material. As mentioned, my main goal is to make the McKone Collection accessible to researchers and the public with as much contextual information as possible. Ott's methods of item-level description include graphic description for easy identification and access. Some articles conclude that item-level description can be daunting but it can be useful in certain settings.33 Due to the lack of digitization possibilities for the McKone collection, I determined that a detailed description of the graphics and design of the posters would be highly beneficial for researchers prior to examining the material. Although many articles recognize the lack of literature available, they contribute little to the conversation. The authors only provide unique points of view to the conversation by focusing on one aspect of cataloguing and ephemera. However, an article on a team's project to catalogue ephemera was able to explain all aspects of cataloguing from beginning to end. The article "Notes on Operations: Cataloguing and Digitizing Ephemera," follows the work of four members -- three special collections cataloguers and one manuscript cataloguer ­ and describes their methodology for cataloguing German broadsheets. This article shows the different steps it takes to catalogue
30 31

Smith, 65. Smith, 69-70. 32 Katherine Ott, "Reading Paper Ephemera: Issues in Interpreting Nineteenth -Century Graphics," Popular Culture in Libraries 4.2 (1997): 12. 33 Smith, 69.

8

collections of advertising materials and the importance of treating each type of material differently. The article points out an important issue plaguing institutions: inconsistency.34 For example, there is a lack of policies and procedures about cataloguing, housing, and organization. This is not limited to posters but to all collected material. Therefore it is important to create a structured cataloguing system that can be used and adapted to all needs of the institution. 3.3 Poster Collecting The final source35 that I considered focuses on the very nature of collecting from a private collector's point of view. The nature of motion picture ephemera collecting began as a private endeavor. This is relevant since the McKone collection was privately owned before being donated. Individuals would collect the art that interested them. For instance, Edwin and Susan Poole began their careers as collectors and hobbyists but soon developed expertise that enabled them to become dealers and writers on motion picture arts.36 They are now considered authorities in the identification of originals and the care of posters. Their goal with this 1997 publication was to make collecting easier for individuals and to avoid any misrepresentation of quality and worth. 37 Their Illustrated Reference Guide helps to understand how the industry functioned contemporaneously. For instance, the authors lay out a chronology of the movie industry while simultaneously detailing the importance of different sizes and styles of posters. 38 The guide includes identifiers such as National Screen Service (NSS) numbers 39 as well as other identifiers of authenticity such as material, style, and dimensions.40 I include NSS numbers as identifiers in my catalogue.41 This also helps track reissues and later reproductions. Furthermore, the chapter entitled "Illustrated Reference to Major Terms, Concepts and Companies"42 is a guide to the

34

Ann Copeland, Susan Hamburger, John Hamilton, and Kenneth J. Robinson, "Cataloging and Digitizing Ephemera: One Team's Experience with Pennsylvania German Broadsides and Fraktur," Library Resources & Technical Services 50.3 (2006): 188. 35 Poole, Edwin, and Susan T. Poole. Collecting Movie Posters: An Illustrated Reference Guide to Movie ArtPosters, Press Kits, and Lobby Cards, (Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland & Co., 1997). 36 Poole and Poole, 1-2. 37 Poole and Poole, 2. 38 Poole and Poole, 9-22. 39 Poole and Poole, 94-96. 40 Poole and Poole, 25. 41 NSS numbers indicate the year and the time of a year a poster was released. This helps to create a chronology of printing and release. Further explanation of the NSS numbers can be found on page 14. 42 Poole and Poole, 31-148.

9

material types but also to different conservation terminologies and strategies. 43 Having a strong understanding of the practices during the period of production will make cataloguing more detailed and efficient. Since condition is an important part of my catalogue, being able to identify common issues is beneficial. I have chosen to look at a variety of sources because of the nature of this project. There has not been a cohesive study on the cataloguing of posters. The sources above give a good base of information for cataloguing ephemera as well as the handling and collecting of film posters. With this base of information, I can develop a project that addresses the problems with access, language, and description involved in cataloguing film ephemera.

43

Poole and Poole, 31-148. See glossary for examples.

10

4. System Requirements and Limitations of Mimsy at TIFF When cataloguing, it is important to consider what type of system the institution is using and how that can limit possibilities. Mimsy44 is a database system originally created for museums but has been improved for libraries and archives. The system has a basic number of properties and abilities that can be modified to suit the needs of institutions at a cost. The FRL has modified Mimsy to create several views45 to fit the needs of the different sections of the department. The Library uses Library of Congress subject headings while the Archive follows a modified version of the Rules of Archival Description (RAD),46 specifically how to number and organize the collections. The system allows for items to be linked in order to avoid redundant information across views and collections. Although the system allows for the upload of images for the website, the images are extremely small and cannot be enlarged. Therefore, description is important even after items are scanned. Description is searchable in both Mimsy and on the web version. Researchers searching for a specific image or artist can search by keyword. Although Mimsy is easily customizable, there are limits within each view. There are a limited number of fields that can be used in each view. Therefore, it is important to choose which fields are most important. Some fields can also be locked with controlled vocabulary. This limits what terms can be used and provides a standard for all records. I have created a catalogue template that fits into the current parameters of the system but that can be modified if needed in the future.

44

Mimsy was created to manage several types of collections including libraries, museums, and archives. It is an easy interface that lets users input data directly into the fields of the record and lets them interact with all modules. The database is compatible with an online interface that lets users simply click a publish flag for the website. The system also enables users to manipulate what information is made available to the public as well as track loans and exhibitions (Axiell mimsy introduction, http://alm.axiell.com/sites/default/files/Mimsy.pdf). 45 Views is the term preferred by Axiell when training organizations to use Mimsy. Each view can be used to segregate the type of material and information available in each record. For example, in archive view TIFF attributes different information structured with RAD whereas Library view takes a more traditional library approach. Library view incorporates FIAF and LOC subject terms as well as other library organization. TIFF also uses a different view for Film Prints. This provides the opportunity to tailor records to specific material. Furthermore, the digital coordinator can manipulate views to be read only so that individuals such as interns and volunteers can search the database without modifying records. 46 Rules of Archival Description (RAD) are a Canadian standard for cataloguing material in archives.

11

5. Cataloguing Methodology Since the collection was donated, the material has been moved and separated within the FRL. My first task was to identify all the materials in the collection. When the collection was first acquired, someone created a preliminary listing with basic information such as title and format. The second listing has more detailed information such as date, director, and dimensions. I was able to identify almost all of the material in the collection as well as some titles that were not listed on the original intake list. Based on contextual information, the unlisted items are most likely from the same collection, therefore I indicated on the listing which materials were not originally listed. I created a processing plan (appendix 2) to establish a timeline for the completion of this project. This is to help keep me accountable for the work I am doing at TIFF. With this plan, I am able to prioritize and identify a timeline for the completion of tasks. Based on this timeline (appendix 3), I would have completed all the cataloguing by the end of June. Since I had more time to work on the collection, I completed the cataloguing by April 30th. Once identified, I familiarized myself with the collection in general and more specifically with each format. Poster is a generic term for graphic materials used to advertise films. There are many different formats that were used. This affected how companies shipped and stored the material. Window cards and inserts were not treated the same way as one-sheets or threesheets.47 Furthermore, in foreign markets there were slight variations on advertising materials.48 For instance, Lobby Cards in England were called Front-of-House cards and were often in black and white.49 North American lobby cards are more colourful than the Front-of-House cards. It is important to understand the different formats and terms in order to create a proper cataloguing record. TIFF decided that the posters would be a segregated special collection. I factor this in the way I identified and numbered the collection. At TIFF, cataloguing records for general collection posters are not very different from special collections, but their location and identifiers are unique to their RAD classification.50 Library and general collections material are designated with an FRL number in order to be identified in the stacks. Comparatively, special collections have a unique
47 48

See glossary for terms. Poole and Poole, 151. 49 MotionPictureArt.com, "FAQ Lobby Cards," accessed April 5, 2016, http://www.motionpictureart.com/FAQ Lobby-Cards.html. 50 Special collections at TIFF are catalogued according to a modified version of RAD.

12

identifier that has the year, the numbered collection, the series number, and the item number following a period. The first three identifiers are separated by dashes (yyyy-ccc-ss.iiii). The collection was acquired in 2012 and will have the following identifiers: 2012-014-03.0001. Before starting the template for the catalogue, I considered what type of information would be relevant as well as the access points for the record. Access points refer to the information used to locate records.51 The common types of access points in libraries include title, author, and subject. In TIFF special collections, subject headings are not as prevalent. However, other access points can be used to identify the poster material in the database. The main access points that are important for this collection include title, director, release date, and material type. Another consideration includes film title versus object title. Often, posters have alternate spellings for design purposes and for foreign releases. Therefore having separate object and film titles makes it easier for scholars to search the database. Since the identification of designers is rare, a cataloguing field for maker is not immediately needed. FRL staff and I decided that if there were a designer I would include it in the description. When searching the collection, information can be pulled from the description thus a designers name could be identified in the results. The format of the poster is identified in material type as another point of access. The collection name is a point of access from the main page of the collection web database. Scholars can access the collection record from this page. A final access point is the related film materials. One of the largest resources at the FRL is the film, biographic, and subject files in the collection.52 By linking the files, individuals can gather more information on the production and release of a specific title. All of these access points will provide researchers more opportunities to identify material they wish to examine. Not all information in the record is an access point. Location and condition notes are more important for internal information. In Mimsy, condition53 is reported in a separate record that is linked to the main item record. I am taking detailed notes on each individual posters' condition that is included in the record. This is not only important for preservation but also for granting permission to researchers. By noting the condition in a record, it can be made easily accessible to future employees in the FRL. Thus, when
51

Access Points, Elmer E. Rasmuson Library, last modified April 23, 2015, http://library.uaf.edu/ls101-accesspoints. 52 As mentioned, these files contain newspaper clippings, press information, images, and other contemporary material. 53 See illustrations on page 40 for examples of the condition of the material.

13

a request comes in to access the material the Special Collections manager can immediately see if the condition of the material allows handling. Furthermore, location information is only relevant for access by those processing the request. As part of the catalogue,54 the most important aspect is to create a detailed description of the artwork. Since posters are not a priority for digitization, this graphic description will provide valuable information for researchers. Currently, posters have a very simple record that does not provide information past basic title and credits information (see appendix 6). With a detailed description, individuals can identify the correct poster for their research. I believe that the more information is available the more interest and access there will be. Description includes not only the organization of graphic elements but also a description of the artwork itself. This does add a higher level of detail to an otherwise simple catalogue. It is more time consuming but in the long run future employees and researchers will easily identify items in the collection. The description can be searched from the online website by using specific keywords. While looking at the posters, I recognized details such as the National Screen Service copyright and numbering system. From the 1930's to the mid 1980's, the National Screen Service was primarily responsible for distributing posters and other advertising material based on artwork provided by studios.55 By the 1950's, all the major studios signed exclusivity rights with the NSS to produce their advertisements.56 The NSS created a numbering system to identify and keep track of their posters. Prior to the 1980's, the NSS number had two parts: the double-digit year (i.e. 68 = 1968) and when in the year it was released.57 For example, Sergeant Ryker's NSS number is 60/216, which indicates that it was released in 1960 and it was the 216th film released that year. This is extremely valuable in determining authenticity as well as differentiating between an original release and a reissue by the NSS. Those that were reissued, which are also originals, will have a new number with an R preceding it. Items that do not have an NSS number are either secondary producers or reproductions. In the case of secondary producers, identifiable markings are present. NSS numbers cannot be considered access points because not all individuals know the use of these numbers. Any serious poster researcher can identify the use of the numbers for the
54

The cataloguing template is located in appendix 4 and a data dictionary for the Mimsy fields is located in appendix 5. An example of a current record is located in appendix 6. 55 Poole and Poole, 15. 56 Poole and Poole, 95. 57 Poole and Poole, 97.

14

purpose of authenticity and chronology. For basic researchers, the above access points are easily searchable. For more serious researchers, they can keyword search an NSS number and all items will appear in a list. When ingesting a collection, it is important to consider original order. However, since the collection has been separated and moved often, there is no discernible order. Therefore, my goal was to create a new organization that is more effective for access. First, I divided the posters by size and format for more adequate storage and identification. The exception to this rule is the material that has been laminated. For preservation, lamination can cause severe damage to the paper; already some of the lamination is separating. Therefore, I segregated this material from other posters to avoid possible damage. From there, I alphabetized the material to enhance access within the individual archival folders. Due to lack of sufficient workspace, I organized one-sheets alphabetically within folders and to avoid unnecessary handling I did not remove them from their original folders. While cataloguing the collection as stated above, I continually took note of any issues that arose. I first examined individual posters and filled a cataloguing sheet. I then transferred the information to the cataloguing template. I housed the posters in large archival folders within poster cabinets. I wrote the identifiers on the verso of the posters in pencil and on the archival envelopes. For the lobby cards, it is important to consider housing more seriously. There has been some debate whether to leave the lobby cards within the research files for access purposes. It has come to my attention that this material, as well as stills, are removed from the files before showing them to researchers. Like all special collections, permission needs to be gained from the Manager before access is granted. It is important to reconsider current practice since the lobby cards are not accessed and the organization of the files does not aid in the preservation of the material. The files are housed vertically in movable shelves, which put stress and pressure on the material especially if the files are moved and jostled. The best course of action would be to remove the cards from the files and place them flat in an archival box. I placed the cards into Mylar sleeves to protect them from dust and scratching.

15

6. The Unique Case of Lobby Cards Some of the lobby cards were placed in the films files. As I was removing them from the files for proper cataloguing, I discovered that not only was the original intake list inaccurate but the material was not identified in the files. Furthermore, there were no proper supports for the material that was placed in files. Many of the lobby cards were actually identified as part of another collection. Therefore, I decided to look more thoroughly in the Library stacks to see if I could find the items that were misplaced. Eventually I was able to find a grey archival box with a small notation of the McKone name. Inside I was able to identify the missing items as well as some photographic stills and proofs. All the items I found matched the items in the updated list I created in January. I have identified some unique issues with the lobby cards, which were not as easily remedied as with the larger format posters. For instance, I noticed that the items were placed in various styles of housing from Mylar to archival envelopes as well as loose in the archival box. Although this is not necessarily a large issue, consistency is extremely important. I also discovered that the cards and the photographs were left loose in the archival box. Those from the same film were paper clipped together. I removed the paper clips but they had created dents in the images. Furthermore, the loose enclosure may have damaged the surface of some of these cards. As I catalogued I identified a number of cards with surface scratches, often the cards that were at the top of a pile. While organizing the cards I noticed interesting patterns. For some reason, when the individual placed the cards in the files, only one or two of the set were integrated. In other words, I found full sets of cards that were not reflected in the record. This is another instance where it is important to create a more consistent intake list to avoid any misplaced items. Because of the lack of supplies and budget, cards are placed back to back in Mylar sleeves. This will prevent the images from scratching against each other and will prevent dust accumulation. Cards that are 8 x 10 inches are placed in two piles (colour and black & white) in the same box. They will be enclosed with archival cardboard supports to prevent jostling. I placed the larger 11 x 14 inch cards in a separate archival box with supports.

16

7. Conclusions and Comments Creating a catalogue of this magnitude required time and attention to detail. Through this project, I created a simple but effective catalogue that can continue to be utilized by the FRL. I not only wanted to identify the materials and make them accessible but I wanted to highlight a system that could be used with effective descriptions when digitization is not possible. By creating detailed description of the artwork, individuals searching for specific styles and posters will be able to identify unique examples. This technique is not novel as it is used intermittently for objects and photographs. However, by creating a standard record that includes descriptions, I hope that the FRL will continue to catalogue this way as part of their established procedures. By identifying the access points prior to cataloguing, I was able to emphasise these fields for the final record. These access points will continue to present many opportunities for the items to be searched in the online database. Not only will researchers be able to search by title but also by any identifying marker on the posters. This provides every opportunity to further the study of this material. It was also important to retain the integrity of the material by displaying prominently its authenticity. By using NSS numbers, I provide a method for researchers to track the chronology and evolution of the posters in this collection. Using these numbers also helps to distinguish between contemporary and reissue posters. This is not only useful for researchers but also for future staff who may use the material for exhibits or retrospectives. 6.1 Management of Poster Collections It is clear that there are many issues involved with the management of poster collections. First, the size of the material can affect the storage capabilities of institutions. Once they are stored properly they require minimal future considerations. However, it is required to have numerous poster drawers to properly house the material, which can be costly. Using archival envelopes will minimize handling and create a barrier to dust. One of the biggest issues I encountered was the lack of knowledge about posters, which affected how the material is currently handled. For instance, format has been limited to one-sheet and poster, which is but a small fraction of what is in the McKone collection. This has been and continues to be a choice made by those in charge. I believe it is important to be as accurate as
17

possible because it will enable researchers to properly locate and study the material. Using improper language will propagate the ignorance of material types and cause issues in future cataloguing endeavours. Moreover, the artwork changed depending on the format, which emphasises the need for as much information as possible. For example, inserts were mislabelled as half-sheets in the original list. These two formats are extremely different in size and style (see glossary) and required very different artwork to accommodate the various measurements. This is why description and accurate record information is a priority for graphic material of this type. Because of the mislabelling, I had to rethink the organization that I had created. Inserts that were found after were alphabetized within the folders similarly to the one-sheets. All items were properly identified in multiple areas to avoid further issues with labelling. I also asked the system's administrator to add the formats to the controlled vocabulary list in order to avoid any further issues. Another concern that arose with a collection of this type is digitization. Posters do not have copyright restrictions and therefore make them perfect digitization candidates. Yet since these collections are not high on the priority list, they often get neglected in digitization projects. Although TIFF has a poster scanner, it is not in use since the software has not been updated. Also, the condition of lobby cards effects the digitization of material. If cards have stains, rips, or other immediately visible issues, digitization will enhance those imperfections. Photoshop can fix limited issues with condition but it is not ideal. All items will be digitized and fixed in the future, if necessary. It is important to prioritize what material should be digitized and in this case condition is a factor. Ephemeral material is an interesting part of film history and can be used as a tool to attract the public to TIFF and to the FRL. Digitizing the material can provide incentive for people to donate as well as for individuals to do research at the FRL. As mentioned in the introduction, the hierarchical organization of institutions affects how collections are prioritized. If an individual does not make an effort with a collection, it will not be processed. Furthermore, material can deteriorate or be mishandled when a department does not take care of their collections. Furthermore, agendas can affect the way the material will be accessed. Whether it is put online or not, if those in charge do not give permission for access nothing can be done. This type of control can have adverse effects on collections.

18

Having clear policies and procedures on the management and cataloguing of collections is important. The FRL has not updated its collections policies and procedures since the late 1990s although Special Collections has updated some policies in 2008. Since Mimsy has been used no overall collections policy has been created. An update of policies has been ongoing for several years at the FRL and no progress has been made at this time. Without these, consistent intake and processing of collections will be extremely difficult and will continue to be done sporadically. Without set standards, there is no clear system for collecting. When the procedures are updated, my cataloguing template and process will provide a good example for the future processing of poster collections. Limiting access to this material is wasting its potential. First and foremost, they are an incredible resource for mapping the development of advertising practices during the 1950's and 1960's. They can also track the careers of directors and the popularity of certain studios. Consequently, TIFF can use these posters in exhibits or retrospectives of directors and actors. They can also be used in conjunction with other film programmes throughout the year such as TIFF Cinematheque. In an institution like TIFF, using material in the collection shows that it is dedicated to not only exhibiting film but preserving it. Currently, TIFF Bell Lightbox is undergoing a revitalization to make the atrium and public areas more inviting. This could become an opportunity of showcasing the collection. The small free gallery adjoining the FRL is the perfect opportunity to showcase the material in the collection. The public is demanding more diverse and unique exhibits to complement the film programmes. In addition, the laminated posters can be used for decoration and embellishment of the building itself. Although terrible for preservation, lamination provides the opportunity to showcase material while limiting concerns for condition. The laminated posters can be displayed and identified with information about the Library thus bringing more awareness to the collections as a whole. Ephemeral material is becoming more important from both historical and exhibition potential. Already, institutions are focusing on exhibits that focus more on ephemeral objects such as costumes, posters, and concept art.58 More opportunities to display material in the collection should be considered.

58

For instance, The Harry Ransom Centre and the Museum of the Moving Image create large exhibits with ephemera from their own collections including letters, and unique objects. TIFF recently organized a talk about Ephemera and preservation on March 11, 2016 that is available to watch on the Higher Learning Website (http://tiff.net/education/events/reel-heritage-film-ephemera-and-collections-mangement).

19

I have created a number of graphs (appendix 7) to display the chronology and density of object in the collection. These graphs provide information on the scope of the collection as well as the range of dates it covers. This information will provide a quick reference for the Library when other departments inquire about material for exhibits or retrospectives. In relation to access, the question of how to organize and house the lobby cards has been discussed often. As mentioned, the cards were originally integrated into files but due to their lack of access I advocated for segregation. Discussion with the head of the department veered more towards putting them back in the files. There are no policies or procedures available at this time, which affects consistency within the department. Library staff removes items such as photographs and lobby cards from files before presenting files to researchers. According to staff, researchers have to request to look at the photographs and special items in a similar way to Special Collections items. It is also not completely clear on the website that this material needs to be requested from the manager of special collections. Based on my inquiries, permission is normally easily granted for materials in good condition. I would therefore remove the items so that the material does not get handle too much and cause damage. Already some of the items were poorly handled and show the effects of wear. Furthermore, the collection should be kept together rather than have it separated in different places. I have placed the items in two archival boxes and placed them on the Special Collections shelves but there is no guarantee they will remain there. I may believe that this would be best practice for the future preservation of the material, however those in charge of the FRL will handle the material the way they deem appropriate. 6.2 Cataloguing a Poster Collection The issues above need to be addressed by each institution when confronted with these types of collections. However, cataloguing considerations are clearer to establish and monitor. First, institutions need to consider the most pertinent information for full and complete records. Most current object records only have a title and possibly a date so it was a clean slate for how to proceed. To reiterate, I believe that the more information available the more accessible the collection will be. Any identifying information is useful for researchers as well as future employees trying to access the material. Alternate titles and release dates are important when individuals are searching for specific objects. Also adding NSS numbers identifies how studios released and organized the items. They also develop a chronology of style and artwork. Finally, the description of the graphics
20

will help to identify the material until it is digitized. Although an image is useful, the online collection does not allow for large images. The description will continue to be useful even if the poster get digitized. However, without a digital strategy or digital assets management system, any digitized items pose other problems with cataloguing and management outside the original items. Again, this is why extensive cataloguing of all objects including description is needed to properly track and organize collection for the long term. Finally, time is a big consideration when cataloguing collections. Before accepting a collection, institutions need to identify how much time can be allocated to its processing. Due to poor time management, the collection was neglected, separated, and possibly damaged. Since the collection was so large, someone decided to put it on hold for other priority collections. It is common for institutions to create a backlog but without proper policies and procedures improper handling of collections can become more frequent. Prioritizing is important but a system needs to be put in place to keep collections intact and with minimal damage in the meantime. Managing a collection of film ephemera is a huge task. There are several obstacles that can arise when trying to catalogue and organize material of this type. Priorities of the institution will dictate the level of consideration applied to collections. With established templates and workflows, FLR will be able to organize a collection more efficiently. Furthermore, if there is a backlogged collection of posters, employees can use the template to catalogue the collection. Finally, the template can also be used to update current records that do not have pertinent information. It is clear that ephemeral collections need to be handled in a different way than books or film collections.

21

Bibliography Access Points. Elmer E. Rasmuson Library. Last modified April 23, 2015. http://library.uaf.edu/ls101-access-points. Axiell. "Mimsy XG." Accessed June 30, 2016. http://alm.axiell.com/sites/default/files/Mimsy.pdf. Burant, Jim. "Ephemera, Archives, and Another View of History." Archivaria 40 (1995): 189198. California Historical Society. "California Ephemera Project." California Project Supplementary Issue (2009): 1. Canadian Committee on Archival Description. Rules of Archival Description. Last modified July 2008. Accessed April 25, 2016. http://www.cdncouncilarchives.ca/archdesrules.html. Copeland, Ann, Susan Hamburger, John Hamilton, and Kenneth J. Robinson. "Cataloging and Digitizing Ephemera: One Team's Experience with Pennsylvania German Broadsides and Fraktur." Library Resources & Technical Services 50.3 (2006): 186-198. DeBlois, Diane, and Robert D. Harris. "The Appraisal of Ephemera." Popular Culture in Libraries 4.2 (1997): 47-60. Dunn, Jr., Walter S. "Cataloging Ephemera: A Procedure for Small Libraries." History News 27.1 (1972): 9-16. Greenberg, Jane. "Subject Control of Ephemera: MARC Format Options." Popular Culture in Libraries 4.1 (1996): 71-91. Harris, Neil. "American Poster Collecting: A Fitful History." American Art 12.1 (1998): 10-39. Library of Congress ­ Network Development and MARC Standards Office. "Marc Standards." Last modified July 6, 2016, https://www.loc.gov/marc/. McKinney, Justin. "From Ephemera to Art: The Birth of Film Preservation and the Museum of Modern Art Film Library." Art Documentation: Journal of Art Libraries Society of North America 33, no. 2 (2014): 295-312. MotionPictureArt.com. "FAQ Lobby Cards." Accessed April 5, 2016. http://www.motionpictureart.com/FAQ-Lobby-Cards.html. Ott, Katherine. "Reading Paper Ephemera: Issues in Interpreting Nineteenth-Century Graphics." Popular Culture in Libraries 4.2 (1997): 11-24.

22

Parmelee, Stephen. "Remembrance of Films Past: Film Posters on Film." Historic Journal Film, Radio and Television 29. 2 (2009): 181-195. Phillpot, Clive. "Flies in the Files: Ephemera in the Art Library." Art Documentation: Journal of the Art Libraries Society of North America 14.1 (1995): 13-14. Poole, Edwin, and Susan T. Poole. Collecting Movie Posters: An Illustrated Reference Guide to Movie Art- Posters, Press Kits, and Lobby Cards. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland & Co., 1997. Smith, Deborah A. "Intellectual Control of Ephemera ­ A Museum's Perspective." Popular Culture in Libraries 4.1 (1996): 63-70. TIFF Film Reference Library. "The Collection." Accessed June 30, 2016. http://collection.tiff.net/mwebcgi/mweb. Toronto International Film Festival. "Film Circuit." Last modified in 2014. Accessed April 12, 2016. http://tiff.net/filmcircuit-about. Toronto International Film Festival. "Film Reference Library." Last modified in 2014. Accessed April 12, 2016. http://tiff.net/education/film-reference-library/about. Toronto International Film Festival. "History." Last modified in 2014. Accessed April 12, 2016. http://tiff.net/explore/history. Tschabrun, Susan. "Off the Wall and Into a Drawer: Managing a Research Collection of Politi cal Posters." The American Archivist 66.2 (2003): 303-324. Wilson, Terrie L., and Erika Dowell. "Today's Ephemera, Tomorrow's Historical Documentation: Access Options for Artists Files." Journal of Library Administration 39 (2003): 43-60.

23

Appendices 1 ­ Glossary Lobby Cards: Displayed in theatre lobbies, lobby cards came in sets of eight cards with one title card and seven others with key images from the films. They were colour, even in the black-andwhite era and the standard cards measured 11 x 14 inches (27.9 x 35.6 cm).59 They were also numbered in sequence. The studios also released two other types of cards: jumbo (14 x 17 inches) and mini (8 x 14 inches), which are considered rare.60 Window Cards: Printed on heavy cardstock, window cards were displayed in store windows, poles, and offices with a white section at the top for showtimes. 61 The standard window card measures 14 x 22 inches. A jumbo card measures 22 x 28 inches and a mini card measuring 14 x 8 inches.62 One-Sheets: The classic movie poster size, one-sheets were displayed inside and outside of movie theatres. It was first used in 1909 and continues to be used in North American and foreign markets.63 They have undergone several small changes but traditionally the one-sheet measures 41 x 27 inches and are printed on lighter stock than window cards.64 Half-sheets: Originally called `displays,' half-sheets measured approximately half the size of a one-sheet (22 x 28 inches).65 First used in 1910, they were used for specialty-sized displays and were printed on lighter card stock than window cards.66 They were discontinued in the 1980's.67 Inserts: Also used in lobbies, inserts are tall, narrow, vertical posters printed on card stock.68 Released soon after the one-sheet, it was one of the most used styles until the 1980's when it was discontinued. The standard size for inserts was 14 x 36 inches.69 Three-Sheets: Large posters meant for display outside theatres. They measured 81 x 41 inches. They were delivered and stored folded.70

59 60

Resnick, 262. Poole, 82. 61 Ibid, 145-146. 62 Resnick, 262. 63 Poole, 99. 64 Resnick, 262. 65 Ibid. 66 Poole, 68-69. 67 Ibid, 68. 68 Resnick, 262. 69 Poole, 71. 70 Resnick, 262.

24

2 ­ Processing Plan71 Name of Collection: Guy McKone Collection

Entry Number

Donor Date Collection Received McKone Family 2012 Processor Date Processing Plan Filed Sasha Blais February 4, 2016 Current Condition of Donation: Items are not in ideal storage conditions, which will be addressed during the processing. Arrangement: Items currently arranged by type of material, no intellectual arrangement is apparent. In the future they will be organized alphabetically to facilitate access. Number of items: This is a list of items that have been located. Other items were most likely discarded. Please see "McKone_Updated list" (in the file labeled Sasha_McKone in the FRL file on the H drive) for a more detailed list of items.  Total number of items: 3,752  Posters total: 900 o Lobby Cards: 203 o Inserts: 66 o Window Cards: 241 o Half-sheets: 158 o Posters and one-sheets: 108  Sheet Music: 22  Cassettes: 76  45rpm: 451  33rpm: 1890 (some possibly integrated or discarded)  Pressbooks: 32  Ad slicks: 244  Journals and other printed matter: 137 Description: The collection includes material in various printed forms including graphic and advertising material as well as soundtracks in various formats. The collection also includes sheet music and journals about sound editing and composing for film and television. Physical Condition: Overall the collection is in good condition. The poster material is the most in danger because of poor handling and storage. This will be addressed during processing. Cassettes and other sound recordings are in near mint condition.
71

Original template provided by the FRL.

25

Notes: Originally considered for the general library collection but is now being considered as a special collection. Upon arrival the collection was assessed for duplicates. Duplicates were either integrated (if in better condition) or returned/discarded. V/HS and other AV material were discarded. Some materials were not found; these have most likely been discarded or integrated. Background / Donor Information: Private collection donated to Tiff without contingencies or restrictions on the material. No other information is available. Proposed Series: Lobby Cards, inserts, window cards, and posters will be included in the poster series (series 3). 45rpm, cassettes, and LP's will be part of the sound recordings series heading (series 10). Ad slicks will be part of the graphic materials series (series 2) and press books are part of the printed matter series (series 4) as are the journals. Proposed level of Description: The items will be described at the highest level. Posters will include description of the graphics and design. This description will facilitate research and identification until the items can be digitized for Mweb. Sound recordings will include information for access and identification. Processing: A excel spreadsheet has been created to facilitate processing and organization. This sheet can be modified to add more information if the need arises. Processing will start with poster material as part of a research project for Ryerson University. Once those are completed other material will be catalogued. Processing Timeline:  Posters: 15 to 25 per day  Sound recordings: 20 per day  Printed material and graphic material: 20 per day The above rate is wholly dependent on an 8 hour work day. The amount per day will be lower if there are interruptions such as lack of workplace, meetings, or other projects. This is a guideline for processing. Estimated time for Processing: Planned Storage Location:

26

3 - Timeline Item Type Description Actions Items will be fully catalogued, including dimensions and condition, and input into uploader spreadsheet. Once completed and approved it will be uploaded to Mimsy. Records will then be linked to relevant Film File records and Director records. · Week of February 29th: 50 window cards catalogued · Week of March 7th: 50 window cards catalogued (total 100 items) · Week of March 14th: 50 window cards There are 235 catalogued (total 150 items) window cards · Week of March 21st: 20 window cards with a standard catalogued (total 200 items) size of 14 x 22 · Week of March 28th: Last 35 window inches. cards catalogued (total 230) Items will be fully catalogued, including dimensions and condition, and input into uploader spreadsheet. Once completed and approved it will be uploaded to Mimsy. There are 66 Records will then be linked to relevant Film Inserts with a File records and Director records. standard size · Week of March 28th: 30 inserts catalogued of 14 x 36 · Week of April 4th: Last 36 inserts inches. catalogued (total 66) Timeline End Date Notes/ Concerns Completed ?

Window Cards

16 days

March 29, 2016

Working 2.5 days per week

completed

Inserts

4 days

April 5, 2016

Working 2.5 days per week

completed

27

Half-Sheets

One-Sheets and Posters

Lobby Cards

Items will be fully catalogued, including dimensions and condition, and input into uploader spreadsheet. Once completed and approved it will be uploaded to Mimsy. Records will then be linked to relevant Film File records and Director records. · Week of April 4th: 30 half-sheets catalogued · Week of April 11th: 50 half-sheets There are 158 catalogued (total 80 catalogued) half-sheets · Week of April 18th: 50 half-sheets with a standard catalogued (total 130 catalogued) size of 22 x 28 · Week of April 25th: 28 half-sheets inches. catalogued (total 158 catalogued) Items will be fully catalogued, including dimensions and condition, and input into uploader spreadsheet. Once completed and approved it will be uploaded to Mimsy. Records will then be linked to relevant Film File records and Director records. · Week of April 25th: 20 posters catalogued There are 108 · Week of May 2nd: 40 posters catalogued other posters (total 70 catalogued) of varying · Week of May 9th: 45 posters catalogued sizes. (total 108 catalogued) I will examine all the cards in each film file. There are I will describe the condition of the material approximately and verify dimensions. I will make a note if 250 lobby the set is complete or missing any cards cards in (Lobby Cards traditionally come in a set of 8 standard sizes cards). On average, it would take 7-8 of 8 x 10 minutes to fully scan and organize digitized
28

11 days

April 26, 2016

Working 2.5 days per week

completed

7 days

May 11, 2016

Working 2.5 days per week

completed

18 days

June 28, 2016

Working 2.5 days per week

completed

inches or 11 x 14 inches.

files of cards. In total it would take an average of 30 hours to fully scan all cards. · Week of May 16th: 40 lobby cards catalogued · Week of May 23rd: 40 lobby cards catalogued (total 80 catalogued) · Week of May 30th: 40 lobby cards catalogued (total 120 catalogued) · Week of June 6th: 40 lobby cards catalogued (total 160 catalogued) · Week of June 13th: 40 lobby cards catalogued (total 200 catalogued) · Week of June 20th: Last cards catalogued (total 208 catalogued)

29

4 ­ Catalogue Template

30

31

5 ­ Data Dictionary Field identifier CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBER OTHER_NUMBERS.OTHER_N UMBER OTHER_NUMBERS.ON_TYPE CATALOGUE.CATEGORY1

Field Name Accession number NSS # (770145 or 77/35) National Screen Service Number Object Type

Definition Unique identifier National screen service number located on the posters. Definition of above number. Material is separated into series such as graphic material, textual, etc. At TIFF, posters are a separate series (3). Indicated whether it is part of the library collection ( ) or archive collection (A). Indicated whether there are restrictions on the collection. The name of the collection that will be seen online.

CATALOGUE.FLAG3 CATALOGUE.FLAG1 CATALOGUE.CREDIT_LINE CATALOGUE.OPTION10 CATALOGUE.DATE_COLLEC TED CATALOGUE.OPTION14

Department Restricted? Credit Line

Original Release Title of the film when it was first Title released. Year of original release Director(s) Date the film was first released Director(s) of the film. If there is more than one director separate the names with semicolons. Display name as: Last name, First Name Country where the card was printed. Indicator of format of the material such as poster, lobby card, one-sheet, etc.

CATALOGUE.PLACE_MADE CATALOGUE.ITEM_NAME

Country of origin Item name

32

CATALOGUE.TITLE

Title written on object (may be foreign title and differ from OPTION10) Date printed Description

The title that is on the physical object. The title may be different depending on the country of release.

CATALOGUE.DATE_MADE CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Date the object was printed which can be different from original release. Description of the graphics on the posters as well as the organization and location of credits and images. ex. "One sheet: Stanley Kubrick, bold black red backing with graphic title to the centre, a face dominating the centre of the 'T' graphic of THE' in the title. Three lines of credits in black text across bottom; Imprinted signature Saul Bass top right."

CATALOGUE.FLAG4

Colour (C), Black & White (B), or Both (O) Measurements

Indicate whether the posters are in colour or monochrome. Full measurements of items. ex. 27 x 41 inches

CATALOGUE.MEASUREMEN TS MEASUREMENTS.DIMENSIO N1 MEASUREMENTS.UNIT1 MEASUREMENTS.DIMENSIO N2 MEASUREMENTS.UNIT2 CATALOGUE.NOTE CATALOGUE.PROCESSING_I NFO

Division of First number overall measurements in Type of measurement (in) flexi. Second number Type of measurement (in) Note Archivist notes Contextual information that does not directly relate to the object. Private internal notes that will not appear on the public platform.

33

LOCATION.LOCATION LOCATION.LOC_LEVEL1 LOCATION.LOC_LEVEL2 LOCATION.LOC_LEVEL3 LOCATION.NOTE LOCATION.LOCATION_DATE

Location building Location - room Location housing Drawer Note Location date

TBLB FRL Holding Room Poster cabinet Number attributed to the poster drawer. Original housing number if applicable. Date the location was uploaded to Mimsy. Upload date formatted: YYYYMM-DD see full condition record All information on the condition of the item. The date that the condition was recorded. Any notes of anomalies or things that may not be clear about condition.

CONDITION.CONDITION CONDITION.SUMMARY CONDITION.CONDITION_DA TE CONDITION.NOTE CATALOGUE.DEPOSITOR

Title of condition record Summary of condition Date of condition Condition note

34

6- Current poster record

35

7 ­ Graphs reflecting object density in the McKone Collection

Number of posters per year of release
70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 Window Card One-Sheets and posters Half-Sheets Inserts Mini Lobby Cards Standard Lobby Cards

1969

160 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 Standard Lobby Cards Mini Lobby Cards Inserts Half-Sheets Posters and one-sheets Window Cards

1965

1981

1949

1951

1953

1955

1957

1959

1961

1963

1967

1969

1971

1973

1975

1977

1979

1983

1985

36

1987

1987

1949

1951

1953

1955

1957

1959

1961

1963

1965

1967

1971

1973

1975

1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

Window Cards per year of release
40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 1955 1957 1959 1961 1963 1965 1967 1969 1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 Window Cards

Window Cards per year of release
45 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 Window Cards

37

one-sheets and posters per year of release
12 10 8 6 4 2 0 1942 1945 1948 1951 1954 1957 1960 1963 1966 1969 1972 1975 1978 1981 1984 1987 1990 1993

one-sheets and posters

one-sheets and posters per year of release
14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 one-sheets and posters

1954

1942

1945

1948

1951

1957

1960

1963

1966

1969

1972

1975

1978

1981

1984

1987

1990

38

1993

10

12

14

16

10

12

14

16

0 0 2 4 6 8

2

4

6

8

Half-Sheets per year of release

Half-Sheets per year of release

39
Half-Sheets

1945 1947 1949 1951 1953 1955 1957 1959 1961 1963 1965 1967 1969 1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989
1945 1947 1949 1951 1953 1955 1957 1959 1961 1963 1965 1967 1969 1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989

Half-Sheets

Inserts per year of release
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 Inserts

1982

1950

1952

1954

1956

1958

1960

1962

1964

1966

1968

1970

1972

1974

1976

1978

1980

Inserts per year of release
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 Inserts

40

1984

Lobby Cards per year of release
100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 Standard Lobby Cards Mini Lobby Cards

Lobby Cards per year of release
70 60 50 40 Mini Lobby Cards 30 20 10 0 Standard Lobby Cards

41

Illustrations

Figure 1. This 1964 Robin of the 7 Hoods lobby card shows several characteristic condition issues: tears in corners, yellowing, and pinholes in corners (image owned by TIFF).

42

Figure 2. This lobby card shows adhesive damage in top corners and wear along edges (image owned by TIFF).

43

Figure 3. Stains figure prominently on this 1966 mini-lobby card from the film Harper (image owned by TIFF).

44

Figure 4. Damage from a matte with adhesive damage as well as some water damage in centre (image owned by TIFF).

45

Catalogue
CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.I OTHER_NUMBERS.O OTHER_NUMBERS.O CATALOGUE. CATALOG CATALOGUE. E.CREDIT_L CATALOGUE.OPTI CATALOGUE.DA CATALOGUE.O UE.PLACE CATALOGUE.I D_NUMBER THER_NUMBER N_TYPE CATEGORY1 UE.FLAG3 FLAG1 INE ON10 TE_COLLECTED PTION14 _MADE TEM_NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE CATALOG UE.DATE_ MADE CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION CATALOG MEASURE MEASUR CATALO UE.MEAS MENTS.DI MEASUR EMENTS. MEASUR GUE.FL UREMEN MENSION EMENTS. DIMENSI EMENTS. AG4 TS 1 UNIT1 ON2 UNIT2 CATALOGUE.NOTE CATALOGUE.P LOCATIO LOCATIO LOCATIO LOCATION. CONDITIO ROCESSING_I N.LOCATI N.LOC_LE N.LOC_LE LOCATION.L LOCATION.NO LOCATION_ N.CONDIT NFO ON VEL1 VEL2 OC_LEVEL3 TE DATE ION CONDITION.SUMMARY Type of secondary Secondary identity number (ex. number (ex. 770145 National Screen or 77/35) Number) Library (L) or Archive (A) Collection Restricted? C= Color; B=bw; O=both Measure ments ex. 27 x 41 inches original housing number if applicable upload date formatted: YYYY-MMDD Title line of condition record contextual, detailed data of condition CONDITION .CONDITIO N_DATE date condition was noted formatted: YYYY-MMDD

Unique identifier

RAD series

Name of Collection

Original Release Title

Year of original release

Director(s)

Country of origin

Item Name

Title written on object

Date printed

Description of physical object.

27 in

41 in

contextual info that does not directly relate to the object

private internal notes Building

Room

Poster cabinet

Drawer number

2012-01403.0001

60/39

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The 3rd Voice

Cornfield, 1960 Hubert

USA

Window Card The 3rd Voice

Yellow still in top left corner over "It's Diabolikill!" in green text, on a red background (from left to right) a man talks on the phone, a woman looks out to the viewer with the head of a man with the outline of a white skull superimposed on it, title in yellow in the 1960 mouth of the skull, two lines of credits in blue text.

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel "All the Way" by Charles Williams.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellow, slight creasing along top see full edge, blue line in top white section, creasing in condition centre right edge, creasing in bottom right corner, 2016-06-24 record image slightly visible on verso.

2016-02-12

2012-01403.0002

61/182

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse

Minnelli, 1962 Vincente

USA

The 4 Horsemen of Window Card the Apocalypse

Four armour clad-horsemen ride in a fiery orange sky over the burning city of Paris while a couple kisses in front of the city, title in white text centred between the horsemen and couple, three lines of credits in dark blue text. Tagline: "Paris, city of lovers... the day 1961 the clocks stopped turning and the world stood still..." C Large close-up of man's face, a woman stands to his right and a couple embraces on the right of the woman, scenes from the film on the right and left of the figures, one line of credits in black text over the title in purple text, two lines of credits in black text under caption. Tagline: "A war is one test of man... a 1967 woman is another!" C Bold Black letters "This picture has a message: watch out!", three leads in centre right of card; four square boxes show scenes in bottom right of card, pink title and main cast on the bottom left, two lines of credits in small black lettering across the bottom under main 1969 cast. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Vincente Blasco Ibañez.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellowing, slight sun damage on bottom right edge and along the right edge, one see full horizontal crease along centre bottom section and condition a second crease in the top white section, stains in 2016-06-24 record top white section.

2016-01-20

2012-01403.0003

67/27

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

La vingtcinquième heure

Verneuil, 1967 Henry

USA

Window Card The 25th Hour

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellowing with a concentration on condition edges, small finger mark on right side of credits, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso.

2016-01-20

2012-01403.0004

69/97

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

100 Rifles

1969 Gries, Tom

USA

Window Card 100 Rifles

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on a novel by Robert MacLeod.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Good condition; moderate browning and yellowing 2016-06-24 record throughout, holes punched in top two corners.

2016-01-15

2012-01403.0005

70/8

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

A Boy Named Charlie Brown

1969 Melendez, Bill USA

A Boy Named Charlie Window Card Brown

Purple window-shaped border with blue and green floral patterns in top left and right corners, brightly coloured Peanuts characters centred around a piano under green text, title under image in red text, credits 1970 in black text under title. C Outline of Anthony Quinn on a bold red background, two scenes are blended into the outline on the left side of his face, tagline above image in red text, Anthony Quinn's name and title in black lettering under image, two lines of credits in red text at the bottom of the card; imprinted signature of B. Peak in top left of image. Tagline: "Go ahead - measure the man, this dreamer of dreams, this outrageous rebel, 1969 this tender, loving magnificent animal." Three lines of cast and title in beige at the top, man spreads his arms and runs in the centre while various women stand behind him, two lines of credits in blue 1966 text at the bottom. Central image and credits slanted to the left, large image of a woman above a heart shaped section depicting scenes in bright colours, two men take off their hats next the woman's head and above the heart, purple text on the right side of the image, actors names in bold purple and red text, the title in purple text on the right of the heart, two lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Imprinted signature of Mitchell Hooks in the centre left of the 1968 heart in the yellow background.

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Also known as "A Boy Called Charlie Brown," First Charlie Brown and Peanuts film; May not be an copyright United NSS film, no Feature Syndicate, copyright inc. notice. Repo. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Fair condition; creasing at the top and bottom of condition central image with evidence of folding, browning 2016-06-24 record along edges of card

2016-01-15

2012-01403.0006

69/375

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

A Dream of Kings

1969 Mann, Daniel

USA

Window Card A Dream of Kings

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition 2016-06-24 record Great condition; minimal browning along edges see full Fair condition; very yellow, browning in top right condition corner, heavy creasing in top left section, stain in 2016-06-24 record credit lines, image slightly visible on verso.

2016-01-15

2012-01403.0007

66/162

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

A Fine Madness

1966 Kershner, Irvin USA

Window Card A Fine Madness

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-01-15

2012-01403.0008

68/135

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

A Flea in Her Ear

Charon, 1968 Jacques

France; USA

Window Card A Flear in Her Ear

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

A film version of a TV movie of the same name released in 1967.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Good condition; slight browning along edges 2016-06-24 record moving towards centre.

2016-01-15

2012-01403.0009

66/392

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

A Funny Thing Happened On The Way To The Forum

USA and 1966 Lester, Richard UK

A Funny Thing Happened On The Window Card Way To The Forum

Bright yellow background, a man balances on a ball while holding the face of a Roman building, women are depicted as statue columns while men in bright clothing run between them, the title is located in the triangular section above the columns, actors and title in red lettering below image, two lines of credits in 1966 black text at the bottom. C A caricature of Bob Hope juggles the earth with his feet while five women cling to the globe, "Bob Hope and The Global Girls" and the title written in yellow text inside the earth, tagline in red and black text on left side of globe, five cartoon squares in the bottom right corner depict Hope and the different girls, credits in blue text under image. Tagline: "Girls of all nations want closer relations - in fact they want to be 1964 the mother of my child!" C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

red drag marks may be a printing defect TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; browning along edges, red drag marks from top centre right to the bottom of card see full (possibly printing damage), slight creasing in the condition centre (visible from verso), red border visible on 2016-06-24 record verso.

2016-01-15

2012-01403.0010

64/18

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

A Global Affair

1964 Arnold, Jack

USA

Window Card A Global Affair

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; heavy browning on the bottom and along the edges, small stain next to top comic block see full (bottom right), small stains in white borders condition possibly caused by adhesive, ink and dirt transfer 2016-06-24 record on the verso, slight yellowing from sun exposure. 2016-01-15

2012-01403.0011

68/240

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

A Man Called Gannon

Goldstone, 1968 James

USA

A Man Called Window Card Gannon

Brown sandy background, central black ink drawing of Gannon with a smoking gun, smaller black and red drawings of scenes and characters on the right of central figure, two actors' names in red text next to central figure, title in red text located between the central figure and small scene drawings, two lines of credits in black text under title, tagline in green and black text in top right hand corner: "He battled an empire of barbed wire and bullets! ... then had to face a showdown with the kid he trained to shoot... and 1968 the women he showed how to love!" C Bright blue background, sepia toned image of girl hanging onto a tree in the centre right of image, tagline next to central image, small sepia portrait of Sidney Poitier next to title in darker blue text, two lines of credits in black text under image. Tagline: "A man... a girl... captives in their own worlds... finding 1966 escape in each other..." Blue border around an image of a woman undressing in a mirror with a film quote in pink lettering next to the image, a sepia toned image of a couple and a smaller vertical image of the back profile of a woman located below main image of woman, title in white text on a red background on the right of the two toned images, full white background, two lines of 1965 credits on the bottom outside of blue border

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Remake of "Man Without a Star" (1955).

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-06-24

Great condition; transfer on verso, very slight creasing in bottom right corner.

2016-01-16

2012-01403.0012

66/21

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

A Patch of Blue

1965 Green, Guy

USA

Window Card A Patch of Blue

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel "Be Ready with Bells and Drums" by Elizabeth Kata.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; overall browning with darker areas condition along the top, title and image visible on verso, 2016-06-24 record transfer of ink and dirt on verso. 2016-01-15

2012-01403.0013

65/108

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

A Rage to Live

Grauman, 1965 Walter

USA

Window Card A Rage to Live

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on a book by John O'Hara.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; browning along bottom edges, condition transfer of ink and dirt on the verso, red title card 2016-06-24 record visible on verso.

2016-01-15

2012-01403.0014

66/42

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

A Thousand Clowns

1965 Coe, Fred

USA

Window Card A Thousand Clowns

Bright orange background with black border, on the right and in the foreground a man, a child, and a woman are pictured on a lion statue, stencilled outline of buildings and business men on the left of the lion, short "It's about..." section in the top right corner, title in yellow text below the main cast names 1966 in white text, credits in black text under the title. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on a play by Herb Gardner (he also wrote the screenplay)

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; large yellow discolouration above image in white area, yellowing of card stock, stain that extends from right centre border to 2 inches see full into image in a diagonal sweep, heaving browning condition on bottom edge, transfer of black on verso in 2016-06-24 record square pattern with drag marks.

2016-01-15

46

2012-01403.0015

70/97

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

A Walk in the Spring Rain

1970 Green, Guy

USA

A Walk in the Spring Window Card Rain

2012-01403.0016

64/109

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Act One

1963 Schary, Dore

USA

Window Card Act One

Tagline in white text on a purple background at the top of the image, continues under image in black text, turquoise toned still of a woman leaning on man with crossed arms with a forest in the background, the bottom right of the image is designed to look like falling rain pointing towards the title in purple text, credits in black text under title. Tagline: "Love happens when you least expect it. Even when it's not 1970 yours to have." C Title in black text over a blue-green background, on right side a long thin image of man's silhouette walking away in a city (New York), six small close-up portraits along bottom edge of image under the title, credits in black text on white background under 1964 image. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; large fold in bottom left corner of card with another crease above it, smaller fold in see full bottom right corner, small ink stain in top left of condition the white section, yellowing, transfer and creasing 2016-06-24 record in bottom of verso.

2016-01-15

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on a book by Moss Hart

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; faded in some areas, browning along bottom edge and top right corner, small stain on see full centre left border along edge, blue transfer next to condition credits, yellow discolouration in top centre of verso, 2016-06-24 record slight transfer on verso. 2016-01-15 Poor condition; two horizontal folds with creases radiating outwards, hole in bottom right centre of card (under the ladies dancing), another hole in see full cast card on the left side of the coach scene, condition creasing along bottom edge, pin holes in all four 2016-06-24 record corners, scratches throughout, dirt on verso.

2012-01403.0017

67/71

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Adventures of Bullwhip Griffin

1967 Neilson, James USA

The Adventures of Window Card Bullwhip Griffin

2012-01403.0018

70/62

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Airport

Seaton, 1970 George

USA

Window Card Airport

Glossy vaudeville style poster advertising Bullwhip's exploits and encounters: Bullwhip boxing the Mountain Ox, ladies dancing, the robbing of a 1967 stagecoach, all on a bright yellow background. A border of coloured portraits with character names under each still, in centre top of border is the reference to book material, centred title in red text, eleven lines of cast names in bold black lettering, three lines of credits in black text at the bottom of 1970 card.

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Albert Sidney Fleischman.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-01-20

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on a book by Arthur Hailey.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; uniform yellowing, sun damage 2016-06-24 record along edges of verso.

2016-01-18

2012-01403.0019

67/342

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Ambushers

1967 Levin, Henry

USA

Window Card The Ambushers

Man driving a motorcycle with a side car, five woman ride with him, around the central image small scenes are drawn, announcement of the Slaygirls on left bottom of image, Dean Martin's name and title in large red text under image, four lines of credits in blue 1967 text under the title. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novels by Donald Hamilton. Third film in the Matt Helm series of films.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; yellowing, slight wear in top left 2016-06-24 record edge, image visible on verso.

2016-01-20

2012-01403.0020

64/51

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

America, America

1963 Kazan, Elia

USA

Window Card America America

Title in burgundy text above press comment in yellow text, six stills from the film in black and white tones, two lines of credits in burgundy text at the bottom of 1964 card. C Dark blue background, on the centre right a uniformed hand pulls a zipper to expose soldiers and a battle in water, on the right of zipper three women surround a single man, on the far left a woman looks up at a man, in a scene next to the woman a soldier enters an occupied bedroom, one line of black text with zipper design and one line of credits in black text 1964 under title. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the story of Kazan's uncle.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Okay condition; central horizontal fold, small tears along bottom edge, dirt along left border, ink stains beside title, gray streaks in centre of image, stains along right side of card, adhesive residue in left see full bottom corner and right top corner, damage and condition loss of paper in bottom right corner, transfer of ink 2016-06-24 record and dirt, title can be seen through verso. 2016-01-18

2012-01403.0021

64/301

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Americanization of Emily

1964 Hiller, Arthur

USA

The Americanization Window Card of Emily

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by William Bradford Hue.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellowing, browning in bottom corners, ink smudge on the bottom left side of see full image and credits, red line from top centre to condition centre of image, stain on left bottom side of image, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso. 2016-01-20

2012-01403.0022

66/356

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Any Wednesday

Miller, Robert 1966 Ellis

USA

Window Card Any Wednesday

Title in pink designed lettering with bright painted image of a woman speaking on the phone while smoking, a man enters the apartment while one exits looking dishevelled, two lines of cast in red text and two lines of credits in black text under image. Tagline: "What is young Ellen Gordon doing in the executive suite of John Cleves & Company? Is she on the board of directors? Is she a special consultant? Or is she just the girl who discovers she has the most co-operative 1966 apartment in the world?" C Centred prominently a gun wielding man looks back while riding a horse on a desert background within a black border, along the bottom edge characters in various poses, cast in red text above red title in black box, two lines of credits under title box. Tagline: "Southwest to Sonova rode the lustful, the lawless... 1966 to live on the edge of violence!"

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Also known as "Bachelor Girl Apartment."

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; minimal yellowing, slight creasing condition on the left edge, image visible on verso, red lines 2016-06-24 record and transfer on verso.

2016-01-18

2012-01403.0023

66/347

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Appaloosa

1966 Furie, Sidney

USA

Window Card The Appaloosa

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Robert MacLeod.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Good condition; yellowing, wear along top, creasing 2016-06-24 record along the top white section, image visible on verso. 2016-01-20

2012-01403.0024

69/335

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Arrangement

1969 Kazan, Elia

USA

Window Card The Arrangement

Sepia toned still of a man and woman drinking at a bar, black & white shattered watch in the centre right with a key hanging from the chain outside the still, title in black text under the key, four lines of credits in sand coloured text at the bottom under a small book icon (left of the card). Tagline: "Start comparing your wife to the girl you just met. When you reach a 1969 decision, take off your wedding ring. C On the right side of tagline on a red background a bomb falls on a table with five men which is the hat of a woman, below her another woman dresses while seated, around the chair are characters and scenes from the film, on the left of caption a man jumps out of a burning zeppelin (pink background), title in yellow text in a black door sign, three lines of credits in black 1969 text under title. C Man and woman on the deck of a submarine in the foreground, The Queen Mary visible in the background, green/blue waves and sky behind the ship, small still of kissing couple on the right of image, main cast and title in pink text beside the still, blue 1966 border, two lines of credits in black text under image. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on novel by Elia Kazan.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellowing, browning along bottom condition edge, maker stain on right bottom edge, creasing in 2016-06-24 record top right corner, image slightly visible on verso. 2016-01-20

2012-01403.0025

69/123

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Assassination Bureau

1969 Deardan, Basil USA

The Assassination Window Card Bureau

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on an idea from "The Assassination Bureau, ltd." by Jack London and Robert Fish.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condtion; yellowing, tear in bottom right condition edge, finger marks along left edges of verso, image 2016-06-24 record visible on verso.

2016-01-20

2012-01403.0026

66/81

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Assault on a Queen

1966 Donohue, Jack USA

Window Card Assault on a Queen

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on a book by Jack Finney.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; slight browning along edges, ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso, image visible from verso.

2016-01-18

2012-01403.0027

68/214

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Bandolero!

McLaglen, 1968 Andrew V.

USA

Window Card Bandolero!

2012-01403.0028

64/365

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Back Door to Hell

Hellman, 1964 Monte

USA

Window Card Back Door to Hell

2012-01403.0029

67/222

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Banning

1967 Winston, Ron

USA

Window Card Banning

On a black square background two cowboys pointing guns in opposite directions above a woman looking back, black bullet hole designed cast names in over title in red banner, red toned still on the bottom right, 1968 two lines of credits in black text at the bottom of card. C Top section: characters fighting in a jungle, central male (in colour) jumping or climbing over bottom section. Bottom section: red title over yellow background, one still in blue tone and one drawing next to title, two lines of credits in blue text under 1964 title. C Title in red text above image, stills of actors in various positions in bright pink tone over turquoise background, two lines of credits in black text under 1967 image. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellowing, two punch holes in top condition right corner, slight fading, small tear in left border 2016-06-24 record near top, moderate stains on the top of verso.

2016-01-18

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; slight browning along edges, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso.

2016-01-18

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on a story by Hamilton Maule.

TBLB

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; slight creasing in the top left condition corner, sligh yellowing around edges, transfer of ink 2016-06-24 record on verso, image visible on verso. 2016-01-18

2012-01403.0030

66/3

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Battle of the Bulge

1965 Annakin, Ken

USA

Window Card Battle of the Bulge

Top banner of action scene with tanks in orange and brown tones, close-up stills of characters along left and bottom border of image, title in orange text organized in the shape of a tank in the centre on a black background, orange silhouettes beside the 1966 'tank,' three lines of credits in black text under image. C Stills of Richard Burton and Peter O'Toole's faces in centre, two vertical red banners with actors' names on either side of title, image of two characters on horseback with soldiers and the castle in the background at the bottom and between the banners, 1964 two lines of credits in blue text under image. C Coloured still of bedroom scene with the character of 'Lust' and Dudley Moore, image set between two banners with quotes, title in red text between five 1968 lines of credits in black text. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellowing along edges, credits see full show bleeding and transfer onto white background, condition sun damage on verso, transfer of ink on verso, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso. 2016-01-18

2012-01403.0031

64/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Becket

1964 Glenville, Peter USA

Window Card Becket

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the play by Jean Anouilh. From the story by Peter Cook and Dudley Moore

TBLB

FRL holding room FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; slight yellowing concentrated at condition edges, folded bottom left corner, slight creasing 2016-06-24 record and wear along left border, image visible on verso. see full condition Good condition; yellowing with a concentration on 2016-06-24 record edges, slight image fading.

2016-01-18

2012-01403.0032

68/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Bedazzled

1967 Donen, Stanley USA

Window Card Bedazzled

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-01-18

47

2012-01403.0033

64/250

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Behold a Pale Horse

Zinnemann, 1964 Fred

USA

Window Card Behold a Pale Horse

Portrait of Gregory Peck in a bulls-eye with guns pointed at him, second portrait of man holding knife beside bulls-eye, two lines of credits in violet text above title in pink/red text, five lines of credits in violet text under title, third portrait of a man looking up at right corner, a small painted scene of a border crossing with mountains in background beside 1964 portrait.

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

2012-01403.0034

69/121

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Ben-Hur

1959 Wyler, William USA

Window Card Ben-Hur

Caption of Oscar wins at the top, familiar title in large stone letters with scenes of chariot racing, statues, architecture and characters around the title, six lines of credits in black text at the bottom, yellow/gold 1969 background. C Within a red star designed border five arrows point down towards the White House, central red arrow has tagline, four other blue arrows include black & white stills with quotes, title in red over drawing of the White House, two lines of credits in blue text and 1964 three lines of credits in black text under title. C Top banner with a green toned still of four men pointing guns at another under caption, "Jerry Lewis" in black text above title in red text with water and bubble design, central painting if one man in diving suite stands to the left of a large head while a figure in a bathrobe and another playing tennis stand to the right of the head, a woman and a boat complete the image, two lines of credits in lack text under water 1967 designed border. C A couple stand shocked while a large red dog jumps through and shatters a widow, a surprised boy crouches near the window, title in red text, two lines of credits in black text under title. Tagline: "In one decisive moment... a courageous boy and a Big Red 1962 Dog teach a brave man the meaning of devotion!"

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on novel by Emeric Pressburger Later reprint for release of film. Based on the novel "BenHur: A Tale of the Christ (1880)" by Lew Wallace.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; large fold in left bottom corner, see full slight yellowing, slight damage and creasing along condition left border, slight fading, dirt stains and smudges 2016-06-24 record on verso, ink transfer on verso

2016-01-18

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; stain in left corner above "Metro2016-06-24 record Goldwyn-Meyer present," image visible on verso

2016-01-18

2012-01403.0035

64/166

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Best Man

Schaffner, 1964 Franklin

USA

Window Card The Best Man

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellowing, browning on bottom right corner, large dent above star border on right of card, small crease in white section, small circular see full stain beside white house, finger mark on the condition bottom right next to credits, transfer of ink and 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso. 2016-01-20

2012-01403.0036

67/210

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Big Mouth

1967 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Window Card The Big Mouth

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, browning along edges, two punched holes in top corners, slight wear along edges, suface dirt along edges, horizontal and see full vertical creasng in centre of image, finger mark in condition centre right edge, horizontal creasing throughout, 2016-06-24 record ink transfer on verso, image slightly visible on verso. 2016-01-21 Okay condition; pin holes along all four edges and in corners, two punched holes in top corners, damage along edges, two horizontal folds in top half of see full image, slight fading, brown tape on verso with condition Calgary address of Consolidated Theatre Services, 2016-06-24 record dirt and transfer on verso. 2016-01-18

2012-01403.0037

62/239

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Big Red

1962 Tokar, Norman USA

Window Card Big Red

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the books by James Kjelgaard.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0038

64/253

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Bikini Beach

1964 Asher, William USA

Window Card Bikini Beach

2012-01403.0039

68/43

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Billion Dollar Brain

1967 Russel, Ken

USA

Window Card Billion Dollar Brain

2012-01403.0040

68/238

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Bliss of Mrs. Blossom

McGrath, 1968 Joseph

USA

The Bliss of Mrs. Window Card Blossom

Black & white image of couple over a scene of drag racing, outlines of beachgoers surround the two stills, eight lines of credits above drag racers in square box. 1964 Tagline: "It's where bare-as-you-dare is the rule." B Grey border, animated gun firing on the left, centred live action and animated stills in the shape of a lightning bolt, a man screams with a bulls-eye over his face located on the right side of the bolt, two lines of credits in black text above the title in red text, five lines of credits in black text next to the 'tail' of 1968 lightning bolt. C Bright yellow background with green border, main cast names in red text in top right corner, centre left a comical drawing above a black bra, title in green text in the bra next to a black & white still of woman smiling, two lines of credits in black text at the bottom 1968 of the card. C Scene of an air battle with close-up of one fighter, blue title under air battle, two stills under title of a man and woman drinking and of a soldier, four lines of 1966 credits in black text at the bottom. C Facial close-up of two leads within a pink border on a blue background, "Taylor and Burton" and title in large red text, five lines of credits in black text under 1968 image. C Large black splatter on a red background, white broken silhouette of woman in splatter design, title in white text above splatter, black & white still of eyes and nose of a man, two lines of credits in black text under image. Tagline: "The most fiendish idea ever 1965 conceived by the human brain." O

14 x 20.5 inches

14 in

20.5 in

Reproduction.

NSS# written in pen.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Good condition; slight browning, stairs along 2016-06-24 record bottom section, small tears along right edge.

2016-01-18

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on a novel by Len Deighton.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition 2016-06-24 record Great condition; slight overall yellowing.

2016-01-18

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the play by Alec Coppel.

2012-01403.0041

66 250

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

The Blue Max

Guillermin, 1966 John

USA

Window Card The Blue Max

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB Probably Adaptation by Ben reproduction, Barzinan and Basilio no NSS Franchina from the disclaimer, novel by Jack Hunter. glossy paper. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; slight browning along bottom right see full corner, red ink dragmarks from top right white condition section to the main cast credits, red pencil mark 2016-06-24 record beside Paramount logo.

2016-01-21

FRL holding room FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; ink transfer on verso, image visible 2016-06-24 record on verso, slight wear on bottom edge of image. 2016-01-21 see full condition Good condition; yellowing, slight folding in top two 2016-06-24 record corners, image slightly visible on verso.

2012-01403.0042

68/221

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Boom

1968 Losey, Joseph

USA

Window Card Boom!

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on a play by Tennessee Williams.

TBLB

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-01-18

2012-01403.0043

65/157

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Brainstorm

Conrad, 1965 William

USA

Window Card Brainstorm

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellowing, slight damage along left condition edge, red ink along bottom under credits, transfer 2016-06-24 record on verso, image visible on verso. 2016-01-18 Poor condition; yellow, brown stain from the bottom edge to the top white section, damage by brown liquid at the bottom, two horizontal creases in the centre, wear and tear along edges, pin holes see full in all four corners, residue on bottom of still, brown condition stains under title, ink transfer on verso, creasing on 2016-06-24 record bottom, tear in top right edge. 2016-01-21

2012-01403.0044

68/215

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Brotherhood

1968 Ritt, Martin

USA

Window Card The Brotherhood

Black & white still of a man kissing another man in a wooded area, four lines of cast, title, and credits in 1968 black text under image.

B

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0045

69/74

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Buona Sera, Mrs. Campbell

1968 Frank, Melvin

USA

Buona Sera, Mrs. Window Card Campbell

Black & white character stills surround a yellow title card with red text, four lines of credits in white text on a purple background at the bottom of card, tagline above image on pink background. Tagline: "What's bothering you, Mrs. Campbell, baby. What rat left you in Italy with a beautiful bouncing souvenir? Why have three G.I.'s sent you money all these years? What happens when their wives find out? When your 1969 daughter finds out?" C Central figure of woman undressing, the upper-half of man in a tie looks on, title in red text on the left of central figure, two lines of credits in black ink at the bottom. Tagline: "Ann Margaret strikes a new kind of 1965 fire in a new kind of man... Michael Parks." C Top section the four 'muffs' are described, a crowd of cartoonish characters run away from a cemetery in the background in a curved design, above the title in red and purple text, four red arrows identify the muffs, four lines of credits in white text in a blue box 1967 under the title. C Title in black text encircled with women in various poses, woman in pink dances under the title, on either side of her are colour toned stills from the film in square boxes, blue border on a white background, 1963 four lines of credits in black ink under image. C Large yellow book with title in black text with small outline drawing on the cover, woman in a red dress stands on the right of the book, below the book actors are portrayed with character identifiers or quotes, a couple embraces on the bottom right of image, two lines of credits in black text with the title repeated in 1961 red text below the image. C Purple figure-8 pattern encircles the portraits of the four leads, two blue drawings located in top corners, small red drawing of couple in bottom left section of figure-8, stars and bubbles located outside figure-8, two lines of credits in dark blue text at the bottom of 1960 figure-8. C Lead male running and dragging a woman along as he points his gun, three black & white stills with captions from the film and title in purple, light blue detail between the still, three lines of black text at the 1961 bottom of card. O Two coloured stills of a couple fighting in an open book design, title in red text above book, four lines of 1967 credits in blue text under book.

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Good condition; yellowing, folded top left corner, 2016-06-24 record slight fold in bottom of top section.

2016-01-18

2012-01403.0046

65/01

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Bus Riley's Back in Town

1965 Hart, Harvey

USA

Bus Riley's Back in Window Card Town

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition 2016-06-24 record Great condition; yellowing, image visible on verso

2016-01-18

2012-01403.0047

67/41

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Busy Body

1967 Castle, William USA

Window Card The Busy Body

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on a novel by Donald E. Westlake.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Good condition; curling (rolled), yellow, slight 2016-06-24 record browning along edges, image visible on verso.

2016-01-21

2012-01403.0048

63/134

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Bye Bye Birdie

1963 Sidney, George USA

Window Card Bye Bye Birdie

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the musical play of the same Possibly a name. reproduction. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellowing, NSS stamp visible on condition recto, wear and tear on top corners, image visible 2016-06-24 record on verso.

2016-01-18

2012-01403.0049

61/215

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

By Love Possessed

1961 Sturges, John

USA

Window Card By Love Possessed

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by James Gould Cozzens.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellowing, black smudge in bottom condition left corner, transfer of ink on verso, and image 2016-06-24 record visible on verso. 2016-01-18

2012-01403.0050

60/317

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Can-Can

1960 Lang, Walter

USA

Window Card Can-Can

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the Broadway musical.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0051

67/69

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Caprice

1967 Tashlin, Frank

USA

Window Card Caprice

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; yellowing, browning along edges, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso. Good condition; minimal yellowing, slight folding in left bottom corner and top corners, MPAA sticker see full on left bottom, corner, dirt on verso, image visible condition on verso, sun damage on edges of verso, ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso. see full Good condition; yellowing, slight browning along condition the bottom edge, ink line on bottom right of card, 2016-06-24 record image slightly visible on verso.

2016-01-18

2016-01-18

2012-01403.0052

67/97

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

The Carpetbaggers

Dmytryk, 1964 Edward

USA

Window Card The Carpetbaggers

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel Harold Robbins.

TBLB

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-01-21

48

2012-01403.0053

60/2

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Cash McCall

1960 Pevney, Joseph USA

Window Card Cash McCall

Top right: main cast in black text above the title in white text in a red bubble, yellow and red square around a couple with the outline of a car and skyline in the background, tagline and description on the right of the couple, small portrait of both leads in the bottom right corner of square, three lines of credits in blue and black text under image. Tagline: "Big man... Big charms... big millions... but from the girl not even 1960 a little kiss!" C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the book by Cameron Hawley.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellowing with browning along edges, two punched holes in top corner, finger marks and dirt along bottom section of card, wear on top edge and top right edge, small circular stains in the bottom third of card, wear along all edges, see full small tears along bottom edge, dirt and ink transfer condition on verso, large circled "50" in pencil on verso, sun 2016-06-24 record damage on verso. 2016-01-18 Poor condition; pin holes in all four corners, dirt and smudges in right corner, wear along edges, red stamp in bottom right of verso, bleedthrough of see full three pieces of tape on verso, four sections of condition skinning damage (from adhesive) on verso which is 2016-06-24 record visible on recto, "return" written in ink on verso.

2012-01403.0054

69/245

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Castle Keep

1969 Pollack, Sidney USA

Window Card Castle Keep

Large image of actor with a fiery castle in the background, images from film located on the left and right of the main image, title card with parapet designed border, black background, four lines of 1969 credits in grey and black text. In top right a red toned still of a man with a butcher knife as a hand on a green background, two centred viewer warnings ("Fear Flasher" and "Horror Horn"), between warnings a blue toned woman is being strangled, below warnings a dismembered hand, title in black text with blood drop design, three lines of 1966 credits in blue text.

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by William Eastlake.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-01-18

2012-01403.0055

66/280

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Chamber of Horrors

1966 Averback, Hy

USA

Window Card Chamber of Horrors

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Disclaimer: "A film with many scenes so terrifying, a built in audio-visual warning system has been devised."

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; moderate folding and wear on right see full edges, yellowing, browning along bottom and right condition edges, pencil or ink marks on the centre right of 2016-06-24 record card and top white section, slight image fading.

2016-01-18

2012-01403.0056

67/37

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Cool Ones

1967 Nelson, Gene

USA

Window Card The Cool Ones

Tinted still of a rowdy crowd at a party, title in black text on a ball of flames under still, four lines of credits under ball. Tagline: "The world of the Go-Go girls and the get-get guys. It's the story of Cliff Donner... a teenage singing idol who had it all... lost it... and had 1967 to find it all over again." C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; yellowing, slight browning along 2016-06-24 record edges, sligh wear along top and bottom edges.

2016-01-21

2012-01403.0057

67/66

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Die Hölle von Macao

1967 Hill, James

USA

Window Card The Corrupt Ones

Cast names in red ink above a grey caption above the red title, under the title on a grey background various characters and scenes depicted on the right of tagline, two lines of credits in grey text under image. Tagline: "From the four corners of the earth... From the four corners of Hell... the hunt for the Peking Medallion drew them together in the most sinister orgy of terror 1967 the world has ever known!" C Twenty-one lines in black text on right side of image describing production, a man holds an icepick while lying on a couch, a couple is depicted on left side of man, title in white text on black section of couch, two 1962 lines of credits in black text at the bottom. C Man holds a sniper rifle on a pink background, a man and woman stand to the left and behind him, title in red text under image, blue toned scene of man falling from a dock under title, four lines of cast on the right of blue scene, two lines of credits in black text at the bottom of card. Tagline: "Assassin... or agent? The bullet-riddled answer lies at the bottom of a fortune 1968 in 'hot' money." C A young boy points to three large portraits of women above him while his father laughs beside him, the title in orange text below image, three lines of credits in 1963 blue text below title. C Red still of a group of men in various states of undress, the German WWII swastika is displayed, reference to the Night of the Long Knives, black border, the title in white under image, three lines of 1970 credits in purple text under image. Centred man in black & white stretches out his hand towards the right of image, pink-toned man and woman under his outstretched hand, a scene is located on his left, red border on right and below image, a figure propels down to the bottom from tagline at the top of image, title in red text under border, three lines of credits under title. Tagline: "Kill and keep killing! It's the only chance you've got... 1967 when you steal another man's face!" Green painted image of two heads merging: one monster and one man, title in white text on purple background, below and to the right of morphing a man strangles a woman, small portraits line the bottom of the image between the title and the couple, two lines of credits in white text in a green 1965 box.

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in Caption states that the production of film was shrouded in secrecy under the code name Project Icepick.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellowing, sun damage on right see full bottom edge, stain on top left edge, ink transfer on condition verso, image visible on verso, two red lines from top 2016-06-24 record to centre of verso. 2016-01-21

2012-01403.0058

62/58

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Couch

1962 Crump, Owen

USA

Window Card The Couch

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellowing, slight browning along see full bottom edge, slight wear on right corner, sun condition damage on top edges, ink transfer on verso, stain 2016-06-24 record on top section of verso, image visible on verso.

2016-01-21

2012-01403.0059

68/222

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Counterfeit Killer

1968 Leytes, Josef

USA

Window Card The Counterfeit Killer

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

From a TV production called "The Faceless Man"

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellowing, browning at the bottom see full right of card, image visible on verso, stain along condition bottom of verso, surface stains on top section of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-01-21

2012-01403.0060

63/54

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Courtship of Eddie's Father

Minnelli, 1963 Vincente

USA

The Courtship of Window Card Eddie's Father

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Mark Toby.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellowing, creasing in top left condition corner, dirt and creasing in bottom right corner, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso, ink transfer on verso.

2016-01-21

2012-01403.0061

70/36

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

La caduta degli dei

Visconti, 1969 Luchino

USA

Window Card The Damned

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; ink transfer on the right edge and 2016-06-24 record along the bottom.

2016-01-21

2012-01403.0062

67/249

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Danger Has Two Faces

1967 Newland, John USA

Danger Has Two Window Card Faces

O

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellowing, small fold at the top condition left, crease at the top right, small tear in left edge, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso.

2016-01-18

2012-01403.0063

65/251

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Dark Intruder

1965 Hart, Harvey

USA

Window Card Dark Intruder

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellowing, slightly browning at the see full edges, red ink stains on the bottom right of card, condition image visible on verso, sun damage in right top 2016-06-24 record corner of verso.

2016-01-18

2012-01403.0064

68/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Deadfall

1968 Forbes, Brian

USA

Window Card Deadfall

Central focus on man climbing a rope ladder, smaller yellow image of man falling on the right side of main image, three stills with character descriptions below main image and to the left of falling man, title in pinkpurple text with falling design, three lines of cast in purple and blue text on left, one line of credits in blue 1968 text, blue border lines. C Five character stills, with description, line the left edge of card, title at the top in red and black text, bottom centre (below title) two couples embrace with images overlapping, two lines of credits in blue text under the couples. Tagline: "Only the hot sun was 1960 witness to their shameless sin! - or so they thought..." C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

From the novel by Desmon Cory.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Good condition; yellowing, browning at edges, 2016-06-24 record creasing at the top, severe browning on verso.

2016-01-18

2012-01403.0065

60/294

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Desire in the Dust

Calxton, 1960 William F.

USA

Window Card Desire in the Dust

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Harry Whittington.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Great condition; yellowing with slight browning condition along bottom edge, slight wear on the bottom right 2016-06-24 record corner. 2016-01-19

2012-01403.0066

68/205

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Detective

Douglas, 1968 Gordon

USA

Window Card The Detective

Close-up of a desk with an open drawer: a gun, a woman's portrait, a case file, a pencil, and a book of matches lie in the drawer, "Frank Sinatra" and title in orange text under image, a police I.D. badge on the right side of title, three lines of credits in black text under title. Tagline: "You're Joe Leland, detective. And you sit behind the desk in a city crawling with every crime in the book. And then along comes one as dirty 1968 as a knee brought right up to the stomach." C Diamond shaped central area with black text, double image of a man smoking on the left of title, four different still in each corner outside the diamond, 1967 three lines of credits in black text under image.

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Roderick Thorp.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellowing, browning along edges, see full two punch holes at the top, ink drops in top left condition corner, image slightly visible on verso, right bottom 2016-06-24 record corner separated. 2016-01-21

2012-01403.0067

67/150

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Double Man

Schaffner, 1967 Franklin J.

USA

Window Card The Double Man

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Henry S. Maxfield.

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; yellowing, browning along edges, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso, ink transfer on verso.

2016-01-21

2012-01403.0068

69/365

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Downhill Racer

Ritchie, 1969 Michael

USA

Window Card Downhill Racer

Large black & white close-up image of couple about to kiss, at the bottom of torn section of image a minuscule downhill skier races towards the viewer on a white bottom section, title in black curve design, one line of credits in gray at the bottom. Tagline: 1969 "How fast must a man go to get from where he's at?" O Middle-Eastern style architectural design with bright abstract filled sections and starry sky designs, between columns are located stills from the film, Title in red text under image, three lines of credits in blue 1968 text at the bottom, blue border. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellowing, wear on both vertical condition edges with a concentration at the top, creases in 2016-06-24 record bottom right corner, fold in top right corner.

2016-01-19

2012-01403.0069

69/247

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Duffy

1968 Parrish, Robert USA

Window Card Duffy

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; yellowing, slight wear in the top 2016-06-24 record right corner, two punched holes in top corners.

2016-01-19

49

2012-01403.0070

-

-

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

El Greco

1966 Salce, Luciano USA

Window Card El Greco

Top red section signifies fire, on left a large red tinted image of men leaning down towards woman, black & white images of a man fencing and a man being tortured on the bottom right of larger image, topcentred title in red letters, two lines of credits in black 1967 text on the bottom of card. O Blue border, man's upper body enters border from the left, woman's head enters border on the right both laughing, small drawing of couple between the faces, title in red text at the bottom of square within border, outside of border one line of credits in blue 1967 and four lines in black.

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Reproduction. Based on the play by Joseph Stein from Carl Reiner's novel. Produced on the New York stage by Morton Gottlieb.

White border is on the bottom instead of the top. Auction house says it is authentic but will research more. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; bleeding of ink in bottom right see full corner and under the main image, folded top left condition corner, wear at the bottom edge, ink smudges 2016-06-24 record along top edge, image is extremly visible from verso 2016-01-19

2012-01403.0071

67/39

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Enter Laughing

1967 Reiner, Carl

USA

Window Card Enter Laughing

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; yellow, slight browning along 2016-06-24 record edges, slight creasing and wear on bottom edge.

2016-01-19

2012-01403.0072

61/4

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Exodus

Preminger, 1960 Otto

USA

Window Card Exodus

Image design of a burning photo, black silhouette hands reach for a gun above title in large gray letters, on the right under the burning edge there are five lines of cast names, in smaller black text two lines of credits. Printed on right corner of image: "Design by 1961 Saul Bass." C An arrow pierces the eye socket of skull, below the skull a man's face, both skull and face are represented with a radiated pixelated design, on the right a smaller portrait of a woman screaming above seven lines of credits in blue text, below and left of the skull a man prepares arrow as woman looks on next to him, designed title under image, three lines of credits in 1967 blue text. C Orange book shatters next to caption for the film on a yellow background, a small black airplane flies between the book and caption away from the title, title in white text on an orange background, two lines 1964 of credits at the bottom of card. c Title in blue starry sky design next to small kissing couple in top left corner, seven lines of blue text under title, green-toned skyline with portrait film stills of characters, woman faces viewer while men look at 1961 her, three lines of blue text under image. C Small drawing of the forum on a green background above main image, nine character portraits surround a box with caption: "The most magnificent re-creation of an ancient empire... launches a new epoche in Motion Pictures... The fall of the Roman Empire!", six lines of credits in black text with dots leading tot he title (on the right) which is organized in a falling 1964 design. C A woman's face with her hair blowing in the wind, on the left her hair frames depictions of the three love interests, a farm house with charging soldiers in the background, cast in black text under and on either side of image, one line of credits in blue text under 1968 image. C Man with outstretched arms looks up, man is framed by colour scenes from the film in a square pattern, image designed in green and orange with curling patterns throughout, title in black text under image, twenty-one short lines of credits on the left of image 1972 and title. C On a black background a man and woman in yellow tinted portrait dance, on the far right three drawn character portraits, title in pink and orange text to the left of portraits, six colour stills under black area, five 1968 lines of credits in pink text under image. C Main cast in red text over a purple title, under the title a group of men on horseback over a pink background, two outlines of men on bottom corners of pink background, man points gun in bottom right of image between tagline and face, two lines of credits in red text at the bottom. Tagline: "There was nothing between them and the rape of the town but a $2-amonth farmer sheriff with a badge carved out of tin by 1968 his kids." C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on Novel by Leon Uris. Exclusive engagement poster.

Thicker card stock.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Great condition; yellowing, stains along right edge, condition smudges and dirt along bottom edge and right 2016-06-24 record bottom corner.

2016-01-19

2012-01403.0073

67/285

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Eye of the Devil

Thompson, J. 1967 Lee

USA

Window Card Eye of the Devil

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel "Day of the Arrow" by Philip Lorain.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Fair condition; yellowing, wear on all four corners, condition two heavy creases/dents in centre left of image 2016-06-24 record along edge, image visible on verso.

2016-01-19

2012-01403.0074

64/260

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Fail-Safe

1964 Lumet, Sidney USA

Window Card Fail Safe

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Eugene Burdick and Harvey Wheeler.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellowing, fold in top right corner, condition crease in centre right edge, wear in bottom left 2016-06-24 record corner, image slightly visible on verso

2016-01-19

2012-01403.0075

-

-

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Fanny

1961 Logan, Joshua

USA

Window Card Fanny

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Play by S.N. Behram from the Marselles Trilogy by Marcel Pagnol.

Has NSS disclaimer but no number. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Great condition; yellowing, browning along bottom condition edge, wear at the bottom edge, slight image 2016-06-24 record visibility on verso. 2016-01-19

2012-01403.0076

64/63

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Fall of the Roman Empire

Mann, 1964 Anthony

USA

The Fall of the Window Card Roman Empire

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB reproduction. Has an NSS number Based on the novel by stamped but Thomas Hardy. no disclaimer. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; yellowing, browning along edges, 2016-06-24 record slight transfer on back.

2016-01-21

2012-01403.0077

68 123

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Far From the Maddening Crowd

Schlesinger, 1967 John

USA

Far From the Window Card Maddening Crowd

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; creases along the bottom and 2016-06-24 record bottom right edge, image visible on verso.

2016-01-21

2012-01403.0078

72/2

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Fiddle on the Roof

Jewison, 1971 Norman

USA

Window Card Fiddler on the Roof

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on Joseph stein's stage play from Sholom Ateichem stories.

reproduction. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition 2016-06-24 record Great condition; slight wear and yellowing.

2016-01-21

2012-01403.0079

68 233

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Finian's Rainbow

Coppola, 1968 Francis Ford

USA

Window Card Finian's Rainbow

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Glossy reprodution.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; slight surface scratches, crayon 2016-06-24 record marks under credits, image visible on verso.

2016-01-22

2012-01403.0080

68 42

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Firecreek

McEveety, 1968 Vincent

USA

Window Card Firecreek

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

possibly a reproduction. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Okay condition; yellow, browning on the right edge, two holes punched in top corners, transfer along see full right edge, stain under the gunman, dirt on right of condition credits, smudges in white border, image visible on 2016-06-24 record verso, sun damage on left edge of verso. 2016-01-22 Good condition; yellowing, slight wear in corners and on left edge, smudge in top right corners of see full image, small stain in top centre white section of condition card, transfer on verso, image visible on verso, stain 2016-06-24 record in top right corner of verso. 2016-01-22

2012-01403.0081

67/58

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

First to Fight

1967 Nyby, Christian USA

Window Card First to Fight

Title in large red letter in centre of image, the US Seal with title, tagline under title, scenes in red and black & white frame the title, red caption at the top, three 1968 lines of credits under image. C Central image of a chimp on an orange and red hot air balloon over the title in yellow text on a blue banner, four scenes from the film with captions in the four corners of image, three lines of dark blue text and one 1962 line of light blue text. C In a green border a cartoonish Dick Van Dyke runs with a statue and miniature cars in his arms, three people fall from his arms in the right corner, a woman chases after him on the left, title and "Dick Van Dyke" in red under image, four lines of credits in blue text 1968 under image. C A man stands tall in front of a blue background collage of still from the film, yellow tagline next to him, title in red text under image, small cartoon depiction of man leading troop of boys under title, fours lines of credits in gray and black text. Tagline: "Just an ordinary guy... but the people whose live he touched will remember 1966 him forever... so will you!" C Two images of couples (same man but different women) separated by a yellow vertical banner with tagline, cast in black text under image, title in a red painted design, two lines of credits in black text at the 1960 bottom. C Under tagline, Michael Caine points a gun at the viewer, various scenes surround a bridge with a passport designed on it under Caine, various characters and scenes surround Caine, "Michael Caine" and title in red text with small image of a casket in the title, two lines of light blue text on a darker blue background under image. Tagline: "Harry 'Ipcress File' Palmer didn't know whose funeral it 1967 would be. He just hoped it wouldn't be his..." On the right a man puts his glove on while looking at the viewer, a gray vertical line separates him from a woman in costume on the left, purple outline drawings shown in the background, two lines of 1967 credits in black text at the bottom.

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0082

62/316

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Five Weeks in a Balloon

1962 Allen, Irwin

USA

Five Weeks in a Window Card Balloon

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the book by Jules Verne.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellowing, slight browning along condition edges, ink transfer near title, image visible on verso, 2016-06-24 record browning more concentrated on verso. 2016-01-22

2012-01403.0083

68/27

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Fitzwilly

1967 Mann, Delbert USA

Window Card Fitzwilly

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Poyntz Tyler. Also known as "Fitzwilly Strikes Back."

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; yellowing, slight browning on right 2016-06-24 record edge, ink transfer on verso, image visible on verso. 2016-01-22

2012-01403.0084

66/360

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Follow Me, Boys!

1966 Tokar, Norman USA

Window Card Follow Me, Boys!

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Base on the book "God and My Country" by Mackinlay Kantor.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellowing, wear along all edges, two see full tears along bottom edge, horizontal creasing condition throughout, green paint on the central figures 2016-06-24 record pants, sun damage on verso.

2016-01-22

2012-01403.0085

60/23

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Fugitive Kind

1960 Lumet, Sidney USA

Window Card The Fugitive Kind

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the play "Orpheus Descending" by Tennessee Williams.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellowing, slight sun damage in right bottom corner, water stain in centre right edge and see full centre left edge, dirt in bottom section and top left condition corner, pen in centre of white section, ink transfer 2016-06-24 record on verso, hand and finger marks on verso. 2016-01-22

2012-01403.0086

67/5

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Funeral in Berlin

1966 Hamilton, Guy USA

Window Card Funeral in Berlin

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Len Deighton. Sequel to the Ipcress File, which also starred Michael Caine.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; slight browning along edges, small ink mark in bottom left corner, dirt mark in white see full section, ink transfer on verso, image visible on condition verso, liquid damage and stain in bottom left of 2016-06-24 record verso (not visible on recto.)

2016-01-22

2012-01403.0087

67/2

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Gambit

1966 Neame, Ronald USA

Window Card Gambit

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellowing, sun damage in bottom see full edge and top right corner, small stains in bottom condition right corner, creasing in top left corner, ink transfer 2016-06-24 record on verso, image slightly visible on verso. 2016-01-22

50

2012-01403.0088

62/403

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Gay Pur-ee

1962 Levitow, Abe

USA

Window Card Gay Pur-ee

Still of Judy Garland with credit above title in pink and black text, an animated grey cat smokes a cigarette at the end of title, pink drawing of scenes frame the bottom of title, three stills with captions of cast under 1962 title, two lines of credits in black text. C An old man leans on a tree stump and wags his finger at a gnome standing on two others, a gnome looks out from the stump, a female gnome looks on and two children stand to the right of the old man, title in yellow text under the image, three lines of credits in 1967 grey on left side next to an image of a car chase. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellowing, slight sun damage on right edge, slight wear on right edge, small tear in bottom edge, creasing in top white section, small see full ink marks along left edge, creasing in bottom right condition area, ink transfer on verso, image slightly visible on 2016-06-24 record verso.

2016-01-22

2012-01403.0089

67/92

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The GnomeMobile

Stevenson, 1967 Robert

USA

Window Card The Gnome-Mobile

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the book "The Gnomemobile" by Upton Sinclair.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellow, small tears along bottom condition edge, small crease in bottom section, moderate 2016-06-24 record wear at edges, minimal stains on verso. Poor condition; yellow, browning in bottom edge, heavy substrate seperation along bottom edge, heavy sun damage on right side, bubbling on surface of right bottom section, tear in right edge, see full dirt in the centre of image, creasing in bottom condition section, five pieces of tape on verso, dirt on verso, 2016-06-24 record image very visible on verso.

2016-01-22

2012-01403.0090

61/11

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Go Naked Into the World

MacDougall, 1961 Ranald

USA

Go Naked Into the Window Card World

Central figure of a woman in a blue dress, cast in black text on the left of woman's torso, next to her legs stills of characters and scenes, two lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "No man could 1961 forget her... no woman forgive her!" C Title in red-purple dripping design in top right corner, man zip lines from a tower in background to foreground, banner of stills from the film at the bottom, four lines of credits in black text a the bottom. Tagline: "The explosive story of a quiet Rio de Janeiro schoolteacher who goes to New York, Paris, London and Rome to recruit from each city its most expert professional. For a quiet ten-million-dollar 1968 heist..." O Cast names in black text above a black square, title in pink text in top right of black square, gold bed at the bottom centre of square, eleven lines of credits in black text under square. Tagline: "By day she was Catherine the Queen. By night she was Catherine the 1968 Great." C Three colour toned stills at the top above a scene of a duel, one man's back to the viewer, title in orange spreads out diagonally from centre, four lines of 1967 credits in black text at the bottom. C Central design of a man pointing a gun with multiple versions of him radiating outwards in various poses, seven women pose around a man in the bottom left of main image, yellow title card in the top right corner of main image, two lines of credits in black text at the 1967 bottom. C A ship in the background, a group of men and women get progressively larger towards the foreground with various expressions, main cast in blue text under image, central gate in Greek architectural style between the cast names, title in red text under cast, two lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. C Title in colourful block design above three people leading a blindfolded man, a fifth man chases after them, five lines of credits in black text at the bottom of image, blue border. Tagline: "Four young swingers out for kicks... and suddenly they've got terror by the 1967 tail!" C A couple dances in front of a crowded ballroom with a crocodile in the right corner, man raises his hat beside the title in the top centre of image, in the bottom left a man gestures to the scene while smiling, four lines 1968 of text in black ink at the bottom. C Title in yellow text in the centre of image, individuals fighting on a dock while a boat rides away from the harbour, two lines of credits in blue text on a yellow background. Tagline: "Each light spelled danger in the 1963 harbor of no return." C Central woman wearing a green coat on a red background, "Carroll Baker" in pink above title in yellow with the "O" replaced by the woman's head, two lines of credits on the right of the woman and two under and to the left of the woman. Tagline: "Harlow stood for only one thing - as no woman ever 1965 has - before of since!"

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the book by Tom T. Chamales.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-01-22

2012-01403.0091

68/65

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Ad ogni costo

Montaldo, 1967 Giuliano

USA

Window Card Grand Slam

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition 2016-06-24 record Great condition; slight yellowing.

2016-01-22

2012-01403.0092

68/307

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Great Catherine

Flemying, 1968 Gordon

USA

Window Card Great Catherine

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the play by George Bernard Shaw.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellowing, creasing along right see full edge, ink transfer on verso, image visible on verso, condition brown stain on right edge of verso, sun damage on 2016-06-24 record top left of verso. Good condition; yellowing, creasing in top of see full bottom section, ink stains above the credits, condition creasing in the top white section, ink transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso, image visible on verso.

2016-01-22

2012-01403.0093

67/6

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Gunfight in Abilene

1967 Hale, William

USA

Window Card Gunfight at Abilene

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-01-22

2012-01403.0094

67/220

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Gunn

1967 Edwards, Blake USA

Window Card Gunn

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; yellow, browning along top edge, 2016-06-24 record slight wear on right edge, image visible on verso.

2016-01-22

2012-01403.0095

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Guns of Navarone

Thompson, J. 1961 Lee

USA

The Guns of Window Card Navarone

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Possbly a reproduction Based on the novel by or no NSS Alistair MacLean. number.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; yellowing, slight sun damage along 2016-06-24 record top edges, creasing in bottom right corner. 2016-01-22

2012-01403.0096

67/87

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Happening

Silverstein, 1967 Elliot

USA

Window Card The Happening

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in Based on the play by Kyle Crichton, suggested by a book by Cordelia Drexel Biddle and Kyle Crichton.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Great condition; yellowing, wear in bottom right condition corner, image visible on verso, red line from top to 2016-06-24 record centre on verso.

2016-01-22

2012-01403.0097

68/1

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Happiest Millionaire

1968 Tokar, Norman USA

The Happiest Window Card Millionaire

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Glossy paper.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; slight yellowing, creasing at the 2016-06-24 record top left.

2016-01-22

2012-01403.0098

63/247

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Harbor Lights

1963 Dexter, Maury USA

Window Card Harbor Lights

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; yellow, curling in the right top 2016-06-24 record corner, image slightly visible on verso.

2016-01-22

2012-01403.0099

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Window Card Harlow

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB Reproduction. Maybe Based on the novel by different card James Michener. stock, glossy. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0100

66/298

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Hawaii

Hill, George 1966 Roy

USA

Window Card Hawaii

Title in volcano design on a beach, three characters above centre left, ships sail towards title, four lines in 1966 red text and three lines in black text under title. Three vertical bars: one yellow (left) and three green, three bars show trees, the fourth shows a woman's face, a red still of a man in the yellow banner, "Alan Arkin" in green above red title, small green toned house under image of woman, two lines in green text under image. Tagline: "... and from this man who could not speak or hear, the girl heard many things."

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellowing, crease in top right condition corner, dirt on the bottom section, wear in top left 2016-06-24 record edge, ink transfer on verso, image visible on verso. 2016-01-22 Okay condition; severe wear on all eges, loss of substrate on the left bottom corner, seperation at see full the top, crease in bottom right corner, abraisons condition throughout, slight creasing throughout, transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-01-22

2012-01403.0101

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Heart is a Lonely Hunter

Miller, Robert 1968 Ellis

USA

The Heart is a Lonely Window Card Hunter

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on a novel by Carson McCullers.

re-release.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; browning, creasing throughout concentrated in centre, pin holes in centre bottom, see full two punched holes in top corners, heavy dirt stains condition along bottom edge, water stains along bottom left 2016-06-24 record edge, water stains and dirt on verso. 2016-01-22

2012-01403.0102

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Hearts of the West

1975 Zieff, Howard

USA

Window Card Hearts of the West

2012-01403.0103

69/36

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Hellfighters

McLaglen, 1969 Andrew V.

USA

Window Card Hellfighters

Central heart with portrait, above the heart a couple surrounded by smoke shoot guns with a clapboard in from of them, two reels of film in the top corners unspooled, in the bottom corners two portraits of men with film strip borders, above the portraits men prepare shots, two lines of credits in black text. C Man and woman stand in front of a fiery disaster scene with workers helping each other, "John Wayne" and title in red text, seven lines of credits in red and black text. C Central figure of a man in a cloak, bright patterned images of women and men in the windblown cape, seven lines of cast in yellow-orange text to the right of the man, title in red text within black box, two lines of 1967 credits in blue text. C Centred black question mark with inverted shadow, three sections of gold background surround question mark with a portrait of main cast in each section with names in white text, three lines of credits in white text 1963 under image. C Under burgundy tagline a gunfight shows two men in black shooting over a dozen men, main cast and character names in orange over the title in burgundy text, the outline of a gun under title, two lines of credits in blue text. Tagline: "Wyatt Earp - Hero with a badge or cold-blooded killer? He lived through the gunfight at the O.K. Corral... that may have been a 1967 mistake." C Title in blue text at the top, a house of cards with scenes from the film under the title, three men with yellow jackets in centre of card, tree green toned portraits on the bottom left central image, title repeated to the right of portraits under two Aces, one 1969 line of credits in black text at the bottom. C

12.25 x 22 inches

12.25 in

22 in

Reproduction, trimmed. TBLB

FRL holding room FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; two horizontal creases, dog eared condition right top corner, slight wear along edges, small 2016-06-24 record crease in bottom right corner, slight yellowing. 2016-01-25 Good condition; yellowing, browning along edges, see full adhesive residue in bottom right corner, two condition punched holes in top corners, ink transfer on verso, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso. 2016-01-25

2012-01403.0104

67/188

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Honey Pot

Mankiewicz, 1967 Joseph L.

USA

Window Card The Honey Pot

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Possible reproduction, no top white section. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellowing, two thin lines in centre condition right of top section, dirt on left edge, image visible 2016-06-24 record on verso.

2016-01-25

2012-01403.0105

63/24

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Hook

Seaton, 1963 George

USA

Window Card The Hook

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel "L'hameçon" by Vehe Katcha.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; yellow, folded bottom left corner, creasing in bottom section, ink transfer in top see full border, ink drag marks in bottom right corner and condition bottom secton, ink transfer on verso, image slightly 2016-06-24 record visible on verso. 2016-01-25

2012-01403.0106

67/303

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Hour of the Gun

1967 Sturges, John

USA

Window Card Hour of the Gun

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Great condition; yellowing, browning along edges, condition ink transfer on verso, image slightly visible on verso, 2016-06-24 record blue and red drag marks on verso. 2016-01-25

2012-01403.0107

69/14

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

House of Cards

Guillermin, 1968 John

USA

Window Card House of Cards

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellowing, slight browning in top see full right corner, sun damage in bottom left corner, ink condition transfer on verso, dirt transfer in top section of 2016-06-24 record verso.

2016-01-25

51

2012-01403.0108

R70/139

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

How the West Was Won

Hathaway, Henry; Ford, John; Marshall, 1962 George USA

How the West Was Window Card Won

Black & white colonial man on horseback with a pack horse at the top of a hill, title in white text under man, 1970 six lines of credits in black text under image. B Cast names in orange text above a green box in the design on a shade with a yellow title, two white silhouette hands pull the shade string over a couple, the small portrait of a man beside the top hand and a small portrait of a woman beside the bottom hand, three lines of credits in black text at the bottom. 1968 Tagline: "The wife you save... may be your own!" C The title in yellow on the back of the central office chair, a woman's legs stick out on the right and a man's arm holding a telephone sticks out on the left, two small line drawings in the top right corners, three cast names under chair in orange text, three lines of 1967 credits in black text a the bottom. C Black tree on an orange background with cast names in white text; the tree is mirrored in bottom green section with images from the film in brown tones, title between the two sections in white text, five lines of 1967 white text at the bottom. C "It's Judy" in large black letters behind a black & white image of Judy Garland singing, main cast and title in white text under image, five lines of credits at the bottom left, black & white image of couple in bottom 1963 right corner, red background. O Black border top centre to right side, blue toned images from the film under border, title in turquoise text under image, blue toned image of woman on the left of title, one line of credits in blue text at the 1966 bottom. C Characters divided by a gap made by the tagline in white text, each character has a descriptor and quote above their heads, title in yellow text in black box under image, four lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "The Battle of the Ages... The 1968 Undergraduates vs. The Over-Thirties!" C Black & white close up of eyes above and below title in white text, three lines of credits in white text at the 1968 bottom. B Central image of Clouseau being kissed by two women while they and various arms surround the bed with weapons, portrait of Clouseau next to the title in red text, three lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. 1968 Jack Davis signature on bottom of central image. C Blurred image of a couple, black vertical banner on left of couple with tagline and cast in white text above the red cursive title, seven lines of credits in white under title. Tagline: "Must it happen once to 1968 everyone?" C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Reissue. Each director handled a separate section of the film.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Great condition; yellowing, slight wear in top right condition corner, ink transfer on verso, image visible on 2016-06-24 record verso.

2016-01-25

2012-01403.0109

68/12

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

How to Save a Marriage and Ruin Your Life

1968 Cook, Fielder

USA

How to Save a Marriage -- and Ruin Window Card Your Life

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Great condition; yellowing, small stain on centre condition left edge of verso, ink transfer on verso, dirt in top 2016-06-24 record section of verso.

2016-01-25

2012-01403.0110

67/75

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying

1967 Swift, David

USA

How to Succeed in Business Without Window Card Really Trying

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by No top white Shepherd Mead. section.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; yellowing, ink transfer on verso, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso.

2016-01-25

2012-01403.0111

67/91

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Hurry Sundown

Preminger, 1967 Otto

USA

Window Card Hurry Sundown

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by K.B. Gilden.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; yellowing, ink transfer on verso, 2016-06-24 record deposit on the bottom left of verso.

2016-01-25

2012-01403.0112

63/97

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

I Could Go On Singing

1963 Neame, Ronald USA

I Could Go On Window Card Singing

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellowing, dirt in centre right edge, see full creasing in bottom right edge, corner folding up in condition bottom right corner, ink transfer on verso, image 2016-06-24 record slightly visible on verso. 2016-01-25

2012-01403.0113

66/331

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

I Deal in Danger

Grauman, 1966 Walter

USA

Window Card I Deal in Danger

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condtition; yellowing, slight browning along condition edges, creasing in top corner, adhesive residue in 2016-06-24 record bottom left of verso, ink transfer on verso.

2016-01-25

2012-01403.0114

68/284

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

The Impossible Years

Gordon, 1968 Michael

USA

Window Card The Impossible Years

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellowing, browning along edges, pin holes in all four corners, two punched holes in top see full two corners, horizontal creasing in top white condition section, wear and creasing along right and left 2016-06-24 record edges, ink transfer on verso. 2016-01-25 see full condition Great condition; yellow, ink transfer on verso, 2016-06-24 record image slightly visible on verso.

2012-01403.0115

68/3

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

In Cold Blood

Brooks, 1967 Richard

USA

Window Card In Cold Blood

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the book by Truman Capote.

TBLB

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-01-25

2012-01403.0116

68/168

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inspector Clouseau

1968 Yorkin, Bud

USA

Window Card Inspector Clouseau

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the characters created by Blake Edwards and No top white Maurice Richlin. section.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; yellow, slight browning along 2016-06-24 record edges, slight ink transfer on verso.

2016-01-25

2012-01403.0117

68 170

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Interlude

Billington, 1968 Kevin

USA

Window Card Interlude

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0118

63/187

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Island of Love

DaCosta, 1963 Morton

USA

Window Card Island of Love

Under the title two men carry a bed and luggage while following a bikini clad woman, four lines of credits in 1963 blue text under image. C Diagonal black banner separates a top section from a city map, black & white character portraits on the black banner, title in red burning design on a white background over the city map, nine lines of credits in 1966 black text over red background. Man drinking tea holding a machine gun sits in an office chair, a woman sits next to him with a plan drawn on her back, seven lines in black text at the 1969 bottom.

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; yellowing, transfer on right edge, 2016-06-24 record slight ink transfer on verso, image visible on verso. Poor condition; yellow, creasing and tears along edges, sun damage along edges, vertical crease in centre, two horizontal creases, dirt transfer see full throughout, five tape repairs on verso, dirt and ink condition transfer on verso, stain in bottom left section of 2016-06-24 record verso.

2016-01-25

2016-01-25

2012-01403.0119

66/346

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Paris brûle-t-il?

1966 Clément, Réne. USA

Window Card Is Paris Burning?

O

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Larry Collins and Dominique Lapieu.

TBLB

FRL holding room FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; yellow, browning at edges, ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso, image visible on verso. see full condition Good condition; yellowing, vertical crease along 2016-06-24 record right edge, image slightly visible on verso.

2016-01-25

2012-01403.0120

69/290

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

The Italian Job

Collinson, 1969 Peter

USA

Window Card The Italian Job

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-01-25

2012-01403.0121

67/289

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Jack of Diamonds

1967 Taylor, Don

USA

Window Card Jack of Diamonds

Top section: three images of women with jewels, in the fourth corner a chase scene, a man stands in the centre below the top section, a woman shows off jewels in black cat suit next to him with a car in the background, blue title on a red diamond on the right of the man, four lines of credits in blue text on the right bottom corner. Tagline: "On the prowl for the 1966 most precious jewels and the most beautiful women!" C Main cast above the image of a couple within a purple border, small line drawing of a couple in top right corner of border, title in red text with flowers, two lines of credits in blue text. Tagline: "People said they were too young to marry... they were too much in love 1965 to stay apart." C Outline of an Egyptian city behind a black & white image of a woman, title in white text next to woman, under the woman four black & white men above a scene that changes into a drawing, five lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Animal, saint, 1969 mistress, lover. Which is the true Justine?" O Colourful portraits, objects, scenes, and other odd images frame the title in a yellow banner, a red designed border surround images, two lines of credits 1966 in violet text at the bottom of image. C Coloured battle scene on a yellow background, one man stands above and looks at the Arab man on horseback, four lines of cast above title in red text, 1966 two lines in black and red text. C A woman in purple clothing flips her hair towards the viewer, tagline above her, title in red text on the right, next to her feet blue toned scenes border the bottom of image, two lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "This is the story of Jody... the kicks she digs... the swingers she runs with... and the 1964 special kind of hell she can make for a man!!!" C Two men and a woman in a rounded triangular border in the centre of card, caricatures and scenes drawn on either side of triangle, two lines of cast in blue text under triangle, title in pink text above drawing of a woman in bed holding a rose and a bomb in the right bottom corner, two lines of credits in blue text at the 1966 bottom. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, two horizontal creases with small creases radiating from it, creasing troughout, see full rolling of top and bottom edge, pin holes in four condition corners, stain in top white section, smudges along 2016-06-24 record bottom border, image visible on verso.

2016-01-25

2012-01403.0122

65/135

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Joy in the Morning

1965 Segal, Alex

USA

Window Card Joy in the Morning

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the book by Betty Smith.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; very yellow, two punched holes in condition white section, slight ink transfer on verso, image 2016-06-24 record slightly visible on verso.

2016-01-25

2012-01403.0123

69/299

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Justine

1969 Cukor, George USA

Window Card Justine

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the book "The Alexandria Quartet" by Lawrence Durrell.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0124

66/311

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Kaleidoscope

1966 Smight, Jack

USA

Window Card Kaleidoscope

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in Reprint for "continuous production."

TBLB

FRL holding room FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellowing, vertical crease along condition right edge, grey line on centre right of verso, ink 2016-06-24 record drops on centre right of image. 2016-01-25 Fair condition; yellow, browning along edges, tear in bottom edge, creasing along right edge, creasing see full in top left corner, square adhesive residue in centre condition left edge, ink transfer on verso, image visible on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-01-25 see full condition Great condition; slight yellowing, image slightly 2016-06-24 record visible on verso.

2012-01403.0125

66/266

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Khartoum

1966 Deardan, Basil USA

Window Card Khartoum

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-01-25

2012-01403.0126

64/328

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Kitten With a Whip

1964 Heyes, Douglas USA

Window Card Kitten With a Whip

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the book by Wade Miller.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Okay condition; yellowing, liquid stains from centre right edge and 2.6 inches into the image, liquid stains from centre left edge and 2 inches into image, horizontal crease, red ink transfer on see full bottom left, small creases in top section, ink condition transfer on verso, image visible on verso, blue line 2016-06-24 record in top centre of verso to the centre of of verso. 2016-01-25

2012-01403.0127

66/11

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Lady L

1965 Ustinov, Peter USA

Window Card Lady L

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Romain Gary.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellowing, browning along edges, see full sun damage on the top right of card, creasing in the condition centre, ink transfer on verso and image visible on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-01-25 Poor condition; yellow, browning, pin holes in four corners and centre of top and bottom edges, two see full punched holes in the top corners, horizontal condition crease, fading image, holes in centre above and 2016-06-24 record below crease, ink transfer on verso.

2012-01403.0128

61/211

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Last Time I Saw Archie

1961 Webb, Jack

USA

The Last Time I saw Window Card Archie

Nine male heads encircle the title with two women standing on either side of the title, black & white with red scenes above the heads, two lines of credits in 1961 black text at the bottom. C Orange top rectangle with outline of a military charge, on a yellow background the large drawn head of a man surrounded by various small drawings extending into the violet section on the left, "Burt Lancaster" and title in blue text under central figure, two lines in 1963 dark blue at the bottom. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-01-25

2012-01403.0129

63/286

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Il Gattopardo

Visconti, 1963 Luchino

USA

Window Card The Leopard

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel "Il Gattopardo" by Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition 2016-06-24 record Great condition; yellow, ink transfer on verso.

2016-01-25

52

2012-01403.0130

64/316

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Lilith

1964 Rossen, Robert USA

Window Card Lilith

Black border in a spider web design around a pink image of a woman looking at a small black & white portrait of a man caught in a web at the centre of the image, title in black text under centre web, two lines in dark pink text under image. Tagline: "Before Eve 1964 there was Evil... and her name was Lilith!" O Image of a man kissing a woman in front of a beach scene within a black border, outside the border (left) man shoots at people, on the right two men fall from the black border while two others hang over a woman's body, tagline in centre below image, title in red text in right bottom corner, drawing of a man with a gun shaped suitcase next to title, four lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. C Yellow title card in top left corner, title in red text and three lines of credits in black text within the title card, along right vertical border five portraits in orange tone, under the title card a blue still, a list of actors on a sheet of paper is pined to the image with a knife, 1963 one line of credits in black text at the bottom. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by J. R. Salamanca.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellow, slight creasing along right condition edge, dirt particles in bottom right corner, slight ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso, image slightly visible on verso. 2016-01-25

2012-01403.0131

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Liquidator

1965 Cardiff, Jack

USA

Window Card The Liquidator

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by John Gardner.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great conditon; yellowing, water stain in bottom 2016-06-24 record right corner, image slightly visible on verso.

2016-01-25

2012-01403.0132

63/195

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The List of Adrian Messenger

1963 Huston, John

USA

The List of Adrian Window Card Messenger

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Audience encouraged to guess which actor plays which character.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellow, browning along edges, see full creasing along top edge, slight creasing along condition bottom edge, sun damage on top of verso, dirt 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso, image slightly visible on verso.

2016-02-01

2012-01403.0133

61-24

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Long Rope

Witney, 1961 William

USA

Window Card The Long Rope

In the top right a man crawls with two guns in his hands, under him the title in a red and yellow rope design, four lines of credits in violet and blue text at the bottom, on the left of the crawling man a noose extends from the top to the bottom of the image, in the circle a man is being tied by two others, on the left 1961 of the noose know a portrait of a man and woman. C Seven Viking ships create a vertical border on the left, large title in red and yellow text in the centre, under title scenes of fighting and cities, three lines of credits 1963 in blue text at the bottom. C Man in camouflage runs with helicopters circling above him, this is above a red designed title, five lines of credits in blue and black text on the left of the man, couple kisses under credits, two more lines of credits 1966 in black text under title. C In a flower design: scenes and character stills in the petals surrounding "Walt Disney Production Presents," main cast in green leaf design, title in neon pink in the shape of a VW bug, two lines of credits in grey text. Tagine: "It's a Love-in for Herbie... the 1969 incredible little car who shifts for himself!" C In central foreground a woman smokes while leaning on a palm tree, a man in swim trunks stands behind and to the right of her, in the background characters and scenes are separated by palm trees, an island and beach is depicted below, title in pink text with a bluegreen border under image, two lines of black text at 1965 the bottom. C Cartoon man in a coffin-rocket that shoots in the air, four other characters hang from the coffin's handles, in the bottom right corner a man paints a live statue, five lines of credits in black text under title in white 1965 text. C Man with a machine dog stands to the right of title in orange text, cityscapes with the scenes from the film (in brown and yellow tones) below title and man, three lines of credits in black ink at the bottom. 1961 Tagline: "...Maniac with a machine gun!" C Banner with a large portrait of a man and small character portraits on the right, title in a street sign design, three lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "The Truth about "The Build-Up Boys"... the things they do... and the people they use 1961 and abuse - to get to the top!" C Two lines of credits in white text above title in yellow text, two lines of credits in white text under title, blue toned still of a man pointing a gun at a woman with her leg outstretched, numbers 1 to 3 designate objects and/or people in the image, legend at the 1965 bottom above a caption. C The heads of Mary and Burt float next to a caption for the song "Supercalifragalisticexpialidocious," on the background of the "Chim Chiminey" scene a title in yellow light design, an Oscar is shown next to the Walt Disney caption above title, five lines of credits in black 1964 text under image. C The two queens confront each other in a scene with a shield shaped border, character descriptions on the right and left of shield, tagline in white above their heads, painted characters and scenes along the bottom of the shield radiating out, three lines above title in red text on a red background and three lines under title. Tagline: "They used every passion in their incredible duel... and every man in their savage games 1972 of intrigue." C Horizontal banner at the top with various images from film, two lines of cast in blue text above banner, man prepares to kiss woman in central image, title in green text in bottom left of main image, three lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "His world could crumble... lives could be destroyed... fortunes could be squandered... nothing mattered but those 1969 incredible moments in her arms!" C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellow, browning along edges, sun see full damage along right edge, ink transfer in centre left condition edge, stain in centre left edge under portrait, image 2016-06-24 record visible on verso. 2016-02-01

2012-01403.0134

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Long Ships

1963 Cardiff, Jack

USA

Window Card The Long Ships

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Has NSS Based on the novel by disclaimer but Frans Bengtsson. no number. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; yellowing, image slightly visible on 2016-06-24 record verso.

2016-02-01

2012-01403.0135

66/190

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Lost Command

1966 Robson, Mark

USA

Window Card Lost Command

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel "The Centurions" by Jean Larteguy.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellowing, browning along edges, see full pin holes in corners and centre of top and bottom condition edges, slight creasing in centre, ink transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso, image visible on verso.

2016-01-25

2012-01403.0136

69/109

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Love Bug

Stevenson, 1968 Robert

USA

Window Card The Love Bug

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel "Car, Boy, Girl" (1961) by Gordon Buford. Glossy paper.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; yellowing along edges, slight 2016-06-24 record abraisons throughout, creasing in top left corner.

2016-02-01

2012-01403.0137

65/25

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Love Has Many Faces

Singer, 1965 Alexander

USA

Love Has Many Window Card Faces

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellowing, slight browning along condition edges, sun damage along top edge, small crease in 2016-06-24 record bottom edge, image slightly visible on verso. Good condition; yellowing, slight sun damage on see full left edge, browning along bottom right corners, condition slight creasing in top white section, slight ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso.

2016-01-25

2012-01403.0138

65/103

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Loved One

Richardson, 1965 Tony

USA

Window Card The Loved One

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Evelyn Waugh.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-01

2012-01403.0139

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Mad Dog Coll

1961 Balaban, Burt

USA

Window Card Mad Dog Coll

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the material by Leo Lieberman.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Fair condition; very yellow, wear and removal of 2016-06-24 record surface on right centre edge, image visible on verso. 2016-01-25 Fair condition; yellow, browning along edges, creasing along bottom edge, wear on right edge, see full small tear in bottom edge, small stains around condition credits, creasing in top corners, image visible on 2016-06-24 record verso.

2012-01403.0140

61-99

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Madison Avenue

Humberstone, 1961 Bruce USA

Window Card Madison Avenue

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on "The BuildUp Boys" by Jeremy Kirk.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-01-25

2012-01403.0141

69/236

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Marlowe

1969 Bogart, Paul

USA

Window Card Marlowe

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 i

Based on the novel by Raymond Chandler.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; yellow, moderate wear along edges, pin holes in four corners, dirt in bottom right see full corner, creasing throughout, adhesive in centre top condition of verso (visible on recto), water damage in top 2016-06-24 record right corner of verso. 2016-01-25

2012-01403.0142

64/249

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Mary Poppins

Stevenson, 1964 Robert

USA

Window Card Mary Poppins

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the books by P.L. Travers.

Possibly a reproduction, re-release for sure. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition 2016-06-24 record Great condition; slight ink transfer on verso.

2016-01-25

2012-01403.0143

72/44

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Mary, Queen of Scots

1971 Jarrott, Charles USA

Mary, Queen of Window Card Scots

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Heavier cardstock, possibly a reproduction. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition 2016-06-24 record Great condition; slight yellowing at edges.

2016-02-01

2012-01403.0144

69/25

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Mayerling

Young, 1969 Terence

USA

Window Card Mayerling

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

From the novel by Claude Anet and historical documentation, and the "The Archduke" by Michael Arnold.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair/Good condition; yellowing, browning at edges, blue ink transfer in bottom right corner, slight wear see full along left edge, slight creasing in bottom half of condition card, ink and dirt transfer on verso, image slightly 2016-06-24 record visible on verso. 2016-02-01

2012-01403.0145

55/359

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The McConnell Story

Douglas, 1955 Gordon

USA

Window Card The McConnell Story

A couple embraces as a jet flies behind them, cast in yellow on either side of small image of a couple walking away, title in red above a small image of a jet field in the left bottom corner, one line of credits in dark blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "His name's Joe McConnell and even among the rare breed who flame across the new upper-world of the jet plane, he 1955 stands alone -- as America's First triple Jet Ace!" C Woman lies on a bed facing viewer, seven lines of text above her, above and to the left of the woman a couple embraces while crouching, black border with an arrow design around couple pointing to woman, two lines of credits at the bottom. Tagline: "Every woman has her moment of weakness... every man has 1965 his moment of hunger!" C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Plastic sleeve

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; heavy yellowing, sun damage, see full browning, dirt transfer along left side, image visible condition on verso, ink and dirt transfer on verso, "35 501" in 2016-06-24 record China Pencil on verso. 2016-02-01

2012-01403.0146

65/318

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Moment to Moment

1965 LeRoy, Mervyn USA

Window Card Moment to Moment

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Great condition; yellow, wear along top border, condition slight ink transfer on verso, image slightly visible on 2016-06-24 record verso.

2016-02-01

2012-01403.0147

70/147

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Monte Walsh

Fraker, William 1970 A. USA

Window Card Monte Walsh

Zoom in on grey-haired cowboy's face as he looks into the distance with a woman behind him, barbed wire design at the bottom of image, "Lee Marvin" in red above the title in blue text which is above the cast in red text, small blue drawing of the cowboy on the left 1970 of title, four line of credits in black text at the bottom. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Jack Schaefer.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellowing, slight browning on top condition edge, wear at the top edge and bottom left corner, 2016-06-24 record ink transfer on verso, image slightly visible on verso. 2016-02-01

53

2012-01403.0148

60/87

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Murder, Inc.

1960 Balaban, Burt

USA

Window Card Murder, Inc.

Inside a black border various painted scenes from the film, tagline in blue text in top right corner above title in red text, in bottom right a man is dead with bottom half in a black book, three lines of credits in red text at the bottom. Tagline: "Some died in the electric chair... some were shot down in the streets... some were triggered in the perfumed arms of cheap women... and one jumped (or was pushed) from the half-moon 1960 hotel!" C Tagline in bold red letters along left border, two black & white heads in top right corner, small colour still in centre of card, title in red in bottom right corner, centre left of title there is a tombstone, two lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Perhaps it is not for the living to know the truth about reincarnation... that, in fact, we have all returned from the dead to the flesh and bodies we now inhabit 1965 for this lifetime, at least..." C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on true events of Murder Incorporated during the 1930s and 1940s.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Great condition; yellow, slight browning along condition edges, slight ink transfer on verso, image visible on 2016-06-24 record verso.

2016-02-08

2012-01403.0149

65/116

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

My Blood Runs Cold

Conrad, 1965 William

USA

Window Card My Blood Runs Cold

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellow, browning along right edge, see full moderate creasing in top left corner, slight creasing condition along bottom right edge, image slightly visible on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-02-08

2012-01403.0150

65/180

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Naked Brigade

1965 Dexler, Maury USA

Window Card The Naked Brigade

Yellow trapezoid title card with title in red text, tagline in black, above a trapezoid building explodes, on either side of the trapezoid six women and one man prepare for arms, a couple embraces on the right of title and two men fight in the bottom left, four lines of credits at the bottom of image. Tagline: "One man on a desperate mission... his life and his country at 1965 stake... and six women his only fighters." C Black & white image of a faceless man holding a gagged woman above a yellow banner, two red stills on either side of white title card, disclaimer next to stop signal above the red title, black silhouette couple fight in left corner above title, three lines of credits in black text. Caption: "No one - absolutely no one 1961 seated during the last 13 minutes!" C Woman is attacked while another is engulfed in flames behind her, title in white at the top, four lines 1964 of credits at the bottom.

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, browning along right and bottom edges, wear and creasing along right edge, loss of substrate in top right corner, small tear in see full right edge, creasing in top left, sun damage on condition verso, image visible on verso, slight ink transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso.

2016-02-08

2012-01403.0151

61/221

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

The Naked Edge

Anderson, 1961 Michael

USA

Window Card The Naked Edge

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the Novel "First Train to Babylon" by Maz Ehrlich. Also known as "Deadline for Murder"

TBLB Black & reproduction, thicker stock. TBLB

FRL holding room FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellow, defects in paper in top condition white sections (elevation), smudge in bottom right 2016-06-24 record edge, image slightly visible, ink transfer on verso. see full Good condition; yellow, browning along bottom condition edge, finger marks along bottom white section, 2016-06-24 record creasing along bottom, ink transfer on verso.

2016-02-08

2012-01403.0152

poster

A

N

The Naked Flame

Matanski, 1964 Lawrence

Window Card The Naked Flame

B

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-08

2012-01403.0153

68/149

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Never a Dull Moment

1968 Paris, Jerry

USA

Never a Dull Window Card Moment

Two men skip along with guns, a woman with paint brushes stands in the background on the left, around the feet and legs of the two men small line drawings of scenes, title in white in a frame design in the bottom right which is being carried by four silhouette men, one line of credits in dark green text and two lines black on a lime green background at the bottom 1968 of card. C Title in red at the top, scenes from the film painted within a yellow border, three men and two women walk towards viewer at the bottom, two lines of 1964 credits in blue text at the bottom. Central image of a man with a knife on a purple background, on the right three portraits of women with captions, "Albert Finney" in red text at the top left, title in red and white design in bottom centre next to man and above a wheelchair with a woman lying face down on it, two lines of credits in blue text 1964 at the bottom.

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the book by John Godey. Based upn characters from the novel "The Interns" by Richard Frede.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; small tear along right edge, see full creasing in top left corner and bottom right corner, condition abraisons in bottom section, slight ink transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-02-08 Fair condition; yellow, sun damage at the top right see full edge and bottom edge, creasing and folding at the condition top edge, small mark in top section, finger marks 2016-06-24 record along right edge, slightly faded.

2012-01403.0154

64/201

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The New Interns

1964 Rich, John

USA

Window Card The New Interns

C

14 x 23.5 inches

14 in

23.5 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-08

2012-01403.0155

64/79

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Night Must Fall

1964 Reisz, Karel

USA

Window Card Night Must Fall

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

From the play by Emlyn Williams.

Two copyright notices. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellowing, slight creasing in top left corner, ink drop in bottom left corner, smudge see full along bottom edge, image visible on verso, red line condition from top to centre of verso, sun damage on right 2016-06-24 record top edge of verso. 2016-02-08

2012-01403.0156

64/160

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Night of the Iguana

1964 Huston, John

USA

The Night of the Window Card Iguana

Central black & white image of couple swimming, four black & white portraits on the left of central image, three lines on a pink background above and to the left of title in black text with a small abstract image of a 1964 couple on the right, two lines of credits under image. C Tagline in a white box at the top, devil figure crouches above a sleeping woman in central image, title in yellow text to the left of the devil figure, three lines of credits in black text. Tagline: "Will it drive you to 1965 dream of things you're ashamed to admit." C Two portraits in top right corner on a purple background with tagline on the left, woman screams in centre image with hands and body like a white silhouette, title in pink text in the bottom centre, a doll lies above the title, a dagger in the 'T' of title and a woman runs away from title, four lines of credits in black text on bottom left of image. Tagline: "What was the evil force that made her kill... never knowing if 1964 it was reality... or only her..." C Large close-up of two men smiling, smaller image of woman looking at a man playing guitar, two lines of credits in black text above title in white on a red back ground, three lines of credits in black text at the 1970 bottom. Three black & white portraits with a ripped border at the top, one line of cast under portraits in white text, two hands make a choking gesture around the title in white text on a black background, three lines of 1968 credits in black text. Various cartoon images on a black background, a green silhouette of a man hangs on a clothes hanger in centre with title in white on the body, four lines of 1967 credits in black text under image.

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

From the play by Tennessee Williams.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Great condition; yellow, browning along edges, condition slight creasing in top centre edge, ink transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso.

2016-02-08

2012-01403.0157

65/10

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Night Walker

1964 Castle, William USA

Window Card The Night Walker

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellow, slight browning along see full edges, slight wear along right edge, creasing in top condition left corner, ink transfer on verso, red ink drag marks 2016-06-24 record from centre right edge to the centre of verso. 2016-02-08

2012-01403.0158

64/11

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Nightmare

Francis, 1964 Freddie

USA

Window Card Nightmare

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB Has a stamped number in right bottom corner: 70 168. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Fair condition; yellow, browning along edges, condition vertical fold along right edge, abraison in centre left 2016-06-24 record of image, finger marks along right edge of verso. 2016-02-08

2012-01403.0159

70/56

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Norwood

1970 Haley Jr., Jack

USA

Window Card Norwood

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on a novel by Charles Portis.

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellow, wear along top edge, condition creasing along top edge, crease in bottom left 2016-06-24 record corner, ink transfer on verso

2016-02-08

2012-01403.0160

68/127

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

2012-01403.0161

67/53

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

No Way to Treat a Lady Oh Dad, Poor Dad, Mamma's Hung You in the Closet and I'm Feelin' So Sad

1968 Smight, Jack

USA

No Way to Treat a Window Card Lady Oh Dad, Poor Dad, Mamma's Hung You in the Closet and I'm Window Card Feelin' So Sad

O

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by William Goldman.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellow, slight browning along condition edges, heavy creasing along right edge, light 2016-06-24 record creasing along the top.

2016-02-08

1967 Quine, Richard USA

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the stage play by Arthur L. Kopit.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; very slight yellowing, smudge in 2016-06-24 record top left corner.

2016-02-08

2012-01403.0162

70/5

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Once You Kiss a Stranger...

1969 Sparr, Robert

USA

Once You Kiss a Window Card Stranger

Woman stands on the left with a harpoon on a dark purple background, close up of eyes in glasses on a pink-purple background in centre, pink toned image of couple with black & white section over the woman's face, title in light purple under image, two lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "There was something strange about the girl... about the way she met him, about the way she loved him... and the 1970 terrible thing she wanted him to do." O

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Suggested by a novel by Patricia Highsmith.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellow, slight sun damage, two see full punched holes in top corners, creasing in top left condition corner, image slightly visible on verso, ink transfer 2016-06-24 record on verso.

2016-02-08

2012-01403.0163

67/349

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

OK Connery

Demartino, 1967 Alberto

USA

Operation Kid Window Card Brother

Central image of a heavily armed man surrounded by various images of armed individuals, title in green and red under man, three lines of credits in blue text at 1967 the bottom. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in Heavier cardstock, possibly a reproduction or from a Based on the novel by secondary Richard Sale. printer.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; yellow, large central horizontal fold with damage at edges, finger marks along bottom edge, pin holes in top centre and bottom centre of see full card, large stain above Connery's name, creasing condition along top edge, dirt smudges along edges, stain in 2016-06-24 record top centre of verso, ink transfer on verso. 2016-02-08

2012-01403.0164

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Oscar

1966 Rouse, Russell USA

Window Card The Oscar

Circular blue border, title in gold and blue in the centre above blue line drawings of characters and scenes, book with title in top left. Image of a tourist couple with souvenirs looking confused, two lines of credits in black text above the title in red text, one line of credits in black text under title. Tagline: "When they take you for an out-of1970 towner, they really take you!"

C

13 x 22 inches

13 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Fair condition; yellow, sun damage along bottom condition edge, ink transfer on recto and verso, creasing in 2016-06-24 record bottom right, small crease in centre.

2016-02-08

2012-01403.0165

70/167

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Out of Towners

1970 Hiller, Arthur

USA

Window Card The Out-Of-Towners

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, three small tears in left edge, creasing in bottom right corner, creasing in top see full right corner, tear/loss of paper in top centre edge, condition sun damage on verso, clear adhesive on verso to fix 2016-06-24 record tears. 2016-02-08

54

2012-01403.0166

64/300

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Outrage

1964 Ritt, Martin

USA

Window Card The Outrage

A man is grabbing a fighting woman within a red circular designed border, title in black to the right of man, five lines of credits in black and blue text at the 1964 bottom left of image.

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Okay condition; china pencil marks above image, yellow, browning, adhesive residue in top centre, creasing throughout the top section, scaring in top section, ink stains in central image, wear along see full edges, crease in bottom right, pencil marks in condition verso, ink transfer on verso, finger marks in top 2016-06-24 record section of verso.

2016-02-08

2012-01403.0167

66/306

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Pad and How to Use It

Hutton, Brian 1966 G.

USA

The Pad (and How to Window Card Use It)

Tagline in red on a yellow background above two pairs of legs sticking out of the silhouette of a headboard, title in yellow on headboard, two lines of credits in black text under image. Tagline: "Don't say she's not 1966 that kind of girl till you've taken her to `The Pad.'" C Blue toned main image of a terrified woman being grabbed by a man above title in yellow shock design, white swirls around couple start from a pair of eyes on a yellow background under title, three lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "A harrowing excursion into terror that takes you deep into the 1963 twisted mind of a ... PARANOIAC!" C Central amalgamated image of scenes and characters from the film in blue tone, cast in white at the bottom of image, under image title in black painted design with blue under line, two lines of credits in black at the bottom. Tagline: "... lover, you just don't play the 1961 Paris Blues... lover-man, you've got to live it!" C Central image of a man smoking on the phone in yellow on a black background, three lines of cast in turquoise in centre left, title in red pendulum design 1969 under man, one line of credits in turquoise under title. C Title in red in centre right of image, woman points to viewer in top left corner, four bubbles announce the perils to be seen located from centre left to bottom right, three lines of credits in black text on a blue 1967 background. In a gray border the central image of an armed man and woman, images of characters and scenes frame the couple, title in gray with a red circle around it, "George Peppard is" in large gray letters to the left of 1968 title, four lines of credits in gray at the bottom.

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the stage play "The Private Ear" by Peter Shaffer.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellowing, slight browning along see full bottom edge, slight creasing along top edge, condition smudges in top right, small tear in centre left edge, 2016-06-24 record ink transfer on verso, image slightly visible on verso. 2016-02-08

2012-01403.0168

63/125

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Paranoiac

Francis, 1963 Freddie

USA

Window Card Paranoiac!

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Loosely based on Josephine Tey's novel "Brat Farrar"

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellow, browning, sun damage on see full left edge, wear along edges, small tear on the right condition edge near bottom, slight creasing in centre, 2016-06-24 record creasing along top and bottom edges.

2016-02-09

2012-01403.0169

61/313

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Paris Blues

1961 Ritt, Martin

USA

Window Card Paris Blues

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Harold Flender.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, slight browning along edges, creasing in bottom right corner, creasing in top left see full corner, dirt along left edge and next to title, slight condition abraison in centre left of image, heavy dirt and ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso. Fair condition; yellow, browning along edges, see full curling in top left corner, two tears in top edge, condition scratch in centre left of image, creasing in bottom 2016-06-24 record left corner, slight ink transfer on verso.

2016-02-09

2012-01403.0170

69/30

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Pendulum

Schaefer, 1969 George

USA

Window Card Pendulum

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-09

2012-01403.0171

67/189

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Perils of Pauline

Leonard, Herbert B.; 1967 Shelley, Joshua USA

Window Card The Perils of Pauline

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellow, browning along edges, see full wear along right edge, pencil marks in top left condition corner, dirt transfer, stain in bottom right, sun 2016-06-24 record damage on left edge.

2016-02-09

2012-01403.0172

68/7

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

P.J.

Guillermin, 1968 John

USA

Window Card P.J.

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Also known as "New Face in Hell."

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellow, sun damage along right condition edge, slight creasing in top left corner, sun damage 2016-06-24 record in bottom left corner, image slightly visible.

2016-02-09

2012-01403.0173

68/15

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The President's Analyst

Flicker, 1967 Theodore J.

USA

The President's Window Card Analyst

Central neon pink image of man with drum sticks singing/screaming in front of the capitol building, three small drawings with questions above central image on a pink background, "James Coburn" and title in bright green text in centre, four lines of credits in 1968 black text at the bottom. C On a green background an image of a couple holding a gun, superimposed over the image is a line drawing of a woman crouching over another woman with her head on the right and looking away from viewer, title in violet in top left corner of image, three lines in green and red text at the bottom. Tagline: "... wait till you see what they do to his aunt - to the night 1968 watchman - to her mother." C Cast in black text at the top, central drawn image of a man leaning towards a woman with fingers crossed behind his back, coloured scene still on either side of central image, title in black with crossed fingers design between the legs of central couple, three lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Once there was this girl... stunning, stacked... and this guy... cunning, cool... and somehow they got together for all 1966 this funning!" C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Great condition; slight yellowing at bottom edge, condition slight creasing in top left corner, small red line in 2016-06-24 record top section of verso.

2016-02-09

2012-01403.0174

68/101

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Pretty Poison

1968 Black, Noel

USA

Window Card Pretty Poison

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Stephen Geller

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Great condition; slight yellowing along edges, condition creasing in bottom right corner and top left corner, 2016-06-24 record finger marks or palm print in top right section. 2016-02-09

2012-01403.0175

66/68

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Promise Her Anything

1966 Hiller, Arthur

USA

Promise Her Window Card Anything

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on a story by Arne Sultan and Marvin Worth.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, slight browning in bottom right corner, slight wear along top edge, small tear see full in centre right edge, creasing in bottom right condition corner, image visible on verso, slight ink transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-02-09

2012-01403.0176

67-301

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Purple Hills

1961 Dexter, Maury USA

Window Card The Purple Hills

Title in large red letters across the top, small scene of cowboys running in top right corner, a large arrow points to men on horseback in centre right of image, a cowboy fights a native in centre left, four lines of cast and credits in blue on either side of portrait of couple in centre bottom. Tagline: "Every Indian arrow pointed to the purple hills where hate-for-hate and 1961 gun-for-gun scorched this land of treachery! C Within and next to a large yellow 'Q' various characters and scenes dot the top section, title in red design in bottom right of image, recursive drawing of a man in a phone booth in the 'Q' of the title, three lines of credits in black at the bottom. Tagline: "Quiller... Persuer or Pursued - ... he played the most 1967 dangerous game in Europe... and he played it alone." C On a purple background various stills of a woman, "Joanne Woodward" in white outline text between stills, a small sepia still of a girl above the title in black 1968 text, two lines in light purple text at the bottom. C Purple rainy image of a couple on a beach, title in purple leaf design in bottom right of image, two lines of credits in light purple at the bottom. Tagline: "Rain people are very fragile... one mistake in love and they 1969 dissolve." C Two stills with lines creating pie shaped sections, a whip in centre left of image, cast and title in red in centre under the stills, three lines of credits in black texts at the bottom. Tagline: "In the loosest sense he is her husband...and in the loosest way she is his 1967 wife!"

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Okay condition; yellow, slight browning along edges, slight creasing along top edge, large crease in top right edge, small stain in centre of image, see full crease in centre bottom right near cast, crease in condition centre right of image, creasing throughout bottom 2016-06-24 record section, ink transfer on verso.

2016-02-09

2012-01403.0177

67/13

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Quiller Memorandum

Anderson, 1966 Michael

USA

The Quiller Window Card Memorandum

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Great condition; yellow, browning along right edge, condition finger marks in bottom right corner, image slightly 2016-06-24 record visible on verso, slight ink transfer on verso. 2016-02-09 Good condition; yellow, slight sun damage in top see full right corner, slight creasing in top left corner, condition image slightly visible on verso, sun damage on 2016-06-24 record verso.

2012-01403.0178

68/259

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Rachel, Rachel

1968 Newman, Paul USA

Window Card Rachel, Rachel

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel "Jest of God" by Margaret Laurence.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-09

2012-01403.0179

69/256

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Rain People

Coppola, 1969 Francis Ford

USA

Window Card The Rain People

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellow, ink drag marks in bottom condition left corner, verticle creasing in top corners, image 2016-06-24 record slightly visible on verso.

2016-02-09

2012-01403.0180

67/327

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Reflections in a Golden Eye

1967 Huston, John

USA

Reflections in a Window Card Golden Eye

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Earson McCullers.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0181

61/55

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Right Approach

1961 Butler, David

USA

Window Card The Right Approach

Top central image of a couple talking, title in red under and to the left of couple, three yellow-brown stills with captions under title, three lines of credits in 1961 blue text at the bottom. C Central orange image of man's head with smaller figures and scenes to the right, four black & white stills with captions to the left stacked vertically, title in white text in bottom right above black & white still of couple, four lines of credits in black text on the left of 1960 black & white still. O Cast in white text around portrait of Ustinov above the title in red text on a yellow background, three portraits between cast and title, couple embraces in centre right of image, one line of credits in white on 1961 purple background at the bottom. C Central image of a woman throwing money in a yellow background, small line drawings centred around woman, woman stands on red box with title in white, four lines of cast above title, one line of credits in 1967 black at the bottom. C Top red image of a man climbing a fence, tagline in blue under image, two stills in centre left, title to the right in red with a purple hand holding object, three lines of credits in black text. Tagline: "The price for uncovering the secret of the Satan Bug comes high 1965 your life!"

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Garson Kanin.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellow, browning along edges, see full small stain on the left edge next to tagline, creasing condition in white section, image visible on verso, transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-02-09 Good condition; yellow, sun damage along bottom right edge, browning along bottom, smudge in see full bottom right corner, tear in top left edge, creasing condition along right edge, pen mark in bottom left, image 2016-06-24 record visible on verso. 2016-02-09

2012-01403.0182

60/30

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Rise and Fall of Legs Diamond

Boetticher, 1960 Budd

USA

The Rise and Fall of Window Card 'Legs' Diamond

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, browning on bottom edge, accumulation in bottom right, vertical creasing see full along left edge, creasing in top right corner, crease condition in bottom left of image, thin scratches in title, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso. Good condition; yellow, browning in top and bottom sections, creasing along right edge, tear in see full top left edge, creasing along top, blue pen mark in condition centre right and bottom centre of image, image 2016-06-24 record visible on verso.

2016-02-09

2012-01403.0183

61/180

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Romanoff and Juliet

1961 Ustinov, Peter USA

Window Card Romanoff and Juliet

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the play by Peter Ustinov.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-09

2012-01403.0184

67/325

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Rosie!

Rich, David 1967 Lowell

USA

Window Card Rosie!

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; slight yellowing, stain in top right condition corner, creasing in top section, finger marks in 2016-06-24 record bottom right corner, image visible on verso.

2016-02-09

2012-01403.0185

65/109

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Satan Bug

1965 Sturges, John

USA

Window Card The Satan Bug

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Ian Stuart.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, browning, wear along edges, two punch holes in top corners, creasing along bottom, pin holes in top corner, slight creasing see full throughout, central creasing, sun damage on verso, condition finger marks on verso, ink transfer on verso, image 2016-06-24 record slightly visible on verso. 2016-02-09

55

2012-01403.0186

68/111

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Scalphunters

1968 Pollack, Sidney USA

Window Card The Scalphunters

Painted central image of two men fighting, a crowd looks on in the background with an image of mountains and cowboys behind them, main cast and title in yellow under the fighting men, two lines of 1968 credits in blue text at the bottom of image.

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

No white section.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, creasing on bottom right see full edge, wear and creasing along all edges, sun condition damage on top right edge, abraison in centre of 2016-06-24 record image, slight sun damage on verso.

2016-02-09

2012-01403.0187

66/263

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Seconds

Frankenheimer 1966 , John USA

Window Card Seconds

Large black & white still on left of card of a man in bandages, caption on right (opposite of image) with small images between the captions, title and "Rock Hudson" in yellow on the bottom of still, three lines of 1966 credits in black text at the bottom. C Black & white still of man holding a candle, red vertical banners on either side and yellow below, title character in yellow on still and "Paul Newman" in white, five lines in black text on yellow background. 1968 Tagline: "It's not who you con... it's how you do it." C Central image in a green-brown tone of a couple running scared, caption in centre beside coloured portrait of a couple embracing, title in white on a red background in bottom centre, six lines of credits in black text next to a soldier on the left of title, line drawing of an armed man with a plane in the 1961 background, two lines in blue on the left of title.

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by David Ely.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellow, slight creasing along right see full edge, sun damage in bottom left, slight creasing in condition top edge, image visible on verso, ink transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso.

2016-02-09

2012-01403.0188

68/105

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Secret War of Harry Figg

1968 Smight, Jack

USA

The Secret War of Window Card Harry Figg

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; yellowing, sun damage along 2016-06-24 record edges, image visible on verso.

2016-01-21

2012-01403.0189

61/96

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Secret Ways

1961 Karlson, Phil

USA

Window Card The Secret Wars

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Alistair MacLean.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; very yellow, sun damage in top white section, sun damage along top edge of verso, see full wear and creasing along right edge, creasing in top condition right corner, blue line in top section, image slightly 2016-06-24 record visible on verso. 2016-02-11

2012-01403.0190

68/260

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Sergeant

1968 Flynn, John

USA

Window Card The Sergeant

Central purple toned still of a man's face, right bottom corner of still is ripped, within rip a line drawing of two people and a town, five lines of cast and title in black to the left of centre under still, two lines of 1968 credits in light purple at the bottom. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Dennis Murphy.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; minimal yellowing, slight creasing 2016-06-24 record in top right corner, image slightly visible on verso. Fair condition; very yellow, sun damage in top right edge, two punched holes in top corners, stains in top white section, in bottom left edge, in centre bottom edge, and over title, finger marks in top see full left, pencil marks in top section, creasing in centre condition of image, small puncture without piercing through 2016-06-24 record in centre of verso.

2016-02-11

2012-01403.0191

68/61

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Sergeant Ryker

1968 Kulik, Buzz

USA

Window Card Sergeant Ryker

Central image of two soldiers divided by an explosion, below and extending on either side are painted scenes from the film, "Lee Marvin as" in black text on the left of title in red, two lines of credits in black text at the 1968 bottom. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the tv production of "The Case Against Sergeant Ryker." Billed as the first in Stereo-Vision. It is also billed with a Stereo-vision animation "Space Attack" and Flaminco Dancers Charito and Ernesto.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-11

2012-01403.0192

60-216

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

September Storm

1960 Haskin, Byron

USA

Window Card September Storm

Disclaimer above a large designed "Stereo-Vision" in orange lettering, green still of a shark attacking two divers under stereo-vision, title in black text under the still, three lines of credits in blue text to the right of 1960 "Special Added Attractions" cards. C Four stills of characters behind a chain link fence with character descriptions under the stills, man is electrocuted in bottom left area, a woman injects something on the right of the man, title in shocking 1964 blue text design, four lines in black text at the bottom. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; yellow, slight browning along edges, tear in centre of bottom edge, heavy creasing along bottom edge, hole in bottom right with small pin marks around it, wear along right see full edge, tear in right edge, dirt along top edge, two condition tape repairs of tears on verso, pen marks on 2016-06-24 record bottom edge of verso.

2016-02-11

2012-01403.0193

64/67

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Shock Treatment

1964 Sanders, Denis USA

Window Card Shock Treatment

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Winfred Van Atta.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Great condition; yellow, small tear with crushed condition fibers in centre right edge, image slightly visible on 2016-06-24 record verso.

2016-02-11

2012-01403.0194

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Shoes of the Fisherman

Anderson, 1968 Michael

USA

The Shoes of the Window Card Fisherman

Top: a large image of two men standing in a control room with an Asian man on the screen in the background, title in yellow on a black background below and to the right of image, a small painted image of characters on the left of title, seven lines of credits in black text at the bottom. C Central banner of three images: a man holding a knife to a woman's throat, central black & white image of a man caught in a water wheel, man following woman on the right, title in red under the banner, two lines of credits in green and one in blue at the bottom. Tagline above the banner: "Are we all potential killers? Don't watch this picture if you are afraid of what it may 1965 reveal about yourself!" O Central image of a man pointing the finger at a woman while another looks on, an African village in the background, title in burgundy on the left and under image, nine lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "How dare you come preach against sin, Rachel Cade! You... and your lover... and your 1960 baby...!" C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Possibly reproduction, no NSS number, white section at the Based on the novel by bottom, Morris L. West. glossy paper. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; slight wear in top corners, image 2016-06-24 record visible on verso.

2016-02-11

2012-01403.0195

65/28

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Signpost to Murder

Englund, 1964 George

USA

Window Card Signpost to Murder

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Monte Doyle.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellow, creasing in bottom right condition corner, small tear in bottom edge, slight wear along 2016-06-24 record left edge. 2016-02-11

2012-01403.0196

60/249

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Sins of Rachel Cade

Douglas, 1961 Gordon

USA

The Sins of Rachel Window Card Cade

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellow, creasing in bottom right, see full top right, and top left corners, small tears top edge, condition slight creasing in bottom section, image visible on 2016-06-24 record verso, dirt transferred onto verso. 2016-02-11

2012-01403.0197

68/20

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Heroin Gang

Hutton, Brian 1968 G.

USA

Window Card Sol Madrid

Central image of man with a gun facing away, a woman dances in the top left of image, small scenes and characters on the left superimposed on the man's back, six lines in blue above the title, two red arrows with silhouetted hands holding guns toward title in 1968 blue, one line of credits in blue text at the bottom. C Centred title in white text, a boy lassos a cowboy standing on the left of title, image of a couple on the left of cast and a woman on the right, two lines of 1957 credits in black text on a yellow background. A ballooned man floats above a pyramid of football players, a man with an umbrella runs on the right of the title in red, two lines of cast in black text above small scenes and portraits, three lines of credits in 1970 black under portraits.

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel "Fruit of the Poppy" by Robert Wilder.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, wear along bottom right edge, tear in left bottom edge, creasing, stain in see full centre right edge, slight creasing in top corner, condition abraison in centre left of image, slight ink transfer 2016-06-24 record on verso. Great condition; yellow, slight browning along see full edges, wear along top edge, image visible on verso, condition ink transfer on verso, sun damage in top left of 2016-06-24 record verso.

2016-02-11

2012-01403.0198

57/436

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Slim Carter

Bartlett, 1957 Richard

USA

Window Card Slim Carter

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-11

2012-01403.0199

R70/275

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Son of Flubber

Stevenson, 1962 Robert

USA

Window Card Son of Flubber

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Glossy, thinker stock. Reprint. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellowing at the bottom, creasing in bottom right, creasing along the top, vertical see full crease in centre right, light pencil mark through condition central image, stain in centre left of verso, punched 2016-06-24 record hole in top centre (possibly original). 2016-02-11 Fair condition; yellow, slight browning along edges, blue ink transfer on bottom right, dirt on right see full bottom edge, creasing and wear along centre right condition edge, creasing and loss in top corners, image visible 2016-06-24 record on verso, ink transfer on verso. 2016-02-11

2012-01403.0200

60/197

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Sons and Lovers

1960 Cardiff, Jack

USA

Window Card Sons and Lovers

An open book on a yellow background, a filmstrip is superimposed on the book, on either side of title in yellow text, two stills of couples kissing, two lines of 1960 credits in green text at the bottom.

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by D.H. Lawrence.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0201

67/70

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Spirit is Willing

1967 Castle, William USA

Window Card The Spirit is Willing

Title in yellow on a haunted house background, swirling from house are various scenes and characters from the film, a family looks at the swirl on left of title, three lines of credits on a blue background at the bottom. Tagline: "The first picture to face the biggest 1967 problem of our time: the sex life of ghosts!" C Title in large red letters above the scene of a desert shootout between cops and others, fives lines of credits in blue text on the right of image of five characters, taglines along the left edge. Tagline: "Tmen on a dangerous trail of counterfeiters... daring cheats and bullets all the way from the ranches of 1960 Arizona to the hideaways South of the Border."

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the book by Nathaniel Benchley.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; yellow, slight creasing in corners, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso, ink transfer on verso.

2016-02-11

2012-01403.0202

60/303

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Squad Car

1960 Leftwich, Ed

USA

Window Card Squad Car

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB Possibly a reproduction, Based on the novel by heavy glossy John Nichols. card stock. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Great condition; yellow, creasing in top left corner, condition creasing in bottom section, '25' written in pencil on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-02-11

2012-01403.0203

69/357

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Sterile Cuckoo

1967 Pakula, Alan J. USA

Window Card The Sterile Cukoo

Polaroid of a girl in a wheelchair over a note stating: "I'm 19, I want to be loved. Hurt me! - Pookie Adams" taped to a wall, title in black text under note, and 1967 three lines in black text at the bottom. C Central image of a seated worried woman, behind her a blue monochrome image of a couple kissing, to the bottom right of her outlined hands fight for a gun, cast and title in pinkish text along right edge, two lines 1960 of credits in black and blue text at the bottom. C A man and the sun in a mosaic title design, small line drawings in top left corner, "Marcello Mastroiani" and title in white on the mosaic, three lines of credits in 1968 black text on the bottom. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Good condition; slight yellowing, heavy creasing 2016-06-24 record along right edge, slight creasing in left corners.

2016-02-11

2012-01403.0204

60/15

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Story on Page One

1960 Odets, Clifford USA

The Story on Page Window Card One

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellow, slight creasing along top condition left edge, loss of substraight in centre left edge, 2016-06-24 record smudge in bottom right, image visible on verso. Good condition; yellow, finger marks in bottom see full right corner, ink transfer in bottom section, wear condition on top left edge, creasing in corner, image visible 2016-06-24 record on verso, dirt transfer on verso.

2016-02-11

2012-01403.0205

68/145

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Lo Straniero

Visconti, 1967 Luchino

USA

Window Card The Stranger

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Albert Camus.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-11

56

2012-01403.0206

67/159

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

The St-Valentine's Day Massacre

1967 Corman, Roger USA

The St-Valentine's Window Card Day Massacre!

Painted images of gangsters, deaths, and women in a heart, yellow newspaper headline with the title in red text, four lines of credits in black text in the bottom 1967 right of card. C Green still of a couple kissing above a synopsis of film, green key behind the tag, title in purple above four 1968 lines of credits in green text. C Six coloured still under the character descriptions, centre a topless woman stands next to title in yellow text on a design of surfers and bikers, three lines of 1968 credits in black at the bottom.

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on true events.

TBLB

FRL holding room FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0207

68/76

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Sweet November

Miller, Robert 1968 Ellis

USA

Window Card Sweet November

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

Poster cabinet

PF67

Great condition; yellow, sun damage in top right see full edge, creasing in bottom right corner, image visible condition on verso, blue line from top centre to centre of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-02-11 Poor condition; large hole in top left, yellow, sun see full damage in top section, scarring in top right, wear condition along right edge, creasing in corners, image visible 2016-06-24 record on verso. 2016-02-11

2012-01403.0208

68/72

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Sweet Ride

1968 Hart, Harvey

USA

Window Card The Sweet Ride

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by William Murray.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellow, two punch holes in top condition corners, creasing in top left, dirt line in top left, dirt 2016-06-24 record on bottom left corner and edge. 2016-02-11

2012-01403.0209

68/193

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Swimmer

1968 Perry, Frank

USA

Window Card The Swimmer

Caption in white on a black background on the left of image, man and woman embrace as the image dissolves into horizontal lines that create the likeness of a man, "Burt Lancaster" and title in red text under 1968 image, four lines of credits in black text at the bottom. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the story by John Cheever.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellow, slight browning along top see full and right edge, slight wear in top corners, smudge condition in right edge near title, image slgihtly visible on 2016-06-24 record verso, slight ink transfer on verso.

2016-02-12

2012-01403.0210

66/348

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

That Tennessee Beat

1966 Brill, Richard

USA

Window Card That Tennessee Beat

Tagline at the top in black text on a yellow background, orange still of a man playing guitar, a woman sits on the border on his left, two black & white stills on the right and left of them, a sign announces guest stars on the right of image, title in orange and black text with musical notes is centred under image, three lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Meet a new kind of swinger - - He's the Nashville Kid... Turnin' everyone on with the hot, 1966 hip, cool beat of the mountain music sound!" C Purple and green coloured image of a man running in water, title in purple and blue text on the centre right of image, a purple hand holding scissors extends from the 'H,' one line of cast with small portraits at the bottom, one line of credits in black under portraits. Tagline: "This is the story of a man searching for a 1964 killer who might even be himself." C A couple embrace looking away from the viewer, title in red on the left of couple, tagline above the couple, around their feet are close-ups of man (left) and woman (right) with the desert in the background, three lines of credits in black on the bottom. Tagline: "A story of love and loneliness... a man's longing... a 1959 woman's hunger!"

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Great condition; yellow, browning along right edge, slight sun damage in top right corner, small ink see full stain in bottom left, image slightly visible in verso, condition slight ink transfer on verso, deposit in centre right 2016-06-24 record of verso. 2016-02-12

2012-01403.0211

64/68

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Third Secret

Crichton, 1964 Charles

USA

Window Card The Third Secret

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellow, browning along edges, condition creasing in top left corner, stain in centre right 2016-06-24 record next to ink transfer, image visible on verso.

2016-02-12

2012-01403.0212

59/201

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

This Earth is Mine

1959 King, Henry

USA

Window Card This Earth is Mine

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Alice Tisdale Hobart.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellow, pin holes in top corners, see full folding in top left corner, creasing in all corners, condition '70' written in pencil on verso, stain in bottom right 2016-06-24 record corner fo verso, small stains in top right. 2016-02-12

2012-01403.0213

67/99

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Thoroughly Modern Millie Those Magnificent Men in Their Flying Machines or How I Flew from London to Paris in 25 hours 11 minutes

Hill, George 1967 Roy

USA

Thoroughly Modern Window Card Millie

Top right an image of a scandalized Julie Andrews looking towards three smaller images of woman on the left, small line drawings extend from centre to bottom right, four lines of cast in centre left above the title in white on a red banner, five lines of credits in black text to the left of a blue card with song title at 1967 the bottom. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condition; yellow, sun damage in bottom condition right corner, creasing in top two corners, image 2016-06-24 record slightly visible on verso, light stain in white section.

2016-02-12

2012-01403.0214

65/218

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

1965 Annakin, Ken

USA

Those Magnificent Men in Their Flying Machines or How I Flew from London to Paris in 25 hours 11 Window Card minutes

Central cartoonish drawing of a man and woman in a 'flying machine' while characters run under it, eleven small portraits under main image, four lines of credits 1965 in black and red text at the bottom. C Red background. Top right a man points his gun towards the viewer, view of terrified crowd with a helicopter flying overhead on the centre left of card, a man points his gun in bottom left next to image of couple, title in yellow on the right, three lines of credits in white on the bottom, Tagline: "The one bullet that could send terror screaming through the 1963 whole Caribbean!" C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, two punch holes in top corners, wear and creasing in top right corner, see full folding in bottom right corner, dirt and ink transfer condition in top section, ink transfer on verso, slight creasing 2016-06-24 record along top edge.

2016-02-12

2012-01403.0215

63/265

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Thunder Island

1963 Leewood, Jack USA

Window Card Thunder Island

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0216

60/14

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Toby Tyler, or Ten Weeks with a Circus

Barton, 1960 Charles

USA

Toby Tyler, or Ten Window Card Weeks with a Circus

On a green background a clown and his gun slinging monkey announce the film with a white title card with black and red text, three portraits along the right edge, three lines in black text on a white cart at the 1960 bottom centre, one line of credits at the bottom. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by James Otis Kaler.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; yellow, creasing in top right 2016-06-24 record corner, dirt transfer in bottom of verso. Okay condition; heavy sun damage, loss of substrate in right bottom edge, creasing in bottom edge, creasing in bottom right corner, scratches in centre of image, loss of colour, creasing in top, dirt see full throughout card (concentration in top section and condition left edge), image visible on verso, ink transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso.

2016-02-12

2016-02-12

2012-01403.0217

69/378

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Topaz

Hitchcock, 1969 Alfred

USA

Window Card Topaz

On a yellow background, a book explodes in top right, small portrait of Hitchcock in top left above caption, three blue stills in centre above "Alfred Hitchcock" and title in red and white text, three lines of credits in 1969 black text at the bottom. C Two pink-red vertical banners on either side of a black & white image of a worried girl, on the left a close-up of a deranged man's face, on the right the tagline, "Kirk Douglas in" in black text above title in red text, four lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "The Story of What Four Men Did To a Girl... 1961 And What the Town Did To Them!" O On a red-orange background a house split in half, on the left a black & white man caresses a woman's face, on the right he hits her, title in white under cast in 1963 centre bottom, two lines at the bottom. O A frightened couple hold each other in the centre while two gangsters point guns at them, a clock hand points up to the couple, small blue monochrome drawing of a murder with a city in the background on the left of clock hand, title in red on right of clock 1960 hand, two lines of credits in blue text under title.

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on a novel by Leon Uris.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Okay condition; yellow, sun damage along right and bottom edge, slight creasing in top corner, stain on bottom right corner, creasing in bottom left corner, see full wear in left edge, creasing in bottom centre condition section, horizontal crease in centre, slight ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verson, image slightly visible on verso. 2016-02-12 Poor condition; yellow, browning along edges, large horizontal folds throughout, two large deep scratches on the left side, pin holes in centre bottom and top edge, adhesive damage in top see full section, dirt throughout, stain in top left, smudge in condition centre, slight image fading, image visible on verso, 2016-06-24 record ink transfer on verso. 2016-02-12 Fair condition; yellow, heavy sun damage, wear see full along all corners, central horizontal crease, two condition punch holes in top corners, slight smudges in top 2016-06-24 record centre, creasing in bottom.

2012-01403.0218

61/309

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Town Without Pity

Reinhardt, 1961 Manfred

USA

Window Card Town Without Pity

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel "The Verdict" by Manfred Gregor.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0219

63/227

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Toys in the Attic

Hill, George 1963 Roy

USA

Window Card Toys in the Attic

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the stage play by Lillian Hellman.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-12

2012-01403.0220

60/174

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Twelve Hours to Kill

Cahn, Edward 1960 L.

USA

Window Card 12 Hours to Kill

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the Sunday Post serial "Set up for Murder" by Richard Stern.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellow, browning along right and bottom edges, slight wear along right edge, see full creasing in top right corner, stain in centre left condition edge, multiple finger marks around title, image 2016-06-24 record slightly visible. Okay condition; yellow, sun damage along top edge, crease in bottom right corner, moderate creasing throughout top section, multiple creases along right edge, slight wear along left edge, pin holes in bottom corners, ink transfer in title, sun see full damage on verso, finger marks and smudges in top condition section of verso, dirt/ink transfer on right edge of 2016-06-24 record verso.

2016-02-16

2012-01403.0221

63/244

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Twilight of Honor

1963 Sagal, Boris

USA

Window Card Twilight of Honor

2012-01403.0222

64/159

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Unsinkable Molly Brown

Walters, 1964 Charles

USA

The Unsinkable Window Card Molly Brown

Large image of a man in top left, title in orange text in the centre with various images from the film framing title (clockwise from man: two men fighting, woman dancing, courtroom, smoking prisoner, couple kissing), four lines of credits in blue in the bottom 1963 right of card. C Centre title in bright pink text, blue line drawings of dancers weave in and out of title, woman dances in top right while losing a boot, man in bottom right looking at the woman, four coloured stills in bottom left, two lines of credits in pink and blue text at the 1964 bottom. C In the central circle a man shoots at men around him while on a gondola with a woman, men are falling in a canal, on either side and bottom of the circle drawings of various characters and scenes, two lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "Robert Vaughn in an exciting new suspense role. He's caught in a cross-fire of spies, women and intrigue in Europe's 1966 capital of espionage!" C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Also known as "The Charge Is Murder." Based on the novel by Al Dewlen.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-16

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the play of the same name.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great conditon; yellow, crease in bottom right 2016-06-24 record corner, image slightly visible on verso.

2016-02-16

2012-01403.0223

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Venetian Affair

1966 Thorpe, Jerry

USA

Window Card The Venetian Affair

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on novel by Helen MacInnes.

Has NSS disclaimer but no number. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Great condition; yellow, creasing in bottom and top condition right corner, slight wear along right and left edges, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso. 2016-02-16

57

2012-01403.0224

60/200

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Walk Like a Dragon

1960 Clavell, James

USA

Window Card Walk Like a Dragon

Top centre still of a woman undressing in front of three cowboys, bottom section a scene of a shootout on a yellow background, title in red on the left, two lines of credits in black at the bottom, small portrait in bottom right corner. Tagline: "Here is the passionswept drama of a flower-faced Chinese girl... the white man who bought her... and the man of her own 1960 race who fought for her... like a dragon!" C Man and woman climb across a rocky landscape away from an armed man, title in red on the left of man, small sepia toned image in top right corner, one line of credits in black and one line in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "They dared to bring law and order 1960 out of the lawless west!" C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, heavy creasing, crushed fibers and warping along left edge, slight creasing see full at the top, small stain in top section and bottom condition section, horizontal crease in centre, image visible 2016-06-24 record on verso, ink transfer on verso.

2016-12-16

2012-01403.0225

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Walk Tall

1960 Dexter, Maury USA

Window Card Walk Tall

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Has NSS disclaimer but no number. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellow, sun damage in bottom left see full corner, creasing in top and bottom right corners, condition blue ink transfer from top centre to centre, image 2016-06-24 record visible on verso.

2016-12-16

2012-01403.0226

66/382

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Warning Shot

1967 Kulik, Buzz

USA

Window Card Warning Shot

Five small stills along top left edge: (top to bottom) a gun, eye, beaten man, man's face; tagline in top area above four stills of characters, "David Janssen" and title in red, 'W' with a gun design, five lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Gun, gun, gun, who's got the gun? Not I, said the little chick. Not I, said the kookie tenant. Not I, said the hungry heiress. 1966 Not I, said the nighttime nurse."

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel "711- Officer Needs Help" by Whit Masterson.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Great condition; yellow, slight browning along right condition edge, wear and tear on the right edge, wear along 2016-06-24 record top right edge. 2016-12-16

2012-01403.0227

66/361

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Way... Way Out

Douglas, 1966 Gordon

USA

Window Card Way... Way Out

2012-01403.0228

66/248

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

What Did You Do During the War, Daddy!

1966 Edwards, Blake USA

What Did You Do During the War, Window Card Daddy!

Man in space suit floats above the moon as characters try to pull him down, title in red below him, at the bottom characters interact in the moon station, four lines of credits in red and white text. Tagline: "It all began in 1989 when America and Russia sent men and 1966 women to live on the Moon!" C Small drawing of a little girl speaking to her father in an armchair, title in yellow text on a pink speech bubble, in father's thought bubble four black & white stills of comical events with captions, three lines of credits in white on a purple background at the 1966 bottom. O Black & white image of a man in the right corner within an orange circle on a green background, on the left the head of a man on a pink roulette wheel with dice above him, black & white still of a man surrounded by woman above three portraits, blue border around images, title in yellow text on a red card with a woman above it, eight lines in blue on the left of title. Tagline: "Where it's at for you, dad... ain't 1969 necessarily where it's at for me." O Brown-toned image of a cowboy hugging another atop a horse, three lines of cast above title in red in the top left corner, three lines of black text at the bottom. Tagline: "They were damned good cowboys, 1971 until they robbed a bank."

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellow, slight browning along right see full edge, ink stain on centre left edge and bottom condition edge, sun damage on verso, ink transfer on verso, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso. Good condition; yellow, slight browning along right edge, slight wear along the right edge, creasing in see full bottom right corner, creasing in top left, ink condition transfer on verso, image visible on verso, sun 2016-06-24 record damage on all edges of verso.

2016-12-16

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-16

2012-01403.0229

69/198

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Where It's At

1969 Kanin, Garson USA

Window Card Where It's At

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

No white border.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellow, creasing along left edge, see full wear along left edge, slight creasing in bottom right condition corner, small ink drops in centre, image slightly 2016-06-24 record visible on verso. 2016-02-16 Fair condition; yellow, two punched holes in top corners, creasing, wear, and crushed fibers in top see full right corner, creasing in top left and bottom right condition corner, small stains in top left section, creasing in 2016-06-24 record centre, image slightly visible on verso.

2012-01403.0230

71/194

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Wild Rovers

1971 Edwards, Blake USA

Window Card Wild Rovers

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Thicker card stock.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-16

2012-01403.0231

68/5

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Will Penny

1967 Gries, Tom

USA

Window Card Will Penny

2012-01403.0232

69/183

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Winning

Goldstone, 1969 James

USA

Window Card Winning

Central tan portrait of a cowboy, small scene in top left corner, couple in bottom left, men fighting in bottom right, five lines of cast, credits and title in black text. Tagline: "Grizzled. Tough. A rawhider. A loner. Look at him... You'd never know he could love.... 1968 just as hard as he could hate!" C Three lines of cast in red text in the top right, a man caresses the face of a woman on the left, man smoking on the right, drawing of a car race on the bottom left of title in red text, two lines of credits at 1969 the bottom. C On a black background a man and woman speak into a radio microphone shaped like a dagger with an American flag design, caption and cast in light blue under image, title in flag design under the cast, six 1970 lines in white text at the bottom. C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Heavy card stock.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellow, sun damage along right edge, slight wear along top edge, crease in left see full edge, dirt in bottom left corner, finger marks in top condition left of verso, creasing in centre, image visible on 2016-06-24 record verso. Fair condition; heavy horizontal crease in centre, separation of backing, creasing along bottom see full section, creasing in all corners, dirt in top white condition section, sun damage in top section of verso, ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso.

2016-02-16

2016-02-16

2012-01403.0233

70/314

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

WUSA

Rosenberg, 1970 Stuart

USA

Window Card WUSA

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel "Hall of Mirrors" by Robert Stone.

Heavy card stock, glossy.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; loss of black background, creasing 2016-06-24 record in top corners.

2016-02-16

2012-01403.0234

61/238

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Young Doctors

1961 Karlson, Phil

USA

Window Card The Young Doctors

Five portraits with character descriptions above on a red background, at the top a line drawing of a couple, cast in black text under portraits, title in red in the bottom right, two lines of credits in black text at the 1961 bottom. C Title in pink curving along a circle where drawings of dancing girls with the city scape as their dress, three small men chase after the girls, twelve lines of credits 1968 in black at the bottom.

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

Based on the novel by Arthur Hailey.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, rolled, horizontal crease in centre, creasing throughout, several pin holes in each corner, browning along right edge, creasing in see full top left edge, dirt transfer throughout, "Saturday condition Matinee Gunfight at Abilene" written in china 2016-06-24 record pencil on verso. 2016-02-16

2012-01403.0235

68/56

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Les Demoiselles de Rochefort

1968 Demy, Jacques USA

The Young Girls of Window Card Rochefort

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Great condition; yellow, very slight creasing in right 2016-06-24 record corner, small crease in centre left edge. 2016-02-16 Poor condition; yellow, slight browning along bottom and right edge, creasing throughout bottom, dirt/ink transfer in centre above credits, small tear in bottom edge, separation of backing in see full bottom right corner, wear along left edge, creasing condition in bottom, slight creasing at the top, image visible 2016-06-24 record on verso.

2012-01403.0236

61/165

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Young Savages

Frankenheimer 1961 , John USA

Window Card The Young Savages

Man kisses woman with back to viewer, on the bottom left three men with knives accost a couple, large head in bottom right, title in red text above 1961 head, three lines of credits in blue text.

C

14 x 22 inches

14 in

22 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-16

2012-01403.0237

62/293

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Two Weeks in Another Town

Minnelli, 1962 Vincente

USA

Insert

2 Weeks in Another Town

Main cast in black text in top right, painting of a couple in top centre, title in black text under the couple, to the left of title a woman dances, under title various images from the film, five lines of credits at 1962 the bottom. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Irwin Shaw.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Okay condition; yellow, three horizontal creases, paper above title under lamination, loss of substrate in centre right edge, slight creasing in top see full section, stain in bottom left, blue pen marks on the condition left near crease, image visible on verso, slight ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso, "62-293" in china pencil. 2016-02-18 Laminated. Okay condition; very yellow, central crease, small creases throughout from rolling, brown stains in the right edge, pin holes in four corners and edges, slight loss of colour from creases, blue ink marks in top edge and within image, square stain along left edge of verso, water see full marks on top section of verso, dirt transfer on condition verso, loss of substrate in top right of verso, "562016-06-24 record 505" written twice on verso.

2012-01403.0238

56/505

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Four Girls in Town

1956 Sher, Jack

USA

Insert

4 Girls in Town

Title in orange at the top, four women in various poses under title, Hollywood skyline under the women, two spotlights point up, in bottom left a couple embraces, four lines of cast in blue on the right of couple on a yellow background, one line of credits in white on a red banner at the bottom. Tagline: "It's the kind of gay adventure every girl lives in her 1956 dreams!" C Central image of a woman's torso with a man swinging from her necklace, tagline at the top in red text on a blue background, title in white under image, six lines of credits in light blue text under title and red caption. Tagline: "When rating women if '8's' make you pant and '9's' make you sweat... Imagine what will 1979 happen when you meet a '10'!" C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-18

2012-01403.0239

National Screen 790129 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

10

1979 Edwards, Blake USA

Insert

10

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Fair condition; five horizontal creases, tear in centre left edge, pin holes in bottom corners, creasing in all four corners, loss of see full substrate in top left corner, small tear in bottom condition left edge, small tears along right edge, small holes 2016-06-24 record in top centre section, ink transfer on verso.

2016-03-01

2012-01403.0240

66/162

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

A Fine Madness

1966 Kershner, Irvin USA

Insert

A Fine Madness

Tagline in black text at the top, cast in mustard colour text with captions under tagline, title in mustard colour centred above two colour-toned stills with captions, on the right of title a cartoon of a man's head with the silhouette of a woman in his brain, two lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "Any time... any place... at any game... Samson 1966 Shillitoe can out-fox them all!" C Central green image of a woman, tagline in top right corner, title in red text with small designed objects under image, three lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Young Mrs. Rojeck has some weird ideas. She's the stuff that dreams are made of. Or is it 1966 nightmares..." C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Okay condition; central horizontal crease, holes repaired with tape along top edge, creasing along left edge, tear in bottom left, creasing throughout bottom section, several tears in bottom section, creasing and wear along bottom right edge, one inch tear in bottom right repaired see full with tape on both recto and verso, separation of condition lamination in bottom centre, nine tape repairs on 2016-06-24 record verso, ink transfer on verso. 2016-03-01 Laminated. Fair condition; yellow damage under image, creasing along top and bottom edge, top right corner folded, bottom left corner folded, see full slight horizontal crease, small circular stains in condition bottom section, yellow damage visible on verso, 2016-06-24 record stains in centre of verso.

2012-01403.0241

66/299

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

An American Dream

1966 Gist, Robert

USA

Insert

An American Dream

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Known as "See You in Hell, Darling."

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-03-01

58

2012-01403.0242

75/220

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Adventure of Sherlock Holmes' Smarter Brother

1975 Wilder, Gene

USA

Insert

The Adventure of Sherlock Holmes' Smarter Brother

2012-01403.0243

66/216

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Arabesque

1966 Donen, Stanley USA

Insert

Arabesque

Central image of Gene Wilder in an arm chair with a woman on his lap and another man searching behind him, a saw makes a hole under the chair, title in green and orange above image, five lines of credits in black 1975 text under image. C Title and cast in yellow text on a black square at the top, a man points a gun while a partially undressed woman poses in front of him, five colour toned stills under couple, four lines of credits in black text at the 1966 bottom. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Fair condition; slight yellowing, slight creasing in bottom section, tear in centre left edge, pin holes in top centre, small tear in top centre, see full tear in bottom left centre repaired with tape visible condition on recto, tear in bottom centre edge, ink transfer 2016-06-24 record on verso, residue in bottom section. 2016-03-01 Laminated. Good condition; slight creasing see full throughout, tear in right bottom edge, smudges in condition top section, loss of black colour, residue of tape in 2016-06-24 record top left corner.

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel "The Cipher" by Gordon Cotler.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-03-01

2012-01403.0244

74/42

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Blazing Saddles

1974 Brooks, Mel

USA

Insert

Blazing Saddles

Caption in black text at the top, central image of a sheriff on horseback, a Native American in full headdress in background over the darkening sky, rope border around image, title in brown and yellow design, clouds at the bottom of image, six lines of 1974 credits in black text at the bottom. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Fair condition; loss of substrate in all four corners from removal of tape, bottom left corner still has tape piece, adhesive residue in top left corner, residue in credits, rippling throughout, staple holes in bottom centre and above image, see full three horizontal creases, pen mark on the left edge, condition stains in verso, blue Consolidated Theatre Service 2016-06-24 record on verso, slight ink transfer on verso. 2016-03-01 Laminated. Good condition; slight yellowing, creasing in bottom section and right edge, creasing in bottom left corner, red stain in centre of bottom see full section, blue stain in left edge, pen mark in bottom condition left edge, stain in centre right edge, image slightly 2016-06-24 record visible on verso. 2016-03-01

2012-01403.0245

71/183

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Bless the Beasts & Children

Kramer, 1971 Stanley

USA

Insert

Bless the Beasts & Children

Central drawn image of a flower and a rifle, tagline in black text at the top and title in black text in centre, nine lines of credits in black at the bottom. Tagline: "Only one animal kills just for the sport of it... Guess 1971 which..."

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Glendon Swarthout.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0246

61/262

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Breakfast at Tiffany's

1961 Edwards, Blake USA

Insert

Breakfast at Tiffany's

"Audrey Hepburn" and caption above and around an image of a couple kissing in the rain, under caption the title in light purple with diamond detail, under title the iconic image of Hepburn in the black dress with the jewels and the cat, one line of cast in white on a pink background under image, two lines of 1961 credits in blue text at the bottom.

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Truman Capote.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Fair condition; three horizontal creases, creasing throughout, pin/staple holes along top and bottom edge and centre right and left edge, yellow, small tear in in left edge, small tears in right see full edge, gole in top left edge, tear in top centre, image condition visible on verso, ink transfer, "61-262" in china 2016-06-24 record pencil on verso, stain in top centre of verso. 2016-03-01

2012-01403.0247

67/72

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Casino Royale

Hughes, 1967 Kenneth

USA

Insert

Casino Royale

Title in pink on a black speech bubble at the top with a heavily tattooed woman with guns under it, a second black speech bubble above another image of the same woman, thirty-three lines of credits in black text on 1967 the left of second speech bubble. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Suggested by the Ian Fleming novel.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Good condition; yellow, small stain in see full centre left, slight creasing in bottom section, condition separation of substrate in bottom left corner, slight 2016-06-24 record dirt transfer on the verso. 2016-03-01 Laminated. Fair condition; four horizontal creases, yellow, creasing along bottom edge, one inch tear in bottom edge, creasing in top section, dirt transfer throughout, smudges on yellow section in see full centre, ink transfer on verso, image slightly visible condition on verso, two stamps on verso, stain in bottom 2016-06-24 record centre, finger marks in centre of verso.

2012-01403.0248

63/314

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Charade

1963 Donen, Stanley USA

Insert

Charade

Cast in black text at the top, central portrait of main cast, a couple runs toward someone with a gun in bottom left, title in black text on a yellow background under image, three lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "You can expect the unexpected 1963 when they play... Charade." C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-03-01

2012-01403.0249

66/56

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Chase

1966 Penn, Arthur

USA

Insert

The Chase

Character images from top to centre, fifteen lines of producer credits in black text on the left of images, "Marlon Brando" in black above title in red wavy design, seven lines of credits in black text at the 1966 bottom.

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Poor condition; yellow, three horizontal creases, stain in top right, creasing throughout, tear in centre left edge repaired with tape on both recto and verso, stain along left edge, creasing in bottom left corner, dirt transfer throughout, finger smudges in centre left, creasing in bottom right see full corner, stain along top right edge, image visible on condition verso, ink transfer on verso, tape residue in centre 2016-06-24 record right edge of verso. 2016-03-01

2012-01403.0250

65/252

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Cincinnati Kid

Jewison, 1965 Norman

USA

Insert

The Cincinnati Kid

2012-01403.0251

R800072

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Close Encounters of the Third Kind

Spielberg, 1977 Steven

USA

Insert

Close Encounters of the Third Kind

Tagline in blue at the top, on the left a man offers money to a man out of frame with only his hand with a cigar visible in centre right, a woman on the right caresses the man's face while another stands behind her, two blue square monochrome images of amalgamated scenes and characters with added colour detail, two lines of cast in black text under images, title in yellow text on a black banner under cast, a hand holding cards on the right of title, two lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "He'd take on anyone, at anything, anytime ....it was 1965 only a matter of who came first!" Central image of a spaceship coming down to earth with a crowd at the bottom of image, title and "Special Edition" in white text in the centre, thirteen lines of credits in light blue text on a dark blue 1980 background at the bottom.

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Richard Jessup.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Fair condition; yellow, three creases from original folding, finger mark in bottom left edge, creasing along right edge, top area, and see full bottom area, slight creasing along left edge, four condition tears in right edge, stain in bottom section of verso, 2016-06-24 record four tape pieces repairing tears on verso. 2016-02-18 Laminated. Good condition; seven inch crease in see full centre left,slight creasing in top and bottom condition section, loss of colour in centre left, small white 2016-06-24 record circle in credits. Laminated. Fair condition; two slight horizontal creases, slight creasing throughout, yellow, browning along bottom edge, pin holes in top two corners, creasing in bottom left corner, red marks in bottom left section, dirt transfer throughout, see full adhesive residue top, centre, and bottom of verso, condition "63-138" in china pencil in top right of verso, small 2016-06-24 record stain in top right of verso.

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-03-02

2016-01403.0252

63/138

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Come Blow Your Horn

1963 Yorkin, Bud

USA

Insert

Come Blow Your Horn

Central image of a man standing and laughing, five toned stills at the top with captions, "Frank Sinatra" and title in red text next to legs of central image, small horn blowing rooster in bottom right, four lines of 1963 credits in blue text at the bottom. C Tagline in red at the top, two toned stills under tagline, Dick Van Dyke stands in character from centre right to bottom right of image, title in red text and six lines of cast in blue text on the left of Van Dyke, under cast three toned stills from the film, two lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "A funny 1969 new motion picture that tells Hollywood like it was." C Central close-up image of a blond woman, title in red text on a theatre marquee design with spotlights pointing around the woman, a mob attacks a terrified man and rips his clothing under marquee, a "Byrd" stamp in image. Tagline: "By train, by car, by bus, they 1975 came to Hollywood... in search of a dream." C Tagline in red text in top left, cast in orange above a portrait of a couple, title in red text under still, caption above still in bottom left corner, one line of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "It is different. It is daring. Most of all, in its own terrifying 1963 way, it is a love story..." C Blue background, a still at the top shows a dog attacking a man, two lines of cast in white text under image, image of a woman merged with a skull under cast, title in white under the skull image, three lines of credits in blue at the bottom. Tagline: "For 'Baby Jane' 1964 people!" C Central image of Hitchcock in a crystal ball, above crystal ball a disguised woman holds a gun while a couple runs in fear on her body, title in white text on a black banner on an orange background, five lines of 1976 credits in black text at the bottom. C On a black background three small drawn portraits in central left, orange toned image of a dancing couple, small white line drawings behind couple, tagline in pink at the top centre, orange and pink title, song titles on right of couple, six lines of credits in pink text at the bottom. Tagline: "And, by the way, things 1968 happen to be just great in Glocca Morra." C Central image of two men in a news room, tagline in black text at the top, cast and title in black text next to men, seven lines of credits in black text on a brown background at the bottom. Tagline: "It's the hottest story since the Chicago Fire... And they're sitting on 1975 it." C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Neil Simon.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-03-02

2012-01403.0253

69/339

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Comic

1969 Reiner, Carl

USA

Insert

The Comic

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Laminated. Great condition; slight yellowing along 2016-06-24 record edges, small stains in top right.

2016-02-18

2012-01403.0254

75/68

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Day of the Locust

Schlesinger, 1975 John

USA

Insert

The Day of the Locust

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Nathanial West.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Laminated. Great condition; adhesive damage in 2016-06-24 record bottom left corner.

2016-02-18

2012-01403.0255

63/7

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Days of Wine and Roses

1963 Edwards, Blake USA

Insert

Days of Wine and Roses

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0256

64/42

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Dead Ringer

1964 Henreid, Paul

USA

Insert

Dead Ringer

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Later known as "Dead Image."

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Fair condition; central horizontal crease, creasing throughout, creasing in bottom left corner, yellow, small tear in centre left edge, see full creasing in bottom right corner, smudges in bottom condition centre, ink and dirt transfer on verso, "63-7" in 2016-06-24 record china pencil on bottom left corner of verso. 2016-03-02 Laminated. Fair condition; yellow, smudges in bottom section, creasing in bottom section, small creases throughout, horizontal crease in top see full section, small hole in top right, small tear in top left condition corner, blue ink in top left corner, dirt transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-02-18

2012-01403.0257

76/94

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Family Plot

Hitchcock, 1976 Alfred

USA

Insert

Family Plot

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel "The Rainbird Pattern" by Victor Canning.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Laminated. Great condition; slight creasing in condition bottom section, adhesive residue in credits, stamp 2016-06-24 record in top left of verso.

2016-03-02

2012-01403.0258

68/233

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Finian's Rainbow

Coppola, 1968 Francis Ford

USA

Insert

Finian's Rainbow

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Good condition; one horizontal crease, yellow, slight creasing in top section, creasing in see full bottom section, small tear in bottom left edge, condition adesive residue at the bottom of verso, smudges on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-03-02

2012-01403.0259

75/12

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Front Page

1974 Wilder, Billy

USA

Insert

The Front Page

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the play by Ben Hecht and Charles MacArthur.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Good condition; rippling, creasing in see full bottom left corner, horizontal creasing throughout, condition brown stain in bottom left corner, adhesive residue 2016-06-24 record on bottom right, slight dirt transfer on verso. 2016-03-02

59

2012-01403.0260

76/33

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Gable and Lombard

1976 Furie, Sidney J. USA

Insert

Gable and Lombard

Central portrait of a couple on a drive in a movie screen, a drawing of a car under the screen with a man carrying a woman in front of it, cast in black text under image, several comical black & white stills under cast, four lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "It was the wildest, wackiest love 1976 affair Hollywood ever knew." C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Great condition; slight creasing in top section, small creasing in bottom left corner, see full adhesive damage in bottom left, stamp in top right condition corner of verso, small ink stains in top section of 2016-06-24 record verso.

2016-03-02

2012-01403.0261

56/497

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Giant

Stevens, 1956 George

USA

Insert

Giant

Tagline in red text at the top, title in white text on a desert background, stills and cast names under the title, four lines of credits in grey text at the bottom. Tagline: "A picture of proud people. A love story, a cavalcade. --A conflict of creeds. -- A personal drama of strong longings. -- A big story of big things and big 1956 feelings. -- This is Giant!" Man dancing at the top with two women on his bottom left, cast in blue text on the right of man's feet, title in red under image, five lines of credits in blue text under title, small cartoonish image at the 1964 bottom of image on a yellow background.

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the nove by Edna Ferber.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Okay condition; browning, creasing throughout, rippling from being rolled, loss of colour from creases, smudges in bottom section, stamps and pen marks in bottom right corner, dirt transfer throughout, black staion and smudges alon right edge of verso, "63-66" and "56-497" in china see full pencil on the right edge, stamp in bottom left condition corner of verso, dirt transfer on verso, image 2016-06-24 record slightly visible on verso. 2016-03-02 Laminated. Fair condition; two horizontal creases, yellow, pin holes in all four corners, dirt transfer see full throughout, creasing in central section, large condition crease on bottom right, creasing in top left section, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso. 2016-03-02 Laminated. Fair condition; six horizontal creases, hole in top left edge, adhesive residue in bottom left, slight creasing in bottom section, loss of colour see full from creases, creasing along right edge, adhesive condition residue in bottom left of verso, tape piece repair of 2016-06-24 record hole in top of verso. 2016-03-02 Laminated. Okay condition; four horizontal creases, yellow, browning on bottom edge, creasing in bottom left corner, slight creasing throughout and concentrated on edges, tear in centre left edge repaired with tape, tear in right edge repaired with tape, pin holes in all four corners, loss of colour see full from creasing, stain in top left, five tape pieces on condition verso, numbers written in pen on top and centre of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-03-02

2012-01403.0262

64/168

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Good Neighbor Sam

1964 Swift, David

USA

Insert

Good Neighbor Sam

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Jack Finney.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0263

74/89

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Great Gatsby

1974 Clayton, Jack

USA

Insert

The Great Gatsby

Central still of main character with a 1920's style border, four lines of credits in black text above the title in white text on a black card, eight lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Gone is the 1974 romance that was so divine." C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by F. Scott Fitzgerald.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0264

68/155

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Green Berets

Kellogg, Ray; 1968 Wayne, John

USA

Insert

The Green Berets

Tagline in black text at the top, two orange portraits above the title in black text in the centre of insert, an image of a night battle under title, six lines of credits in black at the bottom. Tagline: "The toughest fighting force on earth - and the men who led them had to be 1968 just a little bit tougher..." C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Robin Moore.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0265

67/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Kramer, 1967 Stanley

USA

Insert

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Large black & white image of a couple at the top, two small black & white portraits centred under couple, three lines of credits in blue text above the title in red 1967 text, three lines of credits at the bottom. C Central portrait of a woman, black & white image of a man accosting a woman in bottom right of main image, descriptions under image, "Carroll Baker" and title in red text under descriptors, six portraits under the title, four lines of credits in black text at the 1965 bottom. O

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Okay condition; central severe horizontal crease, slight horizontal crease in top, severe crease in top left corner, crease in top centre to centre of insert and bottom centre to centre, slight creasing throughout, two small tears in right edge, tear in top right edge, slight image see full loss from creasing, yellow, "1285" on the top left condition corner of verso, ink transfer on verso, several spots 2016-06-24 record in bottom section, smudges in top section of verso.

2016-03-02

2012-01403.0266

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Insert

Harlow

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Fair condition; two severe creases in top section, yellow, slight browning along bottom edge, creasing in centre bottom edge, stains to the see full right of title, creasing in bottom section, severe condition crease in bottom right corner, stain in top left edge, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso. 2016-03-02 Laminated. Okay condition; yellow, six horizontal creases affecting image, creasing in top and bottom section, yellow adhesive residue in bottom right edge, pin and staple holes along right and left edges, four tears in top section, tear in centre of see full bottom edge, crease in all four corners, dirt condition transfer on verso, adesive residue in bottom left of 2016-06-24 record verso, tape in top right of verso. 2016-03-02

2012-01403.0267

66/102

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Harper

1966 Smight, Jack

USA

Insert

Harper

"Paul Newman" and title in black text at the top, black & white stills in coloured rectangles, tagline in red text on the right of images, a gun points up under the 1966 images, four lines of credits in black at the bottom. O Three vertical bars: one yellow (left) and three green, three bars show trees, the fourth shows a woman's face, a red still of a man in the yellow banner, tagline in black text under image, "Alan Arkin" in green above red title under image along left edge, small green toned house in bottom right, three lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "... and from this man who could not speak or hear, the girl heard many 1968 things." C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0268

68/257

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Heart is a Lonely Hunter

Miller, Robert 1968 Ellis

USA

Insert

The Heart is a Lonely Hunter

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Carson McCullers.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Laminated. Good condition; yellow, creasing in condition bottom left corner, slight creasing in top section, 2016-06-24 record dirt marks in top left, image slightly visible on verso. 2016-03-02

2012-01403.0269

67/4

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Hotel

1967 Quine, Richard USA

Insert

Hotel

Black image of a building in top centre, caption about the adaption under building, title in blue text under caption, small black & white image of a fighting couple under and on the right of title, six squares with coloured stills under title, tagline in black text between images, five lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "You straightened out the room in broad daylight... but some things still breathed and 1967 pulsed with what had happened the night before -" C Cast and tagline in black text at the top on a yellow background, three toned images in centre, title in white text on a blue rectangle under images, caption under title, viewer warning centred under caption, three lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "Bring The Little Woman...Maybe She'll Die 1965 Laughing!"

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Arthur Hailey.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Okay condition; yellow, three horizontal creases, creasing throughout, two tears at the edges of the central crease repaired with tape, white out over yellow adhesive damage in top left edge, deposit in bottom left, creasing in bottom corners, loss of substrate in top right, small tear in top edge, pin holes and staple holes in four corners and bottom centre, tear in right edge above crease, "1068" in red in top left corner of verso, marker in bottom left corner, title in pen in bottom section, see full image slightly visible on verso, four tape pieces on condition verso, yellow adhesive residue in centre left of 2016-06-24 record verso, ink transfer on verso. 2016-03-02

2012-01403.0270

65/77

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

How to Murder Your Wife

1965 Quine, Richard USA

Insert

How to Murder Your Wife

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Fair condition; yellow, four horizontal creases, staple holes in top left corner and throughout bottom section, slight creasing see full throughout, small tear in bottom right edge, image condition visible on verso, yellow tape on bottom right and 2016-06-24 record left of verso.

2016-03-02

2012-01403.0271

65/68

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

1964 Aldrich, Robert USA

Insert

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

Central image of a woman screaming and two other smaller portraits on a black background, silhouette of a black hand with a checkerboard design in the background, cast in red text at the top on a yellow background, title in red text centred under image, bloody bouquet on the right of title, two lines of 1965 credits in red text at the bottom. C Along left edge three images of characters with quotes, a book at the top, on the right of first image a line drawing of a man hitting a woman, two lines of cast in black text above title, title in yellow text on an orange circle, six lines of cast in black text under title, card announcing "Earl Grant" and a song from the film, three lines of credits in blue text on the bottom 1959 right corner. O Central image of a man leaning above a woman sitting in a chair, colourful images of women chasing the same man on either side of chair with arrows pointing to the man, seven lines of character descriptions at the top, title in bright orange text under image, four 1967 lines of credits in black text at the bottom. C Six stills of a woman in various poses with questions on a yellow background, cast in orange text above the title in red text above credits, two lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Is your world full of finks and creeps? Wouldn't you love to put them all 1966 down? Meet your new leader, Daisy Clover." C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

From a story by Henru Farrell.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Fair condition; yellow, one horizontal crease in bottom section, dirt transfer throughout, see full creasing in bottom section, delamination in bottom condition left corner, "HSH" in pen in top centre of verso, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso, ink transfer on verso. 2016-03-02

2012-01403.0272

59/103

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Imitation of Life

1959 Sirk, Douglas

USA

Insert

Imitation of Life

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the book by Fannie Hurst.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Okay condition; slight fading, yellow, two horizontal creases, slight creasing throughout with a concentration in top section, pin holes in four corners, "59-103" and two instances of "906" see full in black china pencil in top and bottom section of condition verso, ink stains in centre of verso, dirt smudges in 2016-06-24 record top section of verso.

2016-03-02

2012-01403.0273

67/70

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

In Like Flint

Douglas, 1967 Gordon

USA

Insert

In Like Flint

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Sequel to "Our Man Flint."

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Fair condition; three horizontal creases, creasing in top left and right corners, tear in top right corner and bottom left corner, smudges in top see full section and centre right, small stains in bottom condition section, smudges in background, three tape pieces 2016-06-24 record on verso, sun damage in top left of verso. 2016-03-02

2012-01403.0274

66/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inside Daisy Clover

Mulligan, 1966 Robert

USA

Insert

Inside Daisy Clover

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Good condition; creasing in bottom section, black smudge in bottom right and left see full edge, pin holes in top corners, black smudges in condition centre, image visible on verso, stamp residue in 2016-06-24 record bottom of verso.

2016-03-02

60

2012-01403.0275

64/218

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Killers

1964 Siegal, Donald USA

Insert

The Killers

On a red background a woman stands and adjusts her dress, title in white above her head, silhouette of a man with a gun in hand on her right, a drawing of a race track at the bottom of image, four lines of credits 1964 in black text at the bottom. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the story by Ernest Hemingway.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Fair condition; yellow two horizontal creases with two small creases under the central fold line, creases through bottom section, pin holes in all four corners, punched hole in centre top, see full fingers marks in top corner, image visible on verso, condition dirt transfer on verso, two stains in centre area of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-02-18 Laminated. Good condition; yellow adhesive damage in bottom left, slight creasing in top section, small circular stain at the bottom, image see full slightly visible on verso, stamp in bottom left of condition verso "Property of Consolidated Theatre Services, 2016-06-24 record Don Mills, Ontario, Calgary, Alberta."

2012-01403.0276

76/241

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Last Tycoon

1976 Kazan, Elia

USA

Insert

The Last Tycoon

On a blue background, large black monochrome image of a man in a tuxedo, a portrait of a couple on the central man's chest, title in white under image, 1976 eight lines of credits in black text under title. Tagline in white text at the top, still of a woman looking at a sleeping man in centre, three portraits under image with character descriptions in blue text, title in red text under portraits, small still of a man kissing a woman in a grassy area on the right of title, three lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "Overnight she became a star. Over many 1968 nights she became a legend."

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by F. Scott Fitzgerald.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-18

2012-01403.0277

68/283

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Legend of Lylah Clare

1968 Aldrich, Robert USA

Insert

The Legend of Lylah Clare

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Fair condition; two horizontal creases, pin holes in all four corners, tape piece in bottom centre, two white adhesive residue spots above top see full crease, slight colour loss, smudges above bottom condition still, creasing in top left corner, smudges in bottom 2016-06-24 record section of verso. 2016-02-18

2012-01403.0278

72/366

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Life and Times of Judge Roy Bean

1972 Huston, John

USA

Insert

The Life and Times of Judge Roy Bean

2012-01403.0279

75/219

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Lucky Lady

1975 Donen, Stanley USA

Insert

Lucky Lady

"Paul Newman" in yellow text and title in red text at the top, a man sits on a bear with weapons in his hand and on the floor, a poster hangs in the back next to a noose, seven yellow toned stills under image, ten lines of credits in black text at the bottom, stamped 1972 "Amsel" on bottom left of image. C Central cartoon image of two men holding a ships wheel with a woman in yellow on the right, a battle scene in the bottom left corner of image, cast in orange text at the top, four lines of credits in orange 1975 text under image. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Okay condition; two horizontal creases with several smaller creases radiating from them, small creases throughout, loss of substrate in top left corner and bottom right corner, creasing along bottom edge, tear in top left edge, creasing in top right corner, stain in centre right edge, line of dirt in see full bottom right section, loss of image caused by condition creases, dirt imbedded in creases in verso, stains in 2016-06-24 record centre of verso, title in blue pen on verso. 2016-02-18 Laminated. Good condition; two horizontal creases, see full crease in centre left edge, pin holes in all four condition corners and right edge, crease in top left, sticker on 2016-06-24 record the left and under credits. 2016-03-02 Laminated. Okay condition; four severe horizontal creases, yellow, staple holes in top and bottom edge, black smudge in bottom right, brown stain in bottom right, creasing in bottom corners, dirt see full transfer in top right, pencil mark in centre right condition edge, smudges in bottom section, "2000" in red in 2016-06-24 record top left corner.

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0280

70/29

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

MASH

1970 Altman, Robert USA

Insert

M.A.S.H

Review in top, in centre a hand with legs makes the piece sign with an army helmet hanging on the left finger, more reviews on the left of hand, sticker with rating over image, seven lines of credits in black text 1970 at the bottom.

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Richard Hooker.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-03

2012-01403.0281

65/150

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Mirage

Dmytryk, 1965 Edward

USA

Insert

Mirage

Tagline at the top, top left image of a man holding a woman, black banner on the right, cast in yellow in centre, title in white text with an image of tunnel in the background, the image of a man stands on the right of tunnel, three lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "Run... Right into her arms... perhaps she'll lead you to your lost secret... or into the arms of 1965 peril." C Sandy background, tagline in black text at the top, central image of a boy flexing his muscles with a girl behind him, a taller older boy stands guard behind him, another boy crouches behind the group, three men lie defeated on the floor, title in red text under image, nine lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Terrorized in the toilets? Chased after school? Shaken down for your lunch money? 1980 GET A BODYGUARD!"

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Laminated. Good condition; creasing in bottom left condition corner, yellow, pin holes in top corners, smudge in 2016-06-24 record top centre edge, image visible on verso. 2016-03-02

2012-01403.0282

National Screen 800085 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

My Bodyguard

1980 Bill, Tony

USA

Insert

My Bodyguard

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0283

73/156

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Oklahoma Crude

Kramer, 1973 Stanley

USA

Insert

Oklahoma Crude

Central image of a couple with shotguns, in the background at the top a large explosion near an oil mining rig, four lines of cast above title, three lines of 1973 credits in black text at the bottom.

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Marc Norman.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Laminated. Great condition; creasing in bottom 2016-06-24 record edge, slight creasing in top section. Laminated. Great condition; slight creasing in bottom section, slight yellowing, vertical creases in centre of image, hole in centre of top section see full repaired with tape on the verso, lines in bottom condition section of verso, red stain in bottom right, deposit 2016-06-24 record in top right of verso.

2016-03-02

2016-03-02

2012-01403.0284

66/58

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Oscar

1966 Rouse, Russell USA

Insert

The Oscar

Tagline in black text at the top, ten drawn portraits in various colours under tagline, title in gold under portraits, five lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "This is the story of... the dreamers and the schemers... the hustlers and the hopefuls... the free-loaders and the phonies... the fakers and the 1966 famous... all fighting for the highest possible award!" C In a black monochrome design a man screams into something, top yellow background, title in yellow text on a black background under man, four lines of credits 1972 in black text on a yellow background at the bottom. C Amalgamated cartoon images of a rowdy party, tagline a the top, "Peter Sellers" in orange text above a fizzy champaign glass, title in pink text on the champaign glass, four lines of credits at the bottom. Tagline: "If you've ever been to a wilder party... you're 1968 under arrest." C "Jerry Lewis" and title in red text at the top, under the title six small characters control a larger man like a puppet, four lines in white text within a red rectangle at the bottom. Tagline: "Jerry's dumb-like-a-fox bellhop that some smart alecs manipulate into 1967 stardom..." C Review captions in blue text above and below an image of a decorated soldier saluting, title in red text under review, three colour stills under title, two lines of credits in red under stills, small portrait of two men on the right of red credits, three lines of credits in black text at the bottom. C Tagline in white text on a black background along the left edge, central image of a couple holding hands with designs and abstact images throughout, cast in black text under image, title in black and pink text above four lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "The deadliest of battlefield of all. You know it 1968 by a different name. Marriage." C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Richard Sale.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Poor condition; seven yellow adhesive pieces along right edge, three tape pieces on left edge, delamination of areas over tape pieces, three severe horizontal creases, bottom right corner missing, creasing in bottom left corner, slight creasing throughout, dirt smudges in top section and bottom centre, white out in bottom left edge, see full image visible on verso, dirt trasnfer on verso, condition seventeen pieces of tape or adhesive residue on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-03-02

2012-01403.0285

72/153

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Other

Mulligan, 1972 Robert

USA

Insert

The Other

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Thomas Tryon.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Laminated. Great condition; slight creasing along 2016-06-24 record edge, image slightly visible on verso.

2016-02-18

2012-01403.0286

68/143

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Party

1968 Edwards, Blake USA

Insert

The Party

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Good condition; yellow, two slight horizontal creases, creasing in bottom right corner, see full creasing in top left corner, slight creasing along left condition edge, black dots in centre left edge, '12' in pen in 2016-06-24 record top left corner of verso. 2016-03-03 Laminated. Fair condition; tear in bottom left edge, kink in centre left, loss of colour at the bottom, see full creasing in bottom section, crease in top right condition corner, smudges in each corner, red ink transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso, tape in four corners and reparing small tear. 2016-02-18 Laminated. Poor condition; yellow, loss of substrate in top right, stains in top left, pin holes in all four corners, three horizontal creases, slight creasing see full throughout, stain under title, dirt transfer on verso, condition stains in bottom section of verso, smudges in top 2016-06-24 record section of verso. 2016-03-03 Laminated. Poor condition; 6.5 inch tear in bottom left edge with taped repair on verso, yellow, delaminated strip of area above title, delaminated area in top right corner, slight creasing in top see full section, white out in bottom left corner, image condition visible on verso, black smudges in centre left edge 2016-06-24 record on verso. Laminated. Fair condition; yellow, browning along bottom edge, three horizontal creases and creases in bottom sections, pin holes and staple holes see full throughout with concentration at edges, section condition missing in bottom edge, creases causing image 2016-06-24 record edge, dirt streak in top centre. Laminated. Fair condition; three horizontal creases from original folds, crease in top and bottom left corners, loss of substrate in centre under image, small tears in right edge, creasing along bottom see full edge and top, stains in top centre, stain in bottom condition right edge, image slightly visible verso, slight ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso.

2012-01403.0287

R67/346

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Patsy

1964 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Insert

The Patsy

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in Based on factual material from Ladislas Farago's "Patton: Ordeal and Triumph" and Omar N. Bradley's "A Soldier's Story."

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0288

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Patton

Schaffner, 1970 Franklin J.

USA

Insert

Patton

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0289

68/156

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Petulia

1968 Lester, Richard USA

Insert

Petulia

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on a novel by John Haase.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-03-03

2012-01403.0290

72/198

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Play It Again, Sam

1972 Ross, Herbert

USA

Insert

Play It Again, Sam

On a yellow background, black & white still of a man in a trenchcoat with lyrics from "As Time Goes By" on the right, in bottom centre a black & white image of Allen with women on either side of him, twelve lines 1972 of title and credits in blue text at the bottom.

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the play by Woody Allen.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-18

2012-01403.0291

67/327

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Reflections in a Golden Eye

1967 Huston, John

USA

Insert

Reflections in a Golden Eye

Cast and title in red text at the top, in centre bottom a still of couple in a circle cut-out design, three lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Most women in her situation would do the very same thing! 1967 They just wouldn't do it as well - or as often!" C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Carson McCullers.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-18

61

2012-01403.0292

64/170

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Robin and the 7 Hoods

Douglas, 1964 Gordon

USA

Insert

Robin and the 7 Hoods

Cast in black text at the top with a Robin Hood hat in top left, five orange portraits under cast, tagline in red text going diagonally towards the title in black text with hand holding guns designed in the letters, red line drawings under title, five characters singing under drawing on a yellow background, four lines of credits in red text at the bottom section, small image of an album cover in bottom left corner. Tagline: "Like we've taken the Robin Hood legend and set it in Chicago's wildest era!.. Like with songs yet!.. Like 1964 WOW!" C Top caption announcing Double Feature, still of baby carriage on a hill with image of woman's profile in the background, six lines of credits in black text under image, purple line separates credits from image of two men: one slob and one neat freak in bottom left, cast and title in red text on the right of image, seven 1969 lines of credits in black text on the bottom right. C Central portrait of a cowboy with a border designed with small character portraits, guns, and scenes around it, tagline above image, two lines of cast in light brown above title in darker brown, ten lines of credits in black text in bottom centre. Tagline: "He's got to face a gunfight once more to live up to his 1976 legend once more to win just one more time."

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Okay condition; three horizontal creases, very yellow, slight dirt transfer throughout, slight creasing throughout, fold in bottom right corner, two tears in top right corner, white sticker in top right next to cast, small stains in centre right see full edge, image visible on verso, ink transfer on verso, condition adehesive residue in top centre of verso, black 2016-06-24 record finger mark in left centre of verso. 2016-03-03 Laminated. Fair condition; creasing in bottom corners, pin holes in all four corners, creasing in bottom section, stain centre left edge, rip in top right edge, missing paper in centre right edge, see full creasing in centre right, ink stain in top left of condition verso, black greasy stain in top right of verso. image 2016-06-24 record slightly visible on verso. 2016-03-02 Laminated. Fair condition; three horizontal creases, deep tear in centre left edge repaired with tape on both sides, pin holes in bottom corners and centre top, adhesive damage in bottom centre, slight see full creasing throughout, Consolidated theatre services condition stamp in bottom left corner of verso, adhesive 2016-06-24 record damage in top corners of verso. 2016-03-03 Laminated. Okay condition; two horizontal creases, pin holes in all four corners, staple holes in two right corners, creasing in top left corner, stains in bottom right corner, slight creasing in bottom section, stains in centre left edge, small dirt in top see full centre, delamination in top corners of verso, condition Consolidated Theatre Services stamp in bottom left 2016-06-24 record corner of verso. 2016-03-03

2012-01403.0293

R69/125

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Rosemary's Baby/The Odd Couple

1968 Saks, Gene

USA

Insert

Rosemary's Baby/The Odd Couple

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Double feature.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0294

76/165

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Shootist

1976 Siegal, Donald USA

Insert

The Shootist

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0295

76/145

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Silent Movie

1976 Brooks, Mel

USA

Insert

Silent Movie

Central image of a man in a shushing motion with a reel of film in the background, title in orange and yellow under man above the city of Hollywood at sunrise, two stills with cast name under image, three 1976 lines of credits in gray text under portraits.

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0296

76/220

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Silver Streak

1976 Hiller, Arthur

USA

Insert

Silver Streak

Tagline in white text at the top on a black background, in central image three characters stand in front of a train accident, title in white text on a red banner, eight lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Signature in bottom right corner of image. Tagline: "By train, by plane, by the edge of your seat - it's the 1976 most hilarious suspense ride of your life!" C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Good condition; slight creasing and wear on right and left edges, yellow adhesive see full damage on bottom left corner, stain in top right condition corner, Consolidated Theatre Services stamp in 2016-06-24 record bottom left corner of verso. Laminated. Poor condition; two severe horizontal creases, creasing throughout, vertical creases causing colour loss, yellow, yellow stain centred under image, yellow adhesive residue in bottom centre, large stain in centre right edge with a small see full stain under it, concentration of creasing along condition edges, black deposits in centre left edge of verso, 2016-06-24 record small yellow stain in bottom left edge. Laminated. Good condition; central horizontal crease, vertical crease in top left corner, slight creasing along edges, pin hole in top and bottom see full centre, small black line in credits, slight creasing in condition bottom section, sticker in bottom left, light stain 2016-06-24 record along left edge of verso.

2016-03-03

2012-01403.0297

71/124

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Summer of '42

Mulligan, 1971 Robert

USA

Insert

Summer of '42

Central image of a man standing next to a fence with a larger portrait of a woman in the background, title in white text in bottom right corner, four lines of 1971 credits in black text at the bottom.

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Herman Raucher.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-03-03

2012-01403.0298

75/264

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Sunshine Boys

1975 Ross, Herbert

USA

Insert

The Sunshine Boys

On a black background a central cartoon black and white image of two men and a woman, caption in red text above the title in yellow text with a fan under image, eleven lines of credits in red text centred under 1975 image. C Title in violet at the top on a green background, image of a woman playing with her hair with a key in her mouth in the centre, four lines of the tagline in black text in semi circles under image, four lines of credits in green text at the bottom. Tagline: "Why would a sweet girl like this give her key to a perfect stranger and invite him to spend the month of November in 1968 her pad?" C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-03-03

2012-01403.0299

68/76

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Sweet November

Miller, Robert 1968 Ellis

USA

Insert

Sweet November

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Fair condition; very slight creasing throughout, yellowing along right edge, tears repaired with tape in centre left edge, tear in see full bottom left edge repaired with tape, stain under condition and to the right of tagline, four pin holes in all four 2016-06-24 record corners.

2016-03-03

2012-01403.0300

73/21

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Thief Who Came to Dinner

1973 Yorkin, Bud

USA

Insert

The Thief Who Came to Dinner

Framed portrait of a woman hugging a seated man holding jewels and a flashlight, plaque under image says "Safecracker of the Year," title in orange-red text under image, a drawing of a man climbs the title towards a woman at the table, four lines of credits at 1973 the bottom, "Amsel" signature in portrait. C Line drawings of characters and scenes in top left and in centre right, central image of a woman's head with a bright orange and purple hat, three women dance on the head, four lines of cast in orange text above the title in light blue tex, two lines of cast under title in bottom centre, five lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Signature "B. Peak" in bottom right of the 1967 woman's head. C A ripped image of a father hugging his children at the top on a wood background, a ripped drawing with crayons and marbles in centre, title and "Gregory Peck" in white text under drawing, praise for the novel on a yellow circle under title, five lines of credits in 1962 blue text at the bottom. C Tagline in red in top centre, cast in turquoise on the right and left under tagline, title in turquoise between two black & white images of cast, colour image of couple laughing in bed in bottom centre, three lines of credits in black text under image. Tagline: "They make 1967 something wonderful out of being alive!" C Light blue still of a couple on a darker blue background, "return engagement" caption at the top, red title under Academy Awards caption, seven lines 1975 of credits in black at the bottom. C Profile of a well dressed man holding a martini on a burgundy background, title in white superimposed over man, woman's face under title, line-design border around image, seven lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Even a man who hates 1976 children and dogs has to love someone."

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Okay condition; two moderate creases in top and bottom section, severe horizontal crease along bottom edge, pin holes in all four corners, staple holes in bottom and top section, tear in bottom right edge, two tears in top right corner, stain in top section, creasing along right edge, see full adhesive residue in bottom right corner and top condition right corner, smudges on verso, three pieces of 2016-06-24 record tape on verso to fix tears, creasing in top section. 2016-02-18

2012-01403.0301

67/99

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Thoroughly Modern Millie

Hill, George 1967 Roy

USA

Insert

Thoroughly Modern Millie

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Good condition; slight yellowing with a concentration along top and bottom edges, crease in top right, hair under lamination on the right of image, creasing in top left corner, tear in top centre see full section repaired with tape on verso, small residue condition in top caption, image visible on verso, stains along 2016-06-24 record left edge of verso. 2016-03-03 Laminated. Fair condition; yellow, central horizontal crease, blue ink transfer in bottom left section, stain in top left edge, creasing in bottom see full edge, creasing in top left corner, slight creasing in condition centre, ink transfer on verso, "63-54" in china 2016-06-24 record pencil in top right corner of verso.

2012-01403.0302

63/54

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

To Kill A Mockingbird

Mulligan, 1962 Robert

USA

Insert

To Kill A Mockingbird

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Harper Lee.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-03-03

2012-01403.0303

67/158

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Two for the Road

1967 Donen, Stanley USA

Insert

Two for the Road

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Fair condition; yellow, three horizontal creases, two areas of tape residue under bottom see full crease, slight creasing throughout, small smudges condition in top section, small black stain in bottom centre 2016-06-24 record right, stain in top left corner of verso. Laminated. Good condition; three horizontal see full creases, yellow adhesive damage at the bottom of condition credits, highlighter over NSS#, pin holes in bottom 2016-06-24 record and top edges, smudges along all edges.

2016-03-03

2012-01403.0304

R75/238

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Way We Were

1973 Pollack, Sidney USA

Insert

The Way We Were

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-18

2012-01403.0305

76/65

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

W.C. Fields

1976 Hiller, Arthur

USA

Insert

W.C. Fields

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Calotta Monti with Cyrice.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Good condition; blue ink stains along the left edge, horizontal crease in centre, two large see full stains in top right and centre left of verso, stains condition along left edge of verso, stamp for "Consolidated 2016-06-24 record Theatre Services" on verso.

2016-02-18

2012-01403.0306

62/416

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?

1962 Aldrich, Robert USA

Insert

What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?

List of things to know at the top on a blue background, three coloured banners, the green and blue banners have stills of women, the title in black text on the third orange banner (right) with a broken doll's head, cast in black text under image, one line of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "Sister, sister, oh so fair, why is there blood all over your 1962 hair?" C Central image of a winking dog with a Paramount archway in the background, three portraits on a film strip under the dog, above the dog a hundred small portraits on film strips, seven lines of credits in black 1976 text at the bottom under title.

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Henry Farrell.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Okay condition; four horizontal creases, very yellow, creasing throughout bottom section, stains in left and right edge, stain in top centre edge, stain in top right edge, stain in top left edge, paper or tape in bottom centre, creasing in bottom see full right edge, image visible on verso, ink transfer on condition verso, "62416" in china pencil in bottom left corner 2016-06-24 record of verso, stain next to pencil on verso. 2016-03-03

2012-01403.0307

76/134

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Won Ton Ton, The Dog Who Saved Hollywood

Winner, 1976 Michael

USA

Insert

Won Ton Ton, The Dog Who Saved Hollywood

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full condition Laminated. Great condition; red ink stain in top 2016-06-24 record section, stamp on verso.

2016-02-18

62

2012-01403.0308

56/524

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Written on the Wind

1956 Sirk, Douglas

USA

Insert

Written on the Wind

Image of a couple kissing at the top which fades into an outdoor scene of a woman standing over a man's body, title in yellow text in the centre, five lines of cast under image, image of a man and woman on the left 1956 of cast, two lines in white text at the bottom. C Title in stone with a castle above and between Dr. Frankenstein and the Monster, image of 'Igor' pushing a cart with arms sticking out in a foggy graveyard under title, four lines of credits in white text on a 1974 black background at the bottom. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Laminated. Poor condition; severely yellow, eight horizontal creases, several tears in right and left edges fixed with tape, one large tear in left centre edge causing delamination, creasing throughout, painted repair of "S" in third line of cast, red highlighter in bottom right, stains in bottom section see full of verso, sun damage throughout verso, twelve condition pieces of tape on verso, "56-524" (x2) and "114" in 2016-06-24 record china pencil on verso. 2016-02-18

2012-01403.0309

74/249

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Young Frankenstein

1974 Brooks, Mel

USA

Insert

Young Frankenstein

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the Characters created by Mary Shelley.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Laminated. Great condition; curling, white sticker in condition bottom left corner, horizontal crease in top, finger 2016-06-24 record marks in centre of verso. 2016-03-03

2012-01403.0310

64/14

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

4 for Texas

1963 Aldrich, Robert USA

Insert

4 for Texas

"How the West was lost" in black text at the top, central red banner with eight lines of cast above the title in yellow text, small scene above cast, two men point guns at each other on either side of banner with two portraits under them, one line of credits in red 1964 text at the bottom. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; very yellow, three severe horizontal creases with slighter horizontal creases throughout (from original delivery method), slight creasing throughout, fold in top right corner, small tear in top right edge, pin holes in top and bottom edge, pen mark in right edge, "Moonlight" in blue on the see full verso, tape on bottom left edge and central right of condition verso, dirt transfer on verso, blue stain in bottom 2016-06-24 record section of verso, slight colour loss. 2016-02-22

2012-01403.0311

64/237

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The 7th Dawn

1964 Gilbert, Lewis

USA

Insert

The 7th Dawn

Tagline in red above image of characters in war gear in the jungle separating characters from the image of a burning village with the continued tagline, two lines of cast in black text above the title in black text on an orange sun design, five lines of credits at the bottom. Tagline: "A strange land sleeps like a beautiful woman so still, so mysterious, so untouched... until the first light of dawn awakens the passions of men and the 1964 furies of war!" C Central image of a battle between soldiers and natives in the desert, three black & white stills of characters with character descriptions, small still in bottom left of a couple kissing, title in black and red text under image, three lines of credits in blue text at the 1964 bottom. O On a yellow background four boxes of images and warnings to guard various personal items, "Peter Sellers" above the title in black text, "Victor Mature" under the title in black and red text, the title in a box with various legs running after the foxtail in bottom right, two lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Watch your girl! Guard your gold! Hold your 1966 jewels! ... the fox is loose!"

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel "The Durian Tree" by Michael Keon.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; very yellow, five horizontal creases, pin holes in all four corners and central edges, creasing along edges near horizontal folds, stain in bottom right, slight wear along vertical edge, small tear in top left edge, dirt transfers along surface, curling from rolling, image visible on verso, ink see full transfer on verso, stain in top centre of verso, condition stamp residue in bottom section, small creases 2016-06-24 record throughout. 2016-02-22 Okay condition; moderately yellow, curling, two horizontal creases, small tear in centre, creasing in bottom centre, significant smudges throughout top see full and bottom section, wear along top edge, punched condition hole in top centre and pin hole in bottom centre, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso, ink transfer on verso. 2016-02-22

2012-01403.0312

64/139

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

A Distant Trumpet

1964 Walsh, Raoul

USA

Insert

A Distant Trumpet

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Paul Horgan.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0313

66/354

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Caccia alla volpe

De Sica, 1966 Vittorio

USA

Insert

After the Fox

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Okay condition; yellow, three horizontal creases (from original delivery method), folding and substrate seperation in top right corner, creasing along bottom edge, slight creasing throughout top see full and bottom section, finger mark in centre, creasing condition causing colour loss, sun damage in bottom of verso, 2016-06-24 record stain in bottom centre. 2016-02-22 Poor condition; very yellow, curling, two horizontal creases, severe creasing radiating from larger horizontal creases, pin holes in all four corners, slight colour loss from creasing, blue transfer in top section, small tear in right edge under crease, see full creasing in all four corners, blue stain in title, sun condition damage in top left of verso, image visible on verso, 2016-06-24 record ink transfer on verso. 2016-02-22 see full Good condition; curling, slight wear along right condition edge, creasing in bottom section, small stain in top 2016-06-24 record left, ink transfer on the verso.

2012-01403.0314

63/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

All the Way Home

1963 Segal, Alex

USA

Insert

All the Way Home

Central image of a couple in a bed, cast names in black text under image, title in red text under cast, under and to the right of title a little boy cries, three lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "Love is not 1963 a thing that grows only in the dark -" C Cast at the top, central image of a couple in water covered in mud, title in cursive pink under image, six 1981 lines of credits in purple at the bottom.

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on a play by Tad Mosel and the novel "A Death in the Family" by James Agee.

TBLB

FRL holding room FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0315

National Screen 810059 Service Number

poster

A

N

Back Roads

1981 Ritt, Martin

USA

Insert

Back Roads

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-22

2012-01403.0316

55/46

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Battle Cry

1955 Walsh, Raoul

USA

Insert

Battle Cry

Tagline at the top extending to the right above title in red text, on the left the drawing of a book with five stills extending vertically to the bottom, line of soldiers under title, two lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "The scorchingly personal story of loves and longings when the battle is far away... Every guy, every girl, every glory, of the best-seller the 1955 nation couldn't put down!" C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Leon Uris. Lighter stock.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; yellow, curling, several tears in right edge (fixed with tape on verso), severe wear along edges, small tears in left edge, severe pin holes in top corners and centre bottom, three horizontal creases, tape residue in top centre, severe pin holes in centre, finger marks at the bottom of verso, see full stains in centre section of verso, title in pencil in condition top left and bottom section of verso, dirt stains in 2016-06-24 record top section and in right edge next to title. 2016-02-22

2012-01403.0317

60/37

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Bramble Bush

1960 Petrie, Daniel

USA

Insert

The Bramble Bush

Caption in top left, title in pink on a black background in centre, under title a couple kisses in front of trees with a town at the bottom, pink streaks on image, outline of a book behind couple, small yellow images along the right edge, two lines of cast in black text 1960 above two lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. C A man stands with a gun and one foot on a woman wearing a leopard bikini, title in yellow text in the mouth of a hippo, four lines of cast in red text on the left of hippo, cartoon lion on the bottom right saying "Bob Hope is the funniest comedian I ever ate!" two 1963 lines of credits in blue text at the bottom.

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Charles Mergendahl.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Okay condition; yellow, sun damage, creasing throughout, curling, bottom right corner substrate seperation, dirt transfer throughout, water stains in see full cast, title in red in the centre of verso, stains in condition centre right, "60-37" written in bottom left of 2016-06-24 record verso, image slightly visible on verso. 2016-02-22 Fair condition; yellow, two horizontal creases, creasing from rolling in top section, wear along bottom edge, pin holes throughout, stains in centre see full right, stains in bottom credits, image visible on condition verso, slight ink transfer on verso, "July 10-11" in 2016-06-24 record pencil in top right of verso. 2016-02-22

2012-01403.0318

63/202

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Call Me Bwana

Douglas, 1963 Gordon

USA

Insert

Call Me Bwana

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0319

National Screen 840145 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

City Heat

Benjamin, 1984 Richard

USA

Insert

City Heat

Central image of two men holding guns, a small scene between them at the bottom, triangle title in red text with gangster shootouts on either side, five lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "When a hot-shot cop and a wise-guy detective get together... 1984 the heat is one!" C Under the tagline a squinty armed man holding a Western Fidelity Bank money bag, under image of man another man runs away from a plane in a field, "Walter Matthau" and title in red text on the right of running man, seven lines of credits in black at the bottom. Tagline: "When he runs out of dumb luck, he 1973 always has genius to fall back on!" C A drawing of a blue bed on a red background, small still of man about to kiss a smiling woman, cast in blue text under still, title in black text with tumbs up and down creating the 'C's, three lines of caption in blue and one line of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "He could never stop being a critic... even on 1963 his wedding night..." C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Great condition; curling from rolling, creasing in condition bottom left corner, sun damage in top section of 2016-06-24 record verso. Poor condition; two horizontal creases with radiating creasing throughout, compromise of the substrate by the creases, colour loss from the creases, colour loss from transfer, separation of see full substrate in bottom corners, creasing in top right condition corner, dirt transfer in top and bottom sections, 2016-06-24 record title in pen on verso, creasing in top section.

2016-02-22

2012-01403.0320

73/293

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Charley Varrick

1973 Siegal, Donald USA

Insert

Charley Varrick

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel "The Looters" by John Reese.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-22

2012-01403.0321

63/12

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Critic's Choice

1963 Weis, Don

USA

Insert

Critic's Choice

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the stage play by Ira Levin.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, curling, folding in bottom left corner, rippling throughout, two slight horizontal see full creases, creasing along bottom edge, staple holes condition in top corners, finger marks in centre, image slightly 2016-06-24 record visible on verso, dirt transfer on verso. 2016-02-22

2012-01403.0322

60/247

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Crowded Sky

1960 Pevney, Joseph USA

Insert

The Crowded Sky

Tagline at the top, small image of people running for a plane under tagline and above title in blue text, along left edge seven character images and descriptions, caption in red text along right edge, lying couple kissing in the bottom right, two lines of credits in blue text. Tagline: "... the most fascinating people the gods 1960 of chance ever swept up into high adventure!" C Red background, five black & white stills of Doris Day in keyhole borders starting in top left to centre right, title in a yellow sign hanging from Day's hand, two stills of men next to last keyhole, eight lines of credits in black text under title. Tagline: "A Gorgeous Day! A Hilarious Day! A Kissable Day! A Glorious Day... and 1965 Night!" O

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Hank Searls.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; very yellow, curling, two horizontal creases, staple holes in all four corners, creasing in bottom section, smudges in bottom right corner, creasing along bottom left edge, loss of substrate in left edge, red ink stain beside the top crease, blue ink transfer in top section, black smudge next to tagline, hole punched in top centre, deposit in bottom section next to image of Keenan Wynn, "60see full 247" in pencil in bottom left corner, image slightly condition visible on verso, dirt transfer on verso, crease in 2016-06-24 record centre left. 2016-02-22

2012-01403.0323

65/365

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Do Not Disturb

1965 Levy, Ralph

USA

Insert

Do Not Disturb

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; curling, yellowing, creasing in bottom section, several tears in bottom edge with taped repair on verso, several small tears along see full right edge, loss of red background, crease in top condition left, deposit in centre left, tear in top edge, dirt 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso, image visible on verso.

2016-02-22

63

2012-01403.0324

76/147

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Drive-In

1976 Amateau, Rod USA

Insert

Drive-In

Central image of cartoon characters and images of a drive-in, tagline in white text at the top, cartoon image of a woman on the phone under image, four lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "There's nothing but action at the Drive-In, and some 1976 good stuff on the screen too!" C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; slight yellowing, curling, rippling throughout, rips and loss of paper in top centre and bottom left corner, loss of colour in centre, gummy deposit in top right corners, staple holes in bottom centre, small tear in right edge, deposits in centre section, shoe mark in centre left of verso, red ink see full transfer in bottom section, image visible on verso, condition stain in centre right edge, title in pen on verso, 2016-06-24 record stain in bottom left corner verso. 2016-02-22 Poor condition; yellow, curling, rippling in bottom section, separation of backing in both bottom corners, creasing in bottom section, vertical crease in centre, creasing along bottom right edge, tear in centre right edge, slight creasing along left edge, see full loss of colour, slight ink transfer on verso, image condition slightly visible on verso, slight sun damage in 2016-06-24 record bottom left corner of verso.

2012-01403.0325

67/211

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Flim-Flam Man

1967 Kershner, Irvin USA

Insert

The Flim-Flam Man

Black & white cartoon images on a red and orange background, title in blue under image, six lines of 1967 credits under title, a dancing silhouette next to title.

O

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Also known as "One Born Every Minute."

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-22

2012-01403.0326

National Screen 790064 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Hanover Street

1979 Hyams, Peter

USA

Insert

Hanover Street

A man in uniform caresses the face of a woman while an air battle rages around them, title in white and red text under tagline in white text, nine lines of credits in blue text on a gold background. Tagline: "It was a time of courage and honor - of passion and sacrifice. This is the story of two people swept up in that time 1979 who met - and fell in love!" C Central black & white image of Dolly with blue and red bubbles of scenes from the film, title in white text on a red circle above Dolly, four lines of credits in blue and black text at the bottom, Academy Award statue 1970 next to a song title card on the bottom right. O

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Okay condition; curling, two severe horizontal creases, two punched holes in top corners, creasing see full in top right corner, wear on right and left edges, condition slight loss of colour, creasing along top edge, stamp 2016-06-24 record on verso. 2016-02-22 Okay condition; two severe creases; large tear in centre trough top crease, creases radiating from see full horizontal creases, creasing along edges, heavy dirt condition transfer in top section, loss of colour, ink transfer 2016-06-24 record on verso. 2016-02-22

2012-01403.0327

70/11

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Hello, Dolly!

1969 Kelly, Gene

USA

Insert

Hello, Dolly!

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Written for screen by Ernest Lehman.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0328

58/339

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Home Before Dark

1958 LeRoy, Mervyn USA

Insert

Home Before Dark

Orange toned still of a woman, small black & white still on the right, title in white text on the bottom left, two lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "A pretty girl and the stunning shock that 1958 marriage brings her." O Pink background, large central image of a seated woman caressing one man's face while another looks on, six lines of cast in centre right, white title on a purple background with a gold bracelet around it, portrait of a man and woman under title, three lines 1964 of credits in blue text at the bottom.

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; very yellow, two large horizontal creases, one smaller horizontal crease, staple holes along edges, adhesive damage in top right corner, tear in bottom left corner, creasing along right edge and bottom edge, tear in top left edge, dirt transfer see full in top section, two adhesive pieces supporting large condition creases, dirt transfer on verso, sun damage along 2016-06-24 record bottom edge of verso, "58-319" in pencil on verso. 2016-02-22

2012-01403.0329

64/238

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

I'd Rather Be Rich

1964 Smight, Jack

USA

Insert

I'd Rather Be Rich

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, curling, three horizontal creases (almost folding), slight creasing in bottom see full section, finger marks in top section, slight wear condition along bottom edge, ink transfer on verso, red ink in 2016-06-24 record title.

2016-02-22

2012-01403.0330

61/185

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Last Sunset

1961 Aldrich, Robert USA

Insert

The Last Sunset

Tagline in black text at the top, two separate stills under tagline: on the left a man holds a woman, on the right a man and woman looking up, cast in white text on a sunset background, title in white text under cast, two men fight in front of sunset, one line of cast in white text under men, three lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "As powerful as both Love 1961 and Hate is the clash of these men!" C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; yellow, curling, three severe horizontal creases from orginal method of delivery, vertical creases radiating from central creases, moderate wear on right and left edge, slight creasing throughout, pin holes in four corners and right centre edge, finger mark in top right, stain under three creases on the right, tear and missing paper in right edge near the top, colour loss, small stain on the left of tagline, "61-186" in bottom left verso, long strip of tape along right edge of verso, finger marks in bottom section, brown stains see full concentrated around bottom crease along left condition edge, tape in top left edge of verso, smudges 2016-06-24 record throughout verso, black stain in top right of verso.

2016-02-23

2012-01403.0331

64/24-

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Lively Set

1964 Arnold, Jack

USA

Insert

The Lively Set

Title in red text at the top, a couple kissing in centre, on the bottom right of couple a man and woman are laughing, eight lines of cast on the left of couple, under couple a scene of a car race, five lines of credits 1964 in blue text at the bottom. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; moderately yellow, three severe horizontal creases, several other less severe horizontal creases, smaller creases throughout, large tear from bottom centre to six inches into image repaired with tape on verso, bottom right corner ripped, pin holes and adhesive residue in all four corners, two tears in right centre edge, two stains in centre of image, stain in bottom left, three see full tape pieces reparing tears, stain in centre of verso, condition dirt transfer on verso, "Harry Mtau 63 oct" in pencil 2016-06-24 record on verso. 2016-02-23 Poor condition; central horizontal crease, large tear from top to 12.75 inches in centre of image, small tears in bottom edge, several pin holes in four corners and left centre edge, several tears and creases in bottom right, dirt transfer throughout, see full stain in credits, colour fading in bottom section, condition tape repairs on verso, dirt transfer on verso, staple 2016-06-24 record holes in right centre. 2016-02-23 Poor condition; yellow, three severe horizontal creases, one inch tear in left edge, smudges in top section, tear in top right edge, slight wear along left see full edge, staple holes in right edge, image very visible condition on verso, dirt transfer on verso, tape in right edge 2016-06-24 record of verso. 2016-02-23

2012-01403.0332

69/38

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Mackenna's Gold

Thompson, J. 1969 Lee

USA

Insert

Mackenna's Gold

A line of various cowboys and Natives from back right to centre foreground, a desert and beige background, four lines of cast and title in red text, six lines of 1969 credits in black text at the bottom. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Will Henry.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0333

65/65

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Major Dundee

Peckinpah, 1965 Sam

USA

Insert

Major Dundee

Central amalgamated image of two angry men at the top with fighting scenes at the bottom, eight lines of credits in black text at the bottom, title at the top in 1965 red text with an eagle on the 'M.'

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0334

57/107

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Man Afraid

1957 Keller, Harry

USA

Insert

Man Afraid

Central blueish image of a frightened couple, in top right two men in a skeletal building, tagline in top left, cast in black text on a white title card, two lines of credits in white at the bottom, title in white and yellow text in the centre. Tagline: "The most terrifying 1957 suspense your heart has ever felt!" C Top left a woman lounges with a man behind her, top still of a woman caressing a man's face, two lines of cast under image, another still under cast with a different expression, title in red text under image, two women stand on left of image, two lines of credits in 1964 green text at the bottom. C Large central image of a couple on an elephant under tagline, the desert and an African tribe in background, three images with descriptors of main characters under elephant, two lines of cast in black text under images, title in red text under cast, two lines of credits in blue text on a yellow background. Tagline: "Joe Moses is his name... tealing Africa is his game! So how did he inherit an elephant, a blonde and a tribe of 1965 restless natives?" C Central image of a man swinging on a rope with another man hanging from his waist, ten lines of credits in blue text on a peach background in centre, three coloured stills at the bottom, title in blue text 1982 with skyline at the top.

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, bluish tint throughout insert, black stains in bottom left, slight wear along right see full edge, small tear in centre left edge, "57-106" in condition bottom right corner of verso, slight ink transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-02-23 Okay condition; very yellow, two horizontal creases, severe finger marks throughout top section, creasing in top corners, slight creasing throughout, see full stains in left edge, blue stain in centre left, rippling, condition black stain in left verso, image slightly visible on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-02-23

2012-01403.0335

64/15

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Man's Favorite Sport?

Hawks, 1964 Howard

USA

Insert

Man's Favorite Sport?

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0336

65/93

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Mister Moses

1965 Neame, Ronald USA

Insert

Mister Moses

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Max Catto.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, curling, three horizontal creases, staple holes in all four corners and top and bottom centre, colour fading, dirt transfer throughout, dirt smudges next to top crease, black see full pen mark in top left, red stains in centre right edge condition smudges in top right, creasing throughout, dirt 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso. 2016-02-26 Fair condition; curling, four horizontal creases, slight creasing throughout, pin holes in all four see full corners, crushed fibers in top right edge, holes in condition bottom right, slight image loss in bottom section, 2016-06-24 record slight dirt transfer on verso.

2012-01403.0337

National Screen 820136 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

My Favorite Year

Benjamin, 1982 Richard

USA

Insert

My Favorite Year

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-26

2012-01403.0338

59/77

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Night of the Quarter Room

1959 Haas, Hugo

USA

Insert

Night of the Quarter Moon

Top left a small image of a courtroom, large central image of a man holding someone's hands with an undressed woman looking on, title in yellow text on a red card, eight lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "I don't care what she is... she's 1959 mine!"

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; yellow, curling, two severe horizontal creases, several staple holes throughout, tear in top right with tape repair on verso, small tears in all edges, colour loss in bottom section, see full tears repared with tape on verso, image visible on condition verso, ink transfer on verso, "59-77" in china pencil 2016-06-24 record and "64-511" in pen at the bottom of verso. 2016-02-26

64

2012-01403.0339

62/151

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Notorious Landlady

1962 Quine, Richard USA

Insert

The Notorious Landlady

Tagline in a blue vertical design at the top, central image of a woman punching a man on the left, another man smiles on the right, cast in blue/orange text under image, title in white text with a blonde woman between words, she dangles a key over a line drawing of a street, four lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "Did she... or did she?!! The police think she knocked him dead... the roomer 1962 thinks it's just a rumor!" C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Reproduction, thinner paper, Based on the story by nss number Margery Sharp. written in pen. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; fading in top section, creasing see full throughout - concentrated on edges, small tear in condition bottom left edge, image visible on verso, dirt 2016-06-24 record transfer verso.

2016-02-26

2012-01403.0340

National Screen 810156 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

On Golden Pond

1981 Rydell, Mark

USA

Insert

On Golden Pond

Four mauve toned portraits at the top with the title in red text under and to the right of portraits, drawing of boat on the water under the title, eleven lines of credits in black at the bottom. Tagline: "when life is at 1981 its finest... when love is at its fullest..." C Two horizontal images of a boot camp with captions at the top, central close-up of a man in centre, tagline and "Tony Curtis" in black text on the left of image, title in yellow text on black background under image, four lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "The Story of Ira Hayes, who hit the heights at 1962 Iwo Jima." C Tagline in blue text at the top, eight lines of cast in black text on the centre left with a small portraits of characters, title in red text under cast with a still of the cast in a car, blue stills along bottom edges, two lines of credits in blue text a the bottom. Tagline: "All the 'swingers' are here... that one weekend of the year when youth busts out all over America's 1963 swankiest playground!"

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; slight yellowing, curling, vertical stains in right edge and centre (looks like it was doused in coffee), large stain in centre right edge, smaller stains throughout, tear in top right, pin see full holes in top left, crease in bottom left corner, three condition horizontal creases, slight creasing throughout, sun 2016-06-24 record damage on verso. 2016-02-26

2012-01403.0341

62/96

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Outsider

1961 Mann, Delbert USA

Insert

The Outsider

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Okay condition; yellow, curling, two punched hole in top centre, creasing throughout, slight colour loss, smudges on bottom left and in title, creasing see full in top edge, dirt transfer on verso, two horizontal condition creases, sun damage in bottom section of verso, 2016-06-24 record title in pen in top right of verso.

2016-02-26

2012-01403.0342

63/316

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Palm Springs Weekend

Taurog, 1963 Norman

USA

Insert

Palm Springs Weekend

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; yellow, curling, finger smudges in centre right, dirt in top of centre section (tape repair on verso), brown stain in right, creasing throughout, dirt transfer throughout, sun damage see full in bottom edge, crease in bottom section, tear in condition bottom right and left corners, image visible on 2016-06-24 record verso.

2016-02-26

2012-01403.0343

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Point Blank

1967 Boorman, John USA

Insert

Point Blank

Central image of a head and hand with a gun on a blue background, tagline in blue text under image, four lines of credits in blue text at the bottom, image of a woman stretched out on credits. Tagline: "There are two kinds of people in his up-tight world: his victims and his women. And sometimes you can't tell them apart." C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; curling, three horizontal creases, rectangular loss of image and substrate possibly caused by removal of tape, stains in bottom see full section, creasing in four corners, sun damage on condition verso, creasing throughout, image visible on verso, 2016-06-24 record two stains in centre left of verso.

2016-02-26

2012-01403.0344

66 337

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Poppies Are Also Flowers

Young, 1966 Terence

Canada

Insert

The Poppy is Also a Flower

Top right three boxes announce the adventure, suspense, and blazing action of the film, seven heads float around the boxes, twenty-two lines of cast in red text under the captions, line drawing of an armed woman on the left of cast, title under cast with a poppy on the right, tagline on the left and a train scene at the bottom, "Property of Consolidated and Theatre Services Limited" at the bottom. Tagline: "The story of another war more deadly... more destructive 1970 against the world wide opium conspiracy." C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Known as "Danger Grows Wild" but released in Canada as "The Poppy is Also a Flower."

Red monotone, thinner paper, secondary printer. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Okay conditon; yellow, curling, heavy stains from right centre to bottom centre, three horizontal creases, creasing in top section, slight creasing throughout, dirt transfer on verso, tape residue in see full all four corners of verso, tear in bottom edge, stain condition in bottom right corner, heavy creasing in bottom 2016-06-24 record right corner.

2016-02-29

2012-01403.0345

60/206

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Portrait in Black

Gordon, 1960 Michael

USA

Insert

Portrait in Black

Centre black vertical banner with tagline in white text, on either side of banner a woman stands, centered under tagline a man kisses the neck of a woman in a black frame, title in white text on a red background with blue design frame, four lines on credits in blue text under title, three blue toned stills under credits. Tagline: "There was a wall between them not even the 1960 shocking truth could tear down!" C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, curling, three horizontal creases, stain in bottom left corner, moderate creasing in bottom left corner, creasing in top corners, red stain in top right, dirt smudges in centre right edge, title in pencil in centre of verso, see full ink transfer on verso, stamp "Property of Theatre condition Poster Exchange, Calgary, Alberta" on verso, red 2016-06-24 record stain in top left of verso. Poor condition; very yellow, curling, rippling, three severe horizontal creases, slight sun damage in bottom section, tear in centre left edge, creasing throughout, one inch cut in bottom centre (in the technicolor credit), creasing in all four corners, see full wear along top and bottom edges, slight dirt condition transfer on verso, red finger marks in top of verso, 2016-06-24 record ink drops on centre left to bottom left of verso.

2016-02-29

2012-01403.0346

63/237

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Rampage

1963 Karlson, Phil

USA

Insert

Rampage

Along the left border stills and images from the film including battles with wild animals and hostiles, twelve lines of cast and captions in black text on the right of images, title in black text shaking design 1963 above four lines of credits in blue text at the bottom.

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-29

2012-01403.0347

61/127

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Return to Peyton Place

1961 Ferrer, José

USA

Insert

Return to Peyton Place

Image of a man and woman in top centre above the tagline in black text, line drawing of a town behind tagline with a woman standing on the road to the right, title in red text with an arrow announcing production credits on top right of title, four lines of credits in blue text, two images of couples in bottom left. Tagline: "It begins where 'Peyton Place' left off!... the day Allison returned to defend herself... against the false morality of the town that couldn't afford to 1961 let the outside world in..." C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; yellow, curling, three slight horizontal creases, heavy creasing in bottom section, small tear in right bottom edge, crease with loss of colour in bottom right, wear in bottom right corner, water damage along bottom edge (rippling), stain in bottom centre, roughened surface in bottom section, stain in credits on left edge, residue in top right area, wear along top edge, creasing along top edge, slight colour loss, title in pencil along bottom edge of verso, sun see full damage in top of verso, red line in top section, "61condition 127" in pencil and in china pencil in top and bottom 2016-06-24 record left of verso, slight creasing in centre. 2016-02-29

2012-01403.0348

61/82

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Ring of Fire

Stone, Andrew 1961 L. USA

Insert

Ring of Fire

Tagline in blue text in top left, train crash in top right, a couple stands to the left of title in red text, at the bottom a scene of a street with people trying to escape the inferno that rages in the background with smoke reaching to the top right, two lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "... minute by 1961 minute... mile... by mile the ring of fire... closed!" C Top two quotes from actors in an arrow pointing to a blurred image of a man holding a woman, six lines of praise for John Ford under couple, small silhouette of two men on the left of praise on an orange background, title in yellow text under praise, small still of a couple in bottom left of image, warning of no seating in the last 10 minutes of the film on the bottom right, four lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "You knew all along that love had 1960 nothing to do with it..." C Title in red text at the top, tagline above a colour drawing of two gladiators fighting, four lines of cast in gray under gladiators, title repeated in a sword under cast, three lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "They trained him to kill for their pleasure. . 1967 .but they trained him a little too well. . ." C Central image of a man kissing a woman with a dark forest in the background, two lines of credits in black text under image, title in red text with a smoke line through it, three colour and black & white stills with captions under title, two lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "What had the other women done with him... the young one? Could she be as 1961 fearless in her love?"

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; yellow, curling, dirt smudges along bottom edge, creasing in bottom right corner, four horizontal creases, slight creasing throughout, pin holes in top centre, red stains/smudges in top section, small coffee stain in top next to train, see full creasing in top corners, image visible on verso, ink condition transfer on verso, stamp for Calgary Poster 2016-06-24 record exchange on verso, stain in centre right of verso.

2016-02-29

2012-01403.0349

60/129

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Sergeant Rutledge

1960 Ford, John

USA

Insert

Sergeant Rutledge

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; yellow, curling, creasing throughout causing colour loss, dirt transfer throughout, rip in top left corner, creasing in all four corners, rip in centre right edge, tear in top left corner, tape repair of rips on verso, ink transfer on see full verso, "60-129" in china pencil in bottom left condition corner of verso, tape residue in centre right of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-02-29

2012-01403.0350

R67/241

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Spartacus

Kubrick, 1959 Stanley

USA

Insert

Spartacus

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Lighter stock.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; curling, wear and tear along see full bottom edge, several small tears, wear along all condition edges, sun damage along right bottom edge, image 2016-06-24 record slightly visible on verso. 2016-02-29

2012-01403.0351

61/263

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Summer and Smoke

1961 Glenville, Peter USA

Insert

Summer and Smoke

O

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the play by Tennessee Williams.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair conditon; yellow, curling, top left corner missing, creasing in top and bottom edges, creasing see full in all four corners, two small tears in top centre, condition slight creasing throughout, several tears along right 2016-06-24 record edge, rippling, ink transfer on verso. 2016-02-29 Poor condition; yellow, curling, pin holes in four corners and staple holes in top and bottom centre, two bottom corners missing substrate, rips and wear, severe wear and tear in right edge and bottom edge, odd paper deposit in top centre, see full slight dirt transfer throughout, tape repairs on condition verso, dirt transfer on verso, tear in centre of 2016-06-24 record bottom edge, "Ladner" in pencil on verso.

2012-01403.0352

61/274

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Susan Slade

1961 Daves, Delmer USA

Insert

Susan Slade

Tagline in red text at the top, black & white images of a woman and man on either side of tagline, central image of kissing couple, two lines of cast in blue text under image, title in red text under cast, small black drawings on an orange background at the bottom, three lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "She always meant to hold them off. She 1961 never could until she met the boy who understood..." O

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on novel by Doris Hume.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-29

65

2012-01403.0353

R72/113

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Ten Commandments

De Mille, Cecil 1956 B. USA

Insert

The Ten Commandments

Caption at the top, De Mille and title in red and yellow text under caption, central image of Moses with tablets above scenes from the film, the Red Sea scene in the background, three lines of credits in light blue 1972 text at the bottom. C Top central image of a couple caressing each other, eight lines of cast on the left of title in yellow text on a red rectangle, three character images on a blue line drawing of Paris, two lines of credits in blue text, yellow toned still at the bottom. Tagline: "Everywhere the nights were tender... and the dawn a thousand 1961 kisses away!" C Tagline in black text at the top, central amalgamation of cast, scenes, and objects in centre, one line of cast in pink under image, title in violet text on bottom right, two lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "The shock that shook Vegas to its foundations! The heist that challenged the syndicate 1968 boys in their own background!" C Top image focused on an eye with the face of a woman in the iris, tagline between eye and central image, title in white text on black background, tumbling head from left centre to bottom right, black & white stills under woman, one line of cast in red text, two lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Seven days and nights in a house of terror 1965 or how I lost my head over a guillotine." O Five characters on an orange balcony design, title in red text under balcony, five lines of cast in orange text on the bottom right of title, a black cat slinks down a staircase at the bottom left, two lines of credits in 1962 burgundy at the bottom. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; several horizontal creases affecting image, pin holes throughout insert, slight loss of see full colour, bottom right corner missing with tape condition replacing the corner, rippling and creasing 2016-06-24 record throughout, ink transfer on verso.

2016-02-29

2012-01403.0354

61/326

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Tender is the Night

1962 King, Henry

USA

Insert

Tender is the Night

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by F. Scott Fitzgerald.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, curling, browning along bottom edge, small tear in right edge, creasing and see full tear in left edge, creasing in bottom edge, image condition visible on verso, ink transfer on verso, finger marks 2016-06-24 record on right edge of verso.

2016-02-29

2012-01403.0355

68/275

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Las Vegas, 500 millones

1968 Isasi, Antonio

USA

Insert

They Came to Rob Las Vegas

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Andre Lay.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; yellow, two severe horizontal creases, one slight horizontal crease, creasing throughout causing loss of colour, pin holes throughout edges, crushed substrate in top right, see full slight creasing in all four corners, glossy, rippling, condition stains in top right of verso, title in pencil in top right 2016-06-24 record of verso. 2016-02-29

2012-01403.0356

65/53

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Two on a Guillotine

Conrad, 1965 William

USA

Insert

Two on a Guillotine

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, browning along edges, pin holes in all four corners, stain in bottom centre, see full slight creasing throughout, colour/substrate loss in condition bottom centre of image, ink transfer on verso, 2016-06-24 record central crease. Fair condition; slight yellowing, curling, rippling, fold in bottom right corner, tear in top right edge, see full pin hole in top centre, wear along right edge, small condition tear in right edge, slight creasing throughout, ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso, image visible on verso.

2016-02-29

2012-01403.0357

62/73

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Walk on the Wild Side

Dmytryk, 1962 Edward

USA

Insert

Walk on the Wild Side

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Nelson Algren. Thinner stock. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-02-29

2012-01403.0358

63/319

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Who's Minding the Store?

1963 Tashlin, Frank

USA

Insert

Who's Minding the Store?

"Jerry Lewis" and title in red text at the top, central image of an escalator with characters in various comedic poses, small still of couple in bottom right, 1963 four lines of credits in blue text at the bottom.

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; yellow, curling, several tears along right and left edge, several horizontal creases, pin holes in all four corners, dirt transfer in bottom section, tape residue with tape repair in bottom section, wear in bottom edge, creasing in all four corners, stain in left bottom edge, slight colour loss see full in bottom section, image visible in verso, seven condition tape repairs on verso, title and "Lewis" in pen in top 2016-06-24 record right. 2016-02-29

2012-01403.0359

57/557

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Don't Go Near the Water

Walters, 1957 Charles

USA

Insert

Don't Go Near the Water

Black & white cartoon images on a red and orange background, title in blue text under image, six lines of 1957 credits under title, a dancing silhouette next to title. O

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by William Brinkley.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Very poor fragile condition; severe creases that are causing tears and separation of substrate, severe wear along edges, holes in left, right, bottom edges, five inch tear in bottom centre edge, missing paper in bottom corners, loss of substrate in bottom right and left edges, dirt transfer throughout, paper deposit on the right of boat, pin holes in all four corners, severe wear along bottom edge, rippling see full throughout, slight water damage along edge, condition several tape repairs on verso, image visible on 2016-06-24 record verso, stains in bottom right corner of verso. 2016-03-08 Poor fragile condition; two severe creases causing loss of paper and colour, severe wear along all edges, staple holes in all four corners, heavy wear and several tears along bottom edge, yellow, browning along bottom edge, rippling possibly caused by water damage, loss of substrate in top see full left, loss of paper in bottom centre edge, tape condition repairs on verso, pen marks in bottom right of 2016-06-24 record verso, hole in centre right.

2012-01403.0360

57/253

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Man on Fire

MacDougall, 1957 Ranald

USA

Insert

Man on Fire

Three lines of credits at the top, large head of Bing Crosby in the centre, small portrait on the right of head and two on the bottom left of head, title in red text on the right of portraits, five lines of credits in 1957 blue text at the bottom.

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on story by Malvin Wald and Jack Jacobs.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2016-03-08

2012-01403.0361

58/12

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Missouri Traveller

1958 Hopper, Jerry

USA

Insert

The Missouri Traveller

Caption in black text on a red background at the top, title in the style of the Missouri flag in the centre, small image of a fight at the top left of title, on the bottom left of title a couple kissing and the bottom right a man falls into a pool, at the bottom centre the image of a horse race, six lines of cast in black text on a red title card on the right of race image, three lines 1957 of credits in black text under race image. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Very poor fragile condition; yellow, six horizontal creases, one inch by five inch loss of paper in centre right edge, severe creasing in bottom edge, several tears in vertical edges and two one inch tears in bottom edges, residue under title, loss of image, see full image visible on verso, dirt smudges in verso, tape condition repairs on verso, 58-12 in bottom left of verso, title 2016-06-24 record in marker in bottom left of verso. 2016-03-08 Poor fragile condition; yellow with browning along edges, three horizontal creases, yellow adhesive damage in all four corners, wear in bottom edge, loss of bottom corners, several tears along left edge, stain along bottom left edge, yellow adhesive damage along left edge, sun damage along right edge, tear in top right corner, creasing in top right corner, stain and smudges in top title card, see full adhesive damage on verso, stain in bottom right condition corner of verso, image visible on verso, creasing 2016-06-24 record throughout. 2016-03-08

2012-01403.0362

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

A Spy With My Face; To Trap a Spy

1965;1964

Newland, John; Medford, Don USA

Insert

A Spy With My Face; To Trap a Spy

Tagline at the top in large black and red letters with two main characters in the tagline with guns, three images of various couples below tagline, continuation of tagline in smaller blue letters under images, two rounded title cards seperated by a man and woman hanging from a bar, both cards have titles in red text and three lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: " Danger! U.N.C.L.E.s at work! America's two most amazing secret agents in the kind of undercover 1966 action that made them your favourites!?" C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0363

59/9

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

These Thousand Hills

Fleischer, 1959 Richard

USA

Insert

These Thousand Hills

Central image of a waterfall with various characters standing in front of it, two men fight at the bottom of main image, title in red text on a yellow background above green hills, five lines of credits in white text under title, two sepia toned stills from the film at the 1959 bottom. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by A.B. Guthrie, Jr.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Very poor fragile condition; yellow, two severe horizontal creases, second creases fixed with tape causing damage to image where some pieces were removed, image loss and colour loss from creases, one inch tear in right edge under bottom crease, one inch tear in top centre edge, "Virgin Witch" in pencil in centre top, wear along top edge, creasing in bottom corners, yellow with a greenish tint to the paper, small tear along left edge, loss of substrate in right edge next to top crease, pin holes and staple holes throughout edges, tape repairs on verso, image visible on verso, yellow stain in bottom see full right corner of verso, blue stain in bottom left of condition verso, "73-607" in pen in top left corner of verso, 2016-06-24 record "59-9" in china pencil in bottom left of verso. 2016-03-08

2012-01403.0364

67/275

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Valley of the Dolls

1967 Robson, Mark

USA

Insert

Valley of the Dolls

Caption about the book at the top in black text, central red, green and blue stills in the shape of a pill of women at various levels of euphoria, title in pink text in a white circle with three coloured pills in the centre, book in bottom right of image, seven lines of 1967 credits in black text at the bottom.

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Jacqueline Susann.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor fragile condition; yellow, creasing throughout, large tear in bottom right edge with white out on previous yellow adhesive damage, white out in top left corner on yellow adhesive damage from repair of tear, missing top right corner, write out in top right corner, correction of caption with marker, yellow adhesive damage along bottom edge, loss of colour, white out in bottom left edge, adhesive stain in centre right above book, wear along left edge, tape in top left corner, loss of bottom left corner, yellow adhesive damage throughout verso, rippling, loss of substrate throughout verso with a see full concentration along edges, image visible on verso, condition marker in centre of verso, slight sun damage on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-03-08

20th centuy

2012-01403.0365

64/156

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Bedtime Story

1964 Levy, Ralph

USA

Insert

Bedtime Story

Tagline and small line drawing of a bed at the top on a yellow background, two lines of cast in blue text under tagline, in the centre four women stand in the background while two men look at each other in the forground: one in a suit and the other in boxers. "Shirley Jones" in blue text between the feet of the men, title in red text curved around the cartoon of two men fighting for a woman, three lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "The funniest story 1964 ever put between covers!" C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, two horizontal creases, red stains in centre left edge, creasing and crushing of fibers along right edge, blue stain in centre left edge, creasing and rippling along bottom edge, see full slight fold in top right corner, image visible on condition verso, ink transfer on verso, stain in bottom centre 2016-06-24 record of verso.

2016-03-08

66

2012-01403.0366

67/257

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Berserk

1967 O'Connelly, Jim USA

Insert

Berserk

Three lines of cast at the top in gray text, three vertical stills in centre: left a blue still of an angry couple, central orange still of a woman screaming, right green still of a man screaming, "Joan Crawford" in blue text above the title in purple marker design, 1967 three lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline in black text at the top on an orange background, several black & white stills of characters and fights from the film in the centre with the firery destruction of an oil drill in the background, title in black text under image, small image of a man in front of oil drills, two lines of credits in red text at the bottom. Tagline: "The epic emotions that spawned the deadliest oil empire of them all! 'Black gold!' The precious oil that boiled in the steaming core of the earth - and challenged men and women to come and 1962 get it!"

C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; slight yellowing at edges, two severe creases that cause loss of colour, loss of integrity of paper, and rip in left edge, creasing in bottom centre, centre crease, slight creasing throughout, creasing in four corners, missing bottom right corner, loss of substrate in bottom see full left corner and top centre, horizontal crease in top condition area, loss of colour because of creasing, stains in 2016-06-24 record top right, stain in bottom left.

2016-03-08

2012-01403.0367

62/257

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Black Gold

Martinson, 1962 Leslie H.

USA

Insert

Black Gold

O

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on a story by Harry Whittington.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

see full Good condtion; two horizontal creases, yellow, pin condition hole in top centre, slight creasing in bottom corner, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso. 2016-03-08 Poor condition; heavy creasing throughout causing colour loss, adhesive residue on the right of title, creasing in bottom four corners, stains in top right, residue in top right of image, small tears along right see full edge, stains in top left of verso, residue in all four condition corners of verso, stamp in bottom centre of verso, 2016-06-24 record image slightly visible on verso. 2016-03-08 Okay conditon; two horizontal creases, yellow, creasing throughout, loss of bottom corners, tape pieces in top right corner, top centre, and left edge, tape backing in bottom right corner, loss of colour from creasing, adhesive damage in bottom centre see full edge, 1.5 inch tear in top centre, wear and tear in condition all four edges, adhesive damage in the verso, ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso. 2016-03-08

2012-01403.0368

National Screen 790105 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Breaking Away

1979 Yates, Peter

USA

Insert

Breaking Away

Tagline in white text at the top, four black & white stills of men sitting on grass in the centre, title in white block letters under stills, seven lines of credits in white text at the bottom. Tagline: "The movie that tells you exactly what you can do with your high 1979 school diploma!" O Vertical orange banner from top to bottom, central purple still of Steve McQueen leaning to the left, "Steve McQueen" and title in black text above image, small image of McQueen in centre right, two stills in bottom right of image, four lines of credits in black text at the bottom, tagline in orange text on the centre left of image. Tagline: "There are bad cops and 1968 there are good cops - and then there's Bullit." C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0369

68/11

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Bullitt

1968 Yates, Peter

USA

Insert

Bullitt

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel "Mute Witness" by Robert L. Pike.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0370

R68/161

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Carpetbaggers; Nevada Smith

1964;1966

Dmytryk, Edward; Hathaway, Henry

USA

Insert

The Carpetbaggers; Nevada Smith

Title and four lines of cast in black text at the top, caption in yellow text on a black banner above the image of a woman hitting a man's face in centre left, thirteen short lines of credits in black text on the right of image, orange banner announcing double bill in centre separating first image from a second image, six lines of cast in black text below and to the right of orange banner, shirtless man holding a shot gun on the left of bottom title in black text, amalgamation of green stills at the bottom of image, three lines of 1968 credits in black text at the bottom. C Caption in top left about the Kinsey Report in red text, another caption about the novel in yellow text on a green background, four images of women from top right to bottom left curving around title in black text in the left centre of image, age restriction in white text in bottom right of image, three lines of credits in 1962 blue text at the bottom. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel "The Carpetbaggers" by Harold Robbins.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Okay condition; yellow, three horizontal creases, slight creasing throughout, small tears along top edge, wear and crushed substrate along bottom edge, yellow tape piece in bottom left corner, small tears in bottom right corner, slight wear along right edge, creasing in top left corner, slight loss of colour due to creasing and abraisions, tape repairs see full on verso, yellow adhesive damage at the bottom of condition verso, image slightly visible on verso, circular stain 2016-06-24 record in centre of verso, smudge in top of verso. 2016-03-08

2012-01403.0371

62/229

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Chapman Report

1962 Cukor, George USA

Insert

The Chapman Report

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Irving Wallace.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good conditon; yellow, blue pen marks centred see full above image, slight creasing in top left, creasing in condition bottom corners, rippling in top section, image 2016-06-24 record slightly visible on verso, slight ink transfer on verso. 2016-03-08

2012-01403.0372

64/339

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Cheyenne Autumn

1964 Ford, John

USA

Insert

Cheyenne Autumn

Caption in red text at the top on an orange background, drawn sihouette image of a Native fighting with another man, black border around image with five portraits on either side of central image, title in red text under image, seven lines of credits in black 1964 text at the bottom. C Iconic drawn image of a woman's face at the top, on the left of the title a green image of a man smoking with the smoke creating the hair of the woman above, title in red text in centre right of man, waves on the right of man, three lines of credits and cast in white text above the repeated title in red text on a black background, five lines of credits in white text at the 1974 bottom. C Tagline in green text at the top, two lines of cast in yellow text under tagline, five vertical images of characters with scenes at the bottom of rectangular stills, title in yellow text in centre, night beach scene in the background, four lines of credits in blue text on the bottom left, blue banner at the bottom. Tagline: 1963 "The giant story of modern Hawaii!' C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, two horizontal creases, creasing in bottom corners, fold in top left corner, stain in centre left, creasing in top right corner,fingermarks in centre of image, slight creasing in top section, staple holes in bottom corners, dirt smudges in top section, title in black marker in bottom centre of verso, title in pen in top see full centre of verso, image visible on verso, yellow condition adhesive residue in bottom corners of verso, ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso, pen mark in centre of verso. 2016-03-08

2012-01403.0373

74/205

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Chinatown

Polanski, 1974 Roman

USA

Insert

Chinatown

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; eight severe horizontal creases, slight yellowing, creasing throughout, colour loss caused by creasing, staple holes along edges, creasing in bottom corners, wear along right edge, see full stain in top right edge, pin holes throughout centre condition from top to bottom, stains in top section, ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso. 2016-03-08

2012-01403.0374

63/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Diamond Head

1963 Green, Guy

USA

Insert

Diamond Head

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Peter Gilman.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; slight creasing throughout, creasing in corners, creasing along bottom corner, rippling in bottom section, smudges in bottom see full right, small tear in centre left edge, creasing along condition vertical edges, image visible on verso, yellow tape 2016-06-24 record residue in top right of verso.

2016-03-08

2012-01403.0375

69/374

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Don't Drink the Water

Morris, 1969 Howard

USA

Insert

Don't Drink the Water

Tagline in white text on a red rectangle at the top, three banners of amalgamated black & white stills under tagline, three hands extend from banners with gun designs pointing to caricatures of a couple and two other characters, two lines of cast and title in red text under image, three lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "They're caught in a security leak! A flood of laughs, with hot and cold running 1969 spies, and a drip from the embassy!" O One line of cast in red text in top right, portrait of a man and woman in top right under cast, central image of someone accosting a woman in a green dress and covering her mouth with a gloved hand, tagline in white text on the centre left, close up of the woman's face with a figure behind her covering her mouth centred under main image, small image of a frightened woman on the bottom left, title in yellow text under image, two lines of credits in red and blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "thrust... trapped... 1962 forced into terror beyond belief..." C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the play by Woody Allen.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; yellow, slight creasing throughout, slight dirt transfer, slight loss of colour at the top and in title from creases, five horizontal creases, slight creasing in all four corners, pin holes in top see full centre, small hole in bottom above title, creasing in condition top and bottom right corner, wear in top centre 2016-06-24 record edge, image slightly visible on verso. 2016-03-08

2012-01403.0376

62/224

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Experiment in Terror

1962 Edwards, Blake USA

Insert

Experiment in Terror

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel Lighter stock, "Operation Terror" by possibly a Mildred Gordon. reproduction. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Okay condition; two horizontal creases, slight yellowing, creasing in top left corner, creasing along bottom edge, two small tears in left edge, two small tears in top right, creasing in bottom right edge, smudges in centre right, slight image loss from see full creasing, punched hole in top centre., ink transfer condition on verso, "Terror" in pen in bottom left of verso, 2016-06-24 record small stains in top left. 2016-03-08

2012-01403.0377

58/14

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Flood Tide

Biberman, 1958 Abner

USA

Insert

Flood Tide

Tagline in black text at the top, central image of a man grabbing a woman's arm, small round portrait of a woman in bottom left of the couple, title in white text in a wavy design with a swimming couple between the two words of the title, three lines of cast in black and red text under image on a yellow background, one line of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Theirs was a love that lived in fear... of a boy with a twisted 1958 hate!" C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Also known as "Above All Things."

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; very yellow, black deposit in centre of image, two horizontal creases, marker dots on the left of top crease, staple holes along vertical edges, sun damage along bottom edge, creasing in bottom left corner, slight creasing along top edge, two small tears in top right and left, tear in bottom see full right edge, slight creasing in centre edge, stains in condition top left corner of verso, "58-14" in china pencil in 2016-06-24 record top right of verso, image visible on verso.

2016-03-08

2012-01403.0378

61/16

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Gold of the Seven Saints

Douglas, 1961 Gordon

USA

Insert

Gold of the Seven Saints

Tagline at the top in black text, central image of two cowboys looking through a cave hole, cast in white text at the bottom of image, title in black text centred under image, small images of characters from left to right under title, two lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "Seven saints guarding the secret of a thousand years! Seven saints opening the gates to hell for a promise of treasure beyond belief... 1961 adventure beyond compare!" C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; two horizontal creases, yellow, creasing along bottom edge, creasing in top section, creasing in top and bottom right corner, see full creasing and folding in bottom left corner, wear condition along bottom edge, image visible on verso, "16-61" 2016-06-24 record in bottom centre of verso.

2016-03-08

67

2012-01403.0379

61/40

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Great Imposter

Mulligan, 1961 Robert

USA

Insert

The Great Imposter

Tagline at the top in black text, small man standing on the left of tagline, central image of couple with the man facing the viewer, title in white text on a red book, three image of the same man in different outfits on the right of book, five lines of cast in black text under book, three lines of credits in blue text at the bottom on a yellow background. Tagline: "The true life 1961 story of his escapades makes fiction seem tame!" C Pink background, caption in white text at the top, title in a lighted marquee design, tagline in white and black text below and to the left of title, central image of a blond made-up woman, small line drawing of a woman in bottom left of main woman, repeated title in pink on the left under image, nine lines of credits in gray text at the bottom. Tagline: "The flame that still burns! --The exciting intimate story of America's controversial sex symbol revealed on the screen for 1965 the first time!" C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Michael Crichton.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; yellow, browning in top section, five horizontal creases, yellow adhesive residue damage in all four corners, punched hole in top centre, creasing in bottom left corner, stain in bottom right corner, blue stains in centre right edge, black smudge in centre of verso, yellow see full adhesive damage in four corners of verso, "61-40" condition in china pencil in both right corners and bottom left 2016-06-24 record corner of verso. 2016-03-08

2012-01403.0380

65/189

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Harlow

1965 Segal, Alex

USA

Insert

Harlow

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Good condition; yellow, slight browning along bottom edge, folded top left corner, slight curling, see full slight creasing in bottom corners, pencil in centre condition right edge, image visible on verso, slight ink transfer 2016-06-24 record in top of verso. 2016-03-08 Fair condition; yellow, two horizontal creases, creasing in top corners, wear along bottom edge with small tear in bottom right, creasing in bottom right edge, slight sun damage in bottom right see full corner, image visible on verso, horizontal creasing condition in bottom section, creasing in top section, "258-60" 2016-06-24 record in china pencil in the bottom centre of verso. 2016-03-08 Fair condition; two horizontal creases, creasing along bottom edge, slight creasing throughout, staple holes in top corners and centre along vertical see full edges, slight yellowing, slight wear along right edge, condition creasing in bottom edge, stain in centre right, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso, ink transfer on verso. 2016-03-08

2012-01403.0381

60-258

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

High Time

1960 Edwards, Blake USA

Insert

High Time

Caption at the top in red text on a yellow and blue frame, under caption: cast names with centred portaits, character images, and character descriptions above the title in red text, two lines of credits in blue 1960 text at the bottom. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on a story by Garson Kanin.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0382

62/352

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Interns

1962 Swift, David

USA

Insert

The Interns

Central image of a large party, caption about the film and book in white text at the top, title in yellow text in the centre, image of four men and one woman under title, seven lines of credits in blue text in line boxes at 1962 the bottom. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Lighter stock, possibly a reproduction, Based on the novel by NSS number Richard Frede. in pen. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

2012-01403.0383

65/248

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Ipcress File

1965 Furie, Sidney J. USA

Insert

The Ipcress File

Reviews in black text at the top, purple and yellow abstract portrait under review, image of an ornate gun in centre left, title in red text in a stamped design in the centre, green line drawings of scenes in bottom right, seventeen short lines of credits in black text in 1965 bottom left corner. C Tagline in pink text at the top, three black & white stills on a colourful background with character descriptions in the centre, six lines of cast in purple text under images, title in white text on a pair of lips, three lines of credits in purple at the bottom. Tagline: 1965 "It happened in Climax, Nevada." O

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Len Deighton.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Poor condition; yellow, five horizontal creases, smudges in bottom section, black stain in bottom left edge, severe creases and small tears along left edge, creasing in bottom left corner, creasing in top right corner, pin holes in all four corners, two half inch tears in left edge, five tears in right edge, small tears along bottom edge, creasing in central see full section, abraison in top section, creasing in bottom condition left corner,five tape repairs on verso, image visible 2016-06-24 record on verso, ink transfer on verso. 2016-03-08

2012-01403.0384

65/4

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Kiss Me, Stupid

1964 Wilder, Billy

USA

Insert

Kiss Me, Stupid

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF67

Fair condition; two horizontal creases, yellow, see full creasing in bottom edge, stain in centre left edge, condition dirt smudges along left edge, image visible on 2016-06-24 record verso, sun damage in bottom edge.

2016-03-08

2012-01403.0385

59/198

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Last Angry Man

1959 Mann, Daniel

USA

Insert

The Last Angry Man

Yellow background, tagline in black text at the top, in centre the line drawing of a man standing on the left of the portrait of anothe man, a woman lies at the feet of the man, a book on the right of the woman, two lines of cast in black text under image, title in red text under cast, three lines of credits in blue text at 1959 the bottom. Tagline: "No other man could play it!" C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Gerald Green.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; yellow, two horizontal creases, one inch tear in left edge repaired with tape on the verso, yellow adhesive residue in top centre, smudges in bottom section, staples holes along vertical edges and in top and bottom centre, creasing in top two corners, slight creasing in bottom left corner, stain in bottom right corner, stain in right edge above first edge, image visible on see full verso, smudges in bottom centre of verso, "72condition 224" in pencil in top left of verso, "59-198" in china 2016-06-24 record pencil in bottom left corner of verso. 2016-03-07 Okay condtion; blue tone throughout, rippling throughout (possible water damage), slight creasing throughout, smudges in top section, yellow tape residue in bottom left, staple holes in top right and bottom right corner, NSS number crossed out with "63-136" written next to it, red stain on the right of men in bottom section, hole on the left of men in bottom, several tear in right bottom edge, image slightly visible on verso, see full smudges in china pencil in bottom left of verso, "63condition 136" in china pencil in top right, ink transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-03-07

2012-01403.0386

59/141; 63/136

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Last Train from Gun Hill

1959 Sturges, John

USA

Insert

The Last Train from Gun Hill

Two lines of cast in red text at the top on a yellow background, title in red text under cast, two black and white drawn images of cowboys on either side of a scene of a cowboy and a woman in a rocky area, one line of credits in white text at the bottom of the image, colour still of one man holding a shotgun to 1959 the chin of another man at the bottom. C Tagline in white text at the top, blue toned image of Kirk Douglas in top right, scene of a man shooting at a helicopter in left centre, "Kirk Douglas" in black text under image, title in white text on a red rectangle on the right of the black & white image of a couple hugging, four lines of credits in white text on a black background at the bottom. Tagline: "Life can never 1962 cage a man like this!" O

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2012-01403.0387

62/256

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Lonely Are the Brave

1962 Miller, David

USA

Insert

Lonely Are the Brave

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Edward Abbey.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; yellow, two horizontal creasing, three tape pieces in bottom corners, slight creasing throughout, tape in top two corners, creasing in top right corner, creasing in bottom right corner, see full creasing in bottom left corner, creasing along left condition edge, tape in all four corners on verso, ink transfer 2016-06-24 record on verso, image visible on verso. 2016-03-07 Fair condition; curling from being rolled, brown stains (mould?) radiating from left bottom edge to centre and towards bottom edge, small creases in top section, yellow residue at the bottom of credits, creasing in bottom and top right corners, sun see full damage in top section of verso, slight yellowing, condition stamp in top right corner of verso, smudges in top 2016-06-24 record centre area of verso. 2016-03-07 Poor condition; three horizontal creases, stains along left edges in downward dripping motion, pin holes along vertical edges and in top and bottom centre, loss of substrate in top right corner and in top left, hole in centre under title with stain, wear along left edge, stain in bottom edge, creasing in see full bottom left edge, wear along right edge, creasing in condition top section, dirt smudges in top section of verso, 2016-06-24 record tape repair on verso. 2016-03-07 Fair condition; creasing in right edge, slight creasing in top left corner, small tear in bottom left corner, see full creasing in bottom section, small tears in top right condition edge, wear in bottom left corner, creasing in top 2016-06-24 record section, image slightly visible on verso. 2016-03-07

2012-01403.0388

National Screen 780117 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Magic

Attenborough, 1978 Richard USA

Insert

Magic

Central image if a ventriloquist's dummy's head, tagline in white text on a black background at the top, title in white text centred under image on a blue background, nine lines of credits in black text at the 1978 bottom. Tagline: "A terrifying love story." C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2012-01403.0389

69/302

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Mosquito Squadron

1969 Sagal, Boris

USA

Insert

Mosquito Squadron

2012-01403.0390

R67/261

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Murderer's Row; The Silencers

Levin, Henry; 1966 Karlson, Phil

USA

Insert

Murderer's Row; The Silencers

Tagline in red text with a light blue title at the top on a yellow background, large central image of an air attack on a large country home, four lines of credits in green text at the bottom. Tagline: "A bombing raid! A prison break! Each impossible... The Mosquito 1969 Squadron did both!" C Titles in black text at the top with caption in yellow above a mirrored image of a man smiling and pointing a gun in the air, several small drawings of women and a man under main image, two boxes with cast, credits, and titles in red, black, and blue text at the 1967 bottom. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2012-01403.0391

66/14

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Our Man Flint

1966 Mann, Daniel

USA

Insert

Our Man Flint

Title in yellow text with a lighter design as the 'T' on a green speech bubble spoken by a woman with an obscured face, a man in a tuxedo sits on a chair in the centre on the left of the woman, two other women stand on the left of man, a heavy made-up eye in the background in centre, a line drawing of a gun on the left of image, a line drawing of a fight on the right, five lines of credits in blue and black text on the bottom 1966 left outside the red border. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition; yellow, eight horizontal creases, wear along left edge, smudge in top centre, pin see full holes in bottom right, hole in credits, hole in top condition left, creasing under the image on the right of 2016-06-24 record credits, pin in top right, image visible on verso.

2016-03-07

2012-01403.0392

R66/189

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Pink Panther; A Shot in the Dark 1962; 1964

Edwards, Blake USA

Insert

The Pink Panther; A Shot in the Dark

Caption at the top in the Pink Panther's speech bubble, in top left a caricature style image of Sellers playing the violin in bed with a woman while two men peek out of the bed looking at a woman on a tiger rug, in bottom right of image a still of a man and woman screaming on a pink background, in bottom centre the mirrored image of a detective looking for clues, ten lines of credits and one title card in bottom left, nine 1966 lines of credits and a title card in bottom right. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; horizontal crease at the top, slight creasing in centre left, creasing in bottom left see full corner, creasing along bottom edge, tear in bottom condition right corner, black smudge in top left, smudges on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-03-07

68

2012-01403.0393

62/11

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Pocketful of Miracles

1961 Capra, Frank

USA

Insert

Pocketful of Miracles

Three character images at the top, two lines of cast in blue text in the centre, title in yellow text on a red apple, images of characters and parties on the right and left of apple, five lines of credits in blue text at the 1962 bottom. C Caption and "Paul Newman" in black text at the top, three image separated by white borders: on the left a man puts his jacket on, central image of a man caressing a woman, a third man (in bottom right) running from a car, the title in a red curved design under image with the small image of a man falling, a book, and a small drawing on the right of credits, four 1963 lines of credits in black and blue text at the bottom. C Yellow background, tagline in black text in top left, line drawings of cowboys on horsback framing the title in black text in the centre, six individual character action images under title, repeated title in red text on a yellow box under black line, one line of cast in black text under title, three lines of credits in blue at the bottom. Tagline: "They were the THUNDERING 1964 TORNADO on horseback..." C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition; yellow, five horizontal creases, smudges in bottom section, black stain in bottom left edge, severe creases and small tears along left edge, creasing in bottom left corner, creasing in top right corner, creasing and small tear in centre and see full bottom right edge, wear in bottom left edge, tape condition repairs of tears on verso, dirt smudges throughout 2016-06-24 record verso, image visible on verso. 2016-03-07

2012-01403.0394

63/318

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Prize

1963 Robson, Mark

USA

Insert

The Prize

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Irving Wallace.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition; yellow, browning along top edge and on bottom edge, two severe horizontal creases, staple holes along all edges, small tears along vertical edges, creasing in all four edges, slight see full creasing in centre section, slight colour loss from condition creasing, image visible on verso, smudges in bottom 2016-06-24 record edge, "71-838" in pen in bottom right corner. 2016-03-07

2012-01403.0395

64/28

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Raiders

Selander, 1964 Leslie

USA

Insert

The Raiders

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; yellow, four horizontal creases, slight creasing throughout centre section, white see full stain in top left, creasing in bottom section, yellow condition tape residue in right and left edge at the bottom, 2016-06-24 record image slightly visible on verso, ink transfer on verso. 2016-03-07

2012-01403.0396

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Sailor Who Fell From Grace Into The Sea

Carlino, Lewis 1976 John

USA

Insert

The Sailor Who Fell From Grace Into The Sea

Title in white text on a green-blue background, central blue silhouette of a man in a sailor's uniform with a white silhouette of a woman over him, title in black text between and to the left of silhouettes, caption about seating in red rectangle under title, seven lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "He gave his soul to the sea and his heart to a woman. Their love will arouse you. The story will disturb you. 1976 The ending will startle you." C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Yukio Mishima.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition; top five inches folded into image, twelve horizontal creases creating colour loss, slight creasing throughout, wear and small tears along vertical edges, pin holes in top corners and bottom centre, stain in left edge, large stain in top left edge, separation of paper substrates in centre right edge, separation of paper in bottom right corner, see full slight yellowing, title and "N. Main" in pencil in top condition left of verso, title in pen in top centre of verso, stain 2016-06-24 record in centre right of verso. 2016-03-07 Okay condition; yellow, two horizontal severe horizontal creases, slight creasing in centre, pin holes along edges and the centre of top and bottom edges, creasing along bottom edges, slight creasing throughout, yellow stain in bottom left, brown stain in centre left, creasing along right edge, stains in top right corner, image visible on see full verso, yellow residue in bottom centre edge of condition verso, title in blue in top right corner of verso, ink 2016-06-24 record trasnfer on verso.

2012-01403.0397

64/294

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Send Me No Flowers

Jewison, 1964 Norman

USA

Insert

Send Me No Flowers

Three lines of cast in black text with colour accent in top section, central woman winking and hugging a man while her hand rests on another man's head, two small dancing couples next to bottom man, title in different colours under image, five lines of credits in 1964 blue text at the bottom. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the play by Norman Barasch and Carroll Moore.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-07

2012-01403.0398

57/457

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Short Cut to Hell

1957 Cagney, James USA

Insert

Short Cut to Hell

Title in yellow text on a red background in the top left, central yellow image of a man pointing a gun at a woman's face, another man gets shot by cops under central image, five lines of credits in black text on the right of injured man, green still from the film at the 1957 bottom. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition; two severe horizontal creases, loss of substrate in top corners, loss of substrate in centre of green still, staple holes in vertical edges, loss of substrate along top crease, yellow, rip in centre left edge, loss of substrate in bottom left corner, small tears along right edge, loss of paper in bottom right, creasing and tears along bottom edge, stain in bottom right corner, rip in bottom right corner, small tear in centre left edge, creasing in top corners, three tape pieces on verso, image see full visible on verso, "57-457" in china pencil in top condition right of verso, "71-347" in bottom right of verso, 2016-06-24 record ink stain in top centre. 2016-03-07

2012-01403.0399

57/128

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Spring Reunion

1957 Pirosh, Robert USA

Insert

Spring Reunion

Tagline at the top on a yellow background, central image of a woman with her hands on her head while a couples kisses in the background, two lines of cast in black text above title in green text, three lines of credits in green text at the bottom. Tagline: "She hungered for a man of her own! And now she was in his arms... this time she couldn't afford to let love 1957 pass her by!" C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair conditon; yellow, two horizontal creases, staple holes along all edges, loss of substrate in top edge and bottom edge, slight browning in top and bottom edge, yellow adhesive residue in bottom centre, creasing in bottom corners, ripped bottom see full right corner, wear along right edge, sun damage on condition verso, "57-128" in blue in top left on verso, stamp 2016-06-24 record in bottom right of verso with stamp "71-251." 2016-03-07

2012-01403.0400

66/32

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Stagecoach

Douglas, 1966 Gordon

USA

Insert

Stagecoach

Seven portraits along top and right edge, blue tagline on the left of portraits, title in red text in centre, the image of a stagecoach attacked by Natives in the background of title, six lines of credits in black text in bottom centre, three portraits on the right of credits. Tagline: "The classic adventure of the ten who rode to greatness on the stagecoach to Cheyenne..." Norman 1966 Rockwell stamp under stagecoach image. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on a story by Ernest Haycox.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition; three severe horizontal creases, slight yellowing with a concentration along bottom edge, staple holes in all four corners, yellow residue and loss of substrate in centre left edge, small tear in bottom left area, stain in centre right edge, dirt smudges in top section, brown stains in centre top edge, one inch tear in right edge, loss of substrate in centre right above title, creasing in centre, small tears along right edge and bottom edge, stain in centre of verso, tape repair in top left of verso, yellow adesive residue in right edge of verso, image see full visible on verso, ink transfer on verso, stain in condition bottom centre of verso, stains in top centre of 2016-06-24 record verso, stain in bottom left of verso. 2016-03-07

2012-01403.0401

53/42

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Stop You're Killing Me

1953 del Ruth, Roy

USA

Insert

Stop You're Killing Me

Caption in top with a small image of a woman wrestling with a man, tagline in yellow text on a red banner above cast (in black text), title in red text in centre, under title a man carries a woman who shoots a cartoon gun that creates a dotted line around title, black line drawn cartoons on either side of the couple on a blue background, red dot border, cast in red text under image, two lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "Muggs, molls and Ho-Ho1953 Homicide!" C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the play by Damon Runyon and Howard Lindsay.

Thinner stock. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition; yellow, pink staining throughout, staple holes throughout edges, three horizontal creases with small tears around creases, loss of substrate in top left corner and on the right edge near tagline, creasing in all four edges, slight dirt transfer in top section, bleedthrough of marker, adhesive damage in top centre edge, tears along top edge, creasing and tear in bottom left corner, crushed and ripped fiber in top right corner, tears in right edge repaired with tape, tear in bottom left see full above crease, five pieces of tape repairs on verso, condition "Secret Seven" in marker on verso, "35-45" in left 2016-06-24 record corner of verso, image visible on verso. 2016-03-07 Fair condition; yellow, three horizontal creases, pin holes in top two corners and bottom centre, small hole above portraits, creasing along right edge, two small tears in right edge, creasing in top and bottom left corners, smudges in bottom centre, slight creasing throughout, slight loss of colour because of creases, red stamps in all three sections see full of verso, "Uanc" in pencil in centre of verso, "60condition 193" in bottom left corner of verso, ink transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-03-07

2012-01403.0402

60/193

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Strangers When We Meet

1960 Quine, Richard USA

Insert

Strangers When We Meet

Top image of a couple, tagline in white text in bottom right of image, four lines of cast in red text under image, title in black text under cast, the black and white drawing of a couple centred under title, four small portraits in bottom left corner, six lines of credits in blue text in bottom centre. Tagline: 1960 "Someone else's husband and someone else's wife!" C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Evan Hunter.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2012-01403.0403

62/98

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Sweet Bird of Youth

Brooks, 1962 Richard

USA

Insert

Sweet Bird of Youth

Orange background, tagline in red sandpaper design at the top, single image of a man on a chair in centre, two lines of cast in red under man, title in black painted design in bottom right above a line drawing of scenes from the film, three lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "He used love like most 1962 men use money." C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the play by Tennessee Williams.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; yellow, large creasing in bottom left corner, creasing along bottom edge, staple holes in top corners, red transfer along left edge, tear in centre bottom edge, tear in bottom right corner, see full small tears along bottom right edge, black lines condition along bottom right edge, small hole in centre left, 2016-06-24 record ink transfer on verso, creasing in right edge. Fair condition; tear in top left corner, three slight horizontal creases, 3.5 inch tear in top right edge, small tears in centre right edge, black smudges in centre top, black stains in left and right edge of bottom crease, small tears in bottom edge, creasing in bottom corners, yellow marker in left see full edge, creasing in centre, tape repair in verso of condition large tear, image slightly visible on verso, slight 2016-06-24 record creasing in bottom section.

2016-03-07

2012-01403.0404

R67/85

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

That Touch of Mink; To Kill a Mockingbird

Mann, Delbert; Mulligan, 1962 Robert USA

Insert

That Touch of Mink; To Kill a Mockingbird

Top image of a man kissing the neck of a woman, caption in white text at the top, title in red text under a line of cast in white text, four lines of credits in blue text under title, two black lines with a caption in red text in centre, bottom section: image of a ripped photograph of a family in top right, ripped drawing on either side of title in yellow text, cast in yellow text, 1967 four lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-07

69

2012-01403.0405

62/431

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Two for the Seesaw

1962 Wise, Robert

USA

Insert

Two for the Seesaw

Central grey image of a couple in centre, on an orange and pink brackground divided into four sections, tagline in white text on the right, left, and below the couple, line drawings in centre on an orange background, two lines of cast and title in black text under image, four lines of credits in red text at the bottom. Tagline: "A square from Nebraska? An offbeatnik from Greenwich Village? It just didn't figure... 1962 that they would... that they could... that they did!" C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the stage play by William Gibson.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition; yellow, six horizontal creases, colour loss by creases, slight creasing throughout, staple holes along right and left edge, loss of substrate in centre left edge, black smudge in bottom right edge, staple holes in top centre, creasing in top right section, dirt transfer and smudges in bottom section, small tear in left see full section, image visible on verso, smudges in centre condition verso, slight dirt transfer in verso, loss of substrate 2016-06-24 record in bottom centre under credits.

2016-03-07

2012-01403.0406

60/80

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Unforgiven

1960 Huston, John

USA

Insert

The Unforgiven

Top image of a man yelling at a woman with a caption in orange text on a yellow background above image and a quote in bottom right of image, cast in black and orange text under image, tagline in black text under cast, title in orange text in centre right, "Jack Huston" under title, a man drags a woman along a stream under title, four lines of credits in black text at the bottom on an orange background. Tagline: "A 1960 Breed Apart... Unashamed... Unconquerable." C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; staple holes in centre along edges, slight creasing along edges, slight yellowing, scrape causing loss of colour in bottom right of top image, creasing in bottom right corner, slight creasing in see full top right, ink transfer on verso, title in pen in top condition centre of verso, "60-80" in china pencil in bottom 2016-06-24 record left corner, slight sun damage in bottom edge. Poor condition; yellow, creasing throughout causing colour loss, tears and missing paper in all four corners, pin holes in all four corners, several large tears throughout bottom section and right edge repaired with tape on verso, tape in bottom centre, yellow adhesive residue under knife, yellow see full residue in centre right edge, two severe horizontal condition creases, multiple tape pieces on verso, ink transfer 2016-06-24 record on verso.

2016-03-07

2012-01403.0407

67/328

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Wait Until Dark

Young, 1967 Terence

USA

Insert

Wait Until Dark

Central orange image of a terrified woman on a pink background, "what did they want with her?" repeated in top right corner, six lines of cast in purple text on the left under image, title in orange and black text with the last word forming a knife, three small men stand on the knife, one line of cast in purple under 1967 title, two lines of credits in black text at the bottom. C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the play by Frederick Knott.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-07

2012-01403.0408

72/099

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

What's Up, Doc?

Bogdanovich, 1972 Peter

USA

Insert

What's Up, Doc?

Caption in top, small image of a woman and man on a bike in top left, on a purple background the outline of a man's chest with a bowtie, orange still of a man looking at a woman on the bottom of outline, cast and title in purple text in centre, small red lips on right of title, four lines of credits in black text at the 1972 bottom. C Four lines of cast in yellow text in top right corner, blue monochrome image of a couple embracing with white cuts in the image, a woman with a knife looks up at couple, title in red text under image, caption on a blue banner with a book under title, five lines of credits in blue text at the bottom, soundtrack caption 1964 in bottom right corner. C Tagline in white text at the top on a red background, a group of men on horseback under tagline, blue banner of stills in centre, title in white text on an image of a group of men in the desert, one line of cast in red text under image, two lines of credits in red text at the bottom. Tagline: "Suddenly a new West had emerged. Suddenly it was sundown for nine men. Suddenly their day was over. Suddenly the sky was 1969 bathed in blood." C

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition; fourteen horizontal creases causing colour loss, tear along right and left edge, white out in NSS numbers, stains in bottom left corner, pin holes in bottom section and top two corners, creasing in bottom right corner, small fold in bottom left corner, creasing in top corners, adhesive damage in bottom right, creasing see full throughout, stains in top left, yellow, red ink condition transfer on verso, stains in centre and top right of 2016-06-24 record verso, smudges in bottom right of verso. 2016-03-07

2012-01403.0409

64/2070

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Where Has the Love Gone

Dmytryk, 1964 Edward

USA

Insert

Where Love Has Gone

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

Based on the novel by Harold Robbins.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; yellow, creasing in bottom section and along top edge, two punched holes in top see full corners, tear and creasing in bottom left corner, condition browning along bottom edge, ink transfer on verso, 2016-06-24 record rippling on bottom edge. 2016-03-07

2012-01403.0410

69/168

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Wild Bunch

Peckinpah, 1969 Sam

USA

Insert

The Wild Bunch

14 x 36 inches

14 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition; very yellow, seven horizontal creases causing colour loss, creasing throughout, glossy, white in bottom centre, creasing along right edge, tear in top right, stain in bottom right, see full residue along edges of verso, yellow adhesive condition residue in bottom section, blue transfer in centre of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-03-07

2012-01403.0411

64/237

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The 7th Dawn

1964 Gilbert, Lewis

USA

Half-Sheet

The 7th Dawn

On the left an image of characters in war wear in the jungle separating characters from the image of a burning village, a couple runs away from the village, three lines of cast in black text on the right above the title (in black text) on an orange sun design, eleven short lines of credits in green and black text in the 1964 bottom right of sheet. C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the novel "The Durian Tree" by Michael Keon.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition; very yellow, creasing throughout, folds, rips, and tears along right edge, separation of substrate in top left corner, blue transfer along left edge, large stain in top right, small stains in top right, small deposits throughout, hole in bottom see full right, stains on the right of credits, vertical and condition horizontal crease intersecting in centre, fold in 2016-06-24 record bottom right corner, ink transfer on verso. 2016-03-11

2012-01403.0412

62 249

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

13 West Street

1962 Leacock, Philip USA

Half-Sheet

13 West Street

Yellow background, in top centre six stills of couples and two portraits in various colours, tagline in centre between stills, four lines in white text in bottom right of border, border extends and circles title (in white text) on a red bubble, five lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Evil enters the house at 13 1962 West street... it's shocking as a scream in the night!" C Yellow background, on the left a confused man holds a doll, a woman leans on him smiling while a little girl pulls on his sleeve on his right, tagline and "Tony Curtis" in black text in top centre, title in red text on the right of little girl, advertisement for Disneyland on the bottom right with image of the iconic castle, three lines of credits in blue text at the bottom left. Tagline: 1963 "Tony's got women trouble." C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Base on the novel "The Tiger Among Us" by Leigh Brackett.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition; yellow, two tears in bottom centre, horizontal and vertical creases intersecting in centre, staple holes throughout edges concentrated in corners, small tear in centre left, fold in bottom right corner, wear in bottom left corner, dirt smudges throughout, hole in top left, loss of colour in title from centre creasing, image visible on verso, ink transfer on verso, tape repair in see full bottom corner of verso, title in pen in centre left of condition verso, stain in bottom right of verso, yellow tape 2016-06-24 record residue in centre left edge of verso. 2016-03-11

2012-01403.0413

63/6

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

40 Pounds of Trouble

Jewison, 1963 Norman

USA

Half-Sheet

40 Pounds of Trouble

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; yellow, slight creasing in bottom right corner, wear in top left, smudge in top left of image, finger marks in top right, slight creases in see full centre, slight rippling from rolling, image visible on condition verso, title in pencil in top right of verso, "A child in 2016-06-24 record waiting" in bottom right of verso.

2016-03-11

2012-01403.0414

67/160

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

A Guide for the Married Man

1967 Kelly, Gene

USA

Half-Sheet

A Guide for the Married Man

Title and tagline in black, red, and blue text in top left, man sits on a stool in the centre with a ball and chain on his ankle, a woman paints her nails on his left, another man points to a book on his right, title in red on the book above the top of a man's head with lipstick at the bottom of the book, four lines of cast in red text on the left and four lines of cast in blue text on the right, one line of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "A Guide For The Married Man By America's Most Famous Swingers OR The Do's And Don'ts For The Married Man Who's Thinking Single 1967 or The Single Man Who's Just Thinking!" C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the novel by Frank Tarloff.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; slight creasing along left edge, rippling from rolling, tear in bottom right corner fixed with adhesive on verso, staple holes along edges, blue pencil in centre, slight loss of colour in title, slight creasing in left section, loss of substrate see full in right credits, yellow adhesive stain in bottom condition right, image slightly visible, faded red stamp in 2016-06-24 record bottom centre of verso.

2016-03-11

2012-01403.0415

74/309

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Airport 1975

1974 Smight, Jack

USA

Half-Sheet

Airport 1975

Tagline in black text at the top, central image of a 747 airplane being hit by a smaller aircraft on an orangy firery sky, title in blue text on the top left of plane, caption on the centre right, seven lines of credits in black text in bottom left above a horizontal banner of fifteen portraits. Tagline: "'Something hit us... the 1974 crew is dead... help us, please, please help us!'" C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the novel "Airport" by Arthur Hailey.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition; slight yellowing, staple damage along all edges and in the centre of image, centre vertical crease, creasing along bottom edge and top edge, creasing in bottom left corner, slight creasing see full in centre, slight rippling, image slightly visible on condition verso, stain in centre left of verso, ink transfer in 2016-06-24 record centre of verso. 2016-03-14 Fair condition; yellow, two tears in top right, one inch tear in bottom right corner, tear in bottom left corner repaired with tape on verso, small tears along right edge repaired with tape, slight curling from rolling, creasing in centre left edge, loss of substrate in bottom centre, stain in bottom left above cast, slight creasing causing loss of colour, see full wear in top left, smudge in bottom right corner, condition image visible on verso, stamp in bottom left of 2016-06-24 record verso, ink transfer on verso. 2016-03-14

2012-01403.0416

60-125

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

All the Fine Young Cannibals

Anderson, 1960 Michael

USA

Half-Sheet

All the Fine Young Cannibals

Central image of a man caressing the face of a woman, on the left of image a woman attempts to hit a shirtless man, tagline in black text along the left edge, two lines of cast in blue and black text in top centre, title in black text on the right of central image, two lines of credits in black text at the bottom left. Tagline: "The screen's frankest story of sophisticated young moderns, torn between the urgency to love... 1960 and the desire to hurt!" C Tagline in large bold white letters at the top, image of a field burning while armed men chase three characters through a jungle, in bottom right various images of scenes and characters including a boat, a blindfolded man and a woman in a can can outfit, cast in black text above the title in red text on the bottom left, two lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "Deadly... dangerous... the game is... 1966 BLINDFOLD..." C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2012-01403.0417

66/153

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Blindfold

1965 Dunne, Philip

USA

Half-Sheet

Blindfold

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; yellow, slight curling from rolling, creasing throughout, water stain along bottom edge, creasing and small tears along right edge, creasing in top edge, creasing in bottom right see full corner, rippling, black pencil mark in bottom condition centre, vertical crease, image slightly visible on 2016-06-24 record verso, ink transfer on verso.

2016-03-14

70

2012-01403.0418

73/293

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Charley Varrick

1973 Siegal, Donald USA

Half-Sheet

Charley Varrick

Tagline in black text at the top, scene of a car in a field and a biplane in the centre, a man looks back at the plane in the centre right, an armed man holds a money bag from the Western Fidelity Bank in the centre, "Walter Matthau" in red text on the left of the man, the title in red text on the right of the man, three lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "When he runs out of dumb luck, he always 1973 has genius to fall back on!" C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the novel "The Looters" by John Reese.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition; vertical crease, tear and fold in top centre, tear in top right corner repaired with tape, creasing in top right corner, wear and creasing in top left corner, creasing in bottom right corner, dirt smudges in bottom right, crushed substrate in bottom left, creasing in bottom right with dirt smudges and slight loss of colour, sticker in bottom right blocking rating, creasing in bottom left corner, deposits in top left of image, finger marks in centre see full of verso, yellow adhesive in centre right of verso, condition residue in bottom right corner, tape repairs on left 2016-06-24 record of verso. 2016-03-14

2012-01403.0419

66/56

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Chase

1966 Penn, Arthur

USA

Half-Sheet

The Chase

Main central image of a man standing and smoking, various images of characters on the left and right of title, tagline in black text in top centre, four lines of credits in black and blue text in centre above red title with the design of an arrow in the 'E', the gray silhouette of a person on the right of title, four lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "A 1966 breathless explosive story of today!" C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on a novel and play by Horton Foote.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition; yellow, slight creasing throughout, severe creasing in bottom right corner, pin holes in all four corners, severe creasing in centre right, surface abraison under title, black smudges in centre of credits, dirt smudges in centre left, pin holes in centre of all four edges, wear in bottom edge, horizontal crease, sun damage in left of see full verso, image visible on verso, title in pen in bottom condition right corner of verso, smudges along bottom of 2016-06-24 record verso, slight ink transfer on verso.

2016-03-14

2012-01403.0420

60/285

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Dark at the Top of the Stairs

1960 Mann, Delbert USA

Half-Sheet

The Dark at the Top of the Stairs

A yellow-toned image of a man carrying a woman while climbing a flight of stairs with the tagline in black text on the yellow background, red-toned stills from the film organized above the stairs, title in red text extending from the top right of stairs to bottom right under the stairs, two lines of gray credits at the bottom. Tagling: "If ever a motion picture blurted out the private truths that lie in the dark between girl and 1960 boy and husband and wife this is that motion picture." C Central amalgamated image of characters and scenes including a large train explosion and a man with a chainsaw attacking another man, tagline in black text in top left, five lines of credits in blue text on the left of image, title in yellow text under the image, two lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "You Don't Kill for Women, You Don't Kill for 1968 Diamonds, You Kill Because You're Paid for it!" C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay conditon; very yellow, loss of substrate in centre right edge, yellow adhesive residue in centre of each edge, tear in bottom right edge, red ink transfer along the left edge, smudges in centre, wear in centre bottom edge, creasing in top right corner, wear along left edge, line in top centre, smudges in bottom left, pin holes in all four corners, rippling, image slightly visible on verso, see full yellow adhesive damage on verso, tape repair in condition bottom left of verso, red stamp in bottom left 2016-06-24 record corner of verso, slight creasing throughout. 2016-03-14 Fair condition; slight yellowing, slight creasing in centre, stain in bottom edge, wear and small tears along bottom edge, creasing in all four corners, tear in centre right edge, wear in top centre, pin holes in top right, stain in centre left, slight loss of colour see full from creasing, ink transfer on verso, stain in condition bottom left of verso, two tape repairs in right of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-03-14

2012-01403.0421

68/14

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Mercenaries

1968 Cardiff, Jack

USA

Half-Sheet

Dark of the Sun

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the novel by Wilbur A. Smith.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2012-01403.0422

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Devil at 4 O'Clock

1961 LeRoy, Mervyn USA

Half-Sheet

The Devil at 4 O'Clock

Caption in white text at the top, painted image of a man in handcuffs with a woman on his left and a priest on the right, dark red sky and volcano with a bridge in the background, small portrait of a couple kissing in bottom right of image, one line of cast in brown text on the left under image, title in red text designed like a volcano on an island, two lines of 1961 credits in black and brown at the bottom.

C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the novel by Max Catto.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition; yellow, creasing throughout, three vertical creases, horizontal crease, wear along bottom edge, creasing in all four corners, pin holes in four corners, red ink along left edge, red ink stains in bottom right edge, wear in top edge, stains in bottom left, stain in centre right in portrait, stains in top right, smudges in top left, two red stamps crossed out with china pencil on verso, see full image visible on verso, ink transfer on verso, tape condition repairs on verso, "61-318" crossed out in top left of 2016-06-24 record verso, finger marks in bottom left corner of verso. 2016-03-14 Okay condition; very yellow, folding, vertical crease, horizontal crease at the bottom, creasing throughout, wear along bottom edge, severe creasing and loss of substrate in bottom right corner, small tears along bottom edge, creasing and small tears along right edge, yellow adhesive damage in top left corner, tape repairing a tear in see full top right corner, stain in top left centre, image condition visible on verso, ink transfer on verso, tape repairs 2016-06-24 record on verso. 2016-03-14

2012-01403.0423

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Diamond Head

1963 Green, Guy

USA

Half-Sheet

Diamond Head

Two lines of cast in blue text at the top, image of an island resort at night, title in yellow text in the centre, tagline and open book on the left of title, five portraits with character descriptions along right edge, small image of a man and woman dancing in bottom right corner, five lines of credits in blue text on the left of 1963 centre. Tagline: "The Giant Story of Modern Hawaii!" C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the novel by Peter Gilman. Lighter stock.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2012-01403.0424

76/147

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Drive-In

1976 Amateau, Rod USA

Half-Sheet

Drive-In

Title in a theatre marquee design in the top left, cartoon images of characters and cars watching a movie at a drive-in, in bottom centre of image the cartoon image of a woman talking on the phone telling audiences to come to see the film, tagline in black text on the right of image, five lines of credits in black text at the bottom right. Tagline: "There's nothing but action at the Drive-In, and some good 1976 stuff on the screen too!" C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition; vertical crease in centre, yellow adhesive residue in top corners, creasing along edges, small tears along right edge, corner ripped off with repair, tears in bottom right edge, stain in bottom left corner, creasing in bottom left causing elevation of paper, sun damage in left of verso, see full yellow adhesive residue in top right of verso, tape condition repairs in left of verso, stain in bottom centre of 2016-06-24 record verso, ink transfer on verso.

2016-03-14

2012-01403.0425

66/184

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Duel at Diablo

1966 Nelson, Ralph

USA

Half-Sheet

Duel at Diablo

Central image of a group of cowboys making a stand in a rocky area, five black & white portraits with character names in red text along the left edge, tagline in white text on the right of portraits, two lines of cast and title in white rocky design in top right, six lines of credits in black and red text at the bottom. Tagline: "Yesterday they fought each other - today 1966 they fight together to stay alive!" O

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the Novel "Apache Rising" by Marvin Albert.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; slight yellowing, vertical and horizontal crease intersecting in the centre, creasing and crushed substrate along bottom edge, yellow tape in bottom centre edge, creasing in all four corners, small tears and folds in top right corner, wear and crushed substrate along right edge, slight creasing throughout, slight colour loss from creasing, dirt smudge along left edge and in portraits, slight dirt transfer in bottom section, pin holes in all four corners, tape repair in bottom see full centre of verso, stain in bottom left of verso, title condition in china pencil in centre left of verso, ink transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-03-14

2012-01403.0426

75/208

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Farwell My Lovely

1975 Richards, Dick

USA

Half-Sheet

Farewell My Lovely

Image of a window in centre left, a man smokes a cigarette and drinks in the centre of the window, a ghost-like portrait of a woman on the left of man, title in neon light design under man, tagline in white text in top right, twenty-lines of credits in white text on the right bottom of image. Tagline: "I need another drink... I need a lot of life insurance... I need a vacation... and all I've got is a coat, a hat, and a gun!" 1975 Stamp of "McMacken" in bottom left corner. C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the novel by Raymond Chandler.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition; severe vertical and horizontal creases intersecting in centre, creasing throughout, colour loss from creasing, creasing along all edges, slight yellow along bottom edge, tear in bottom right corner, wear and tear in bottom left edge, stain in bottom left corner, crushed substrate in see full centre left edge, very yellow on verso, tape in right condition centre of verso, title in pen in top centre of verso, 2016-06-24 record "Guy McKone" in pen in right centre of verso. 2016-03-14

2012-01403.0427

R68/87

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Father Goose; Charade

1964;1963

Nelson, Ralph; Donen, Stanley USA

Half-Sheet

Father Goose; Charade

Pink caption about the double feature centred at the top, two miniature posters divided by a centre blue dotted line, on the left a green poster for "Father Goose:" two lines of cast in blue text integrated in the tagline at the top, title in blue on a white card in centre, a man on the left of title yells at a woman on the right of title with palm trees in the background, four lines of credits in blue and black text at the bottom, on the right of dotted line the pink poster for "Charade:" two lines of cast integrated in tagline at the top, man with a gun looks around the corner, title and two lines of cast in pink text on the right of man, small silhouettes of people running in winding streets, the portrait of a woman in between the streets, two 1967 lines of credits in black at the bottom. C Tagline in blue text at the top, in the centre a little girl hugs a dishevelled man, line drawings of scenes and characters around the legs of the central man, "Jackie Gleason" and title in red text in bottom right corner, "*Pronounced GEE-GO" in blue text under the title, one line of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "A new joy has come to the screen... and the world is 1962 a happier place to live in!" C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

"Father Goose" based on a story by S.H. Barnett.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; slight yellowing, creasing along right edge, creasing in all four corners, tear in bottom left with yellow adhesive damage from previous repair, creasing centre left, smudge in see full bottom left corner, yellowing along left edge of condition verso, severe creasing in top left of verso, yellow 2016-06-24 record adhesive damage in bottom right edge of verso.

2016-03-14

2012-01403.0428

62/361

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Gigot

1962 Kelly, Gene

USA

Half-Sheet

Gigot

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Original story by Jackie Gleason.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; yellow, creasing along right edge, creasing in bottom right corner, small tears along bottom right edge, creasing and fold in bottom left corner, slight creasing in left, creasing along top see full edge with crushed fibers, marker line in top left, condition staple holes in top corners, image visible on verso, 2016-06-24 record pin holes in bottom corners.

2016-03-14

71

2012-01403.0429

65/231

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Great Race

1965 Edwards, Blake USA

Half-Sheet

The Great Race

Caption on the left on a black bubble, four lines of cast in red text at the top, three heads on a line drawing of a crowd of various characters, title in red text under image, three lines of credits in blue text at 1965 the bottom right.

C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition; very yellow, three vertical creases, finger marks in centre left, yellow adhesive damage along right and top edge, and centre left edge, yellow adhesive damage in bottom edge that someone tried to correct with white out, stain in bottom right, tear and loss of paper in bottom left, tears along all edges, tear in top right corner, smudges in top right, tape residue in top from repairs, slight creasing throughout, pen crosses out production note and 'Dick' in pen with white out marks, hole in bottom left repaired with tape on verso, tape repairs and residue in verso, finger see full marks throughout left section, image visible on condition verso, stain in bottom left of verso, residue in top 2016-06-24 record right corner of verso, slight sun damage on verso. 2016-03-14

2012-01403.0430

60/254

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Hell to Eternity

1960 Karlson, Phil

USA

Half-Sheet

Hell to Eternity

Central image of a couple kissing, on the right a battle scene, on the left three images of soldiers, caption about the true aspects of the story on the top left, tagline in blue text in top right, title in red text under image, in bottom right corner a soldier walks with a little boy, three lines of credits in black and blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "The hells of war can wait for 1960 the woman-hungers of fighting men!" C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; yellow, creasing along right edge and top edge, finger marks in top centre, creasing and crushe substrate in bottom left, slight creasing throughout, staple holes in all four corners, small tear in right centre, creasing in top right corner, dirt smudges in top right, horizontal and vertical creases intersecting in the centre, slight loss of see full colour caused by creasing, image visible on verso, condition title in pen in centre left of verso, ink transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso, "60/254" in china pencil in top left corner. 2016-03-14

2012-01403.0431

60/34

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Home from the Hill

Minnelli, 1960 Vincente

USA

Half-Sheet

Home from the Hill

Central silhouette of a tree, tagline in white text and title in yellow text on the tree, couple lying down in the roots of the tree, beginning of tagline at the top in red and black text, six characters stand on brown stain on either side of the tree trunk, four lines of credits on either side of the tree trunk in black, red, and blue text at the bottom of sheet. Tagline: "For good - or bad - every town has it's "First" family. Here it was the Hunnicutts... last of their lusty kind! This is their story, of the love they sought, the sins they 1960 sinned, and the secret they couldn't hide!" C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the novel by William Humphrey.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; yellow, creasing along bottom edge, crushed fibers in bottom right corner, slight creasing along right edge, small tear in top right edge, creasing along top edge, tear in centre left edge,tear in bottom right corner, small tear in top left edge, dirt smudges in top right, image visible on verso, "60-34" in china pencil in top and bottom see full left corners on verso, yellow adhesive residue in condition right centre of verso, slight ink transfer in centre of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-03-14

2012-01403.0432

60/178

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Ice Palace

Sherman, 1960 Vincent

USA

Half-Sheet

Ice Palace

Caption at the top about Edna Ferber's novels and films, title in leaning burgundy text in the centre on a yellow background, line drawing of a town above title, white lines point to title on the right of image, from centre left to centre right along the bottom edge brown toned images of characters and scenes with descriptions of the film, three lines of credits in blue 1960 at the bottom. C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the novel by Edna Ferber.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; yellow, slight browning, vertical and horizontal creases intersecting in the centre, creasing along bottom left edge, creasing in top left corner and bottom right corner, creasing in bottom right, stains in centre left of image, bleedthrough of text in top right corner, staple holes in all four see full corners, smudges in top right corner, three red condition stamps in centre of verso, title in pencil on top right 2016-06-24 record edge, image visible on verso, ink transfer on verso. 2016-03-14 Fair condition; creasing throughout, tear in centre left edge, creasing and folding in bottom left corner, creasing and crushed substrate in top right edge, creasing in bottom right corner, title in pen in bottom right of verso, sticker in bottom right on see full the MPAA raiting, blue stamp in top left corner, condition tape repair in centre right of verso, smudges in 2016-06-24 record centre left. 2016-03-14

2012-01403.0433

77/62

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Island in the Stream

Schaffner, 1977 Franklin J.

USA

Half-Sheet

Island in the Stream

On the bottom left the image of a boat at sunset, above the boat an old man stares at the viewer, on the top right and left of man fuzzy images of characters, on the bottom left twenty-three lines of caption about the film, fiften lines of credits in black 1977 text in bottom left corner.

C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the novel by Ernest Hemingway. Thicker stock. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2012-01403.0434

60/41

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Last Voyage

Stone, Andrew 1960 L. USA

Half-Sheet

The Last Voyage

Caption in large yelllow text at the top on a black background, description of filming locations in white text on a red rectangle in centre right, two lines of credits in violet in centre left, title in red text in bottom left, drawings of characters and a ship in bottom right, one line of credits in violet at the 1960 bottom.

C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; yellow, tear and loss of paper in bottom left corner, tear in centre left and top left, adhesive damage from repair in top left, bleedthrough of NSS number in top right corner, red ink stains in top right, wear along top edge, pin holes in all four corners, curling from rolling, pen mark in centre, stain and residue in centre of yellow caption, crushed substrate in top right, creasing in right corners, small tears in centre right edge, see full yellow adhesive residue from previous repairs in condition right edge of verso, "60-41" in left corners of verso, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso, slight ink transfer on verso. 2016-03-15

2012-01403.0435

63/249

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Lilies of the Field

1963 Nelson, Ralph

USA

Half-Sheet

Lilies of the Field

Black & white image of a smiling man on the left, five black & white stills of nuns in top right corner, tagline in top centre, "Sidney Poitier" in white text under tagline, title in white and gray text in bottom right on an orange background, list of awards in between two laurels in bottom centre, three lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Different by faith, skin and calling but what a wonderful adventure they shared! Five refugee nuns from behind the Iron Curtain and the American ex-GI who helped them raise a monument to faith in the Southwestern 1963 desert." O

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the novel by William E. Barrett.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition; very yellow, faded, black smudges and stains throughout, finger marks in top centre of tagline, dirt deposit on the left of tagline, yellow tape residue in all four corners, creasing and wear along all edges, horizontal and vertical creases intersecting in the centre, slight creasing throughout concentrated at edges, loss of substrate in bottom right corner, stain in bottom left corner, pin holes in all four corners, and in centre of vertical edges, abraison in top left of image,yellow adhesive residue throughout verso, see full tape repairs in centre right of verso, image slightly condition visible on verso, ink transfer on verso, loss of 2016-06-24 record substrate in centre left and centre right of verso. 2016-03-15

2012-01403.0436

63/72

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Love Is a Ball

1963 Swift, David

USA

Half-Sheet

Love Is a Ball

Title in white text on a red rectangle in centre, drawings of two men and a woman in centre above a title imitating the poses of Greek statues in the background, five lines of credits in blue text on the right of characters, tagline in blue text on the right of characters, drawings of scenes from the film on the right and left of title, three lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "You too, can have a solid gold yacht... Riviera parties... villas with a bikini view... 1963 racing cars! It's simple! Get on the 'ball'!" C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; yellow, slight rippling and creasing from rolling, wear along bottom edge, creasing in bottom right corner, staple holes in all four corners, wear along top edge, ink transfer in top left corner, see full blue stain in bottom right, red drop stain in top condition centre, image slightly visible on verso, slight ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso. 2016-03-15 Fair condition; slight creasing throughout, staple holes in four corners, loss of substrate in bottom right edge, stain in bottom right corner, tear in centre right edge, small tears in bottom right, crushed substrate in bottom left edge, creasing in top left edge, one inch tear in top left corner, slight see full curling, tape repairs on verso, title in marker in condition centre right edge of verso, ink stains in centre left 2016-06-24 record of verso, finger marks in centre of verso.

2012-01403.0437

69/341

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Marooned

1969 Sturges, John

USA

Half-Sheet

Marooned

Image of a constellation map, a space capsule in top right, a floating astronaut in centre left, title in white text above the astronaut, tagline in centre right, seven lines of credits in black text at the bottom. 1969 Tagline: "The Saga of Ironman One!"

C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the novel by Martin Caidin. Glossy.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-16

2012-01403.0438

65/150

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Mirage

Dmytryk, 1965 Edward

USA

Half-Sheet

Mirage

Three lines of cast and caption about the couple at the top on a yellow background, central image of a couple about to kiss with blue toned images in the background, 'tears' in the image in top right and to the left of couple, tagline in violet in the left tear, title in red text in centre under image, three lines of credits in blue and black text at the bottom centre. Tagline: "The danger is real... the woman is real... but the terrifying reasons are hidden behind an 1965 extraordinary." C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; yellow, slight creasing in centre right, creasing in right corners, slight rippling and curling from rolling, ink transfer along left edge, creasing in left centre, creasing and crushed substrate along top edge, black stamps in bottom see full left corner of verso, title in red marker in centre condition right edge of verso, slight ink tranfer on verso, 2016-06-24 record image slightly visible on verso.

2016-03-16

72

2012-01403.0439

62/282

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Mr. Hobbs Takes a Vacation

1962 Koster, Henry

USA

Half-Sheet

Mr. Hobbs Takes a Vacation

One line of cast in blue text in top right, title in blue text in centre left, central cartoon of a man loaded with items such as fishing lines and suitcases with a pelican nest on his head, a portrait of a man on the left under title, a woman sits on the bottom left of central image, two portraits in centre right, four people dancing in bottom centre, eight short lines of 1962 credits in bottom right corner.

C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition, fragile; very yellow, severe horizontal and vertical creases intersecting in centre, creasing throughout concentrated in right, severe creasing and loss of substrate in bottom right corner, severe wear along right bottom edge with seperation of substrate, pin holes in all four corners, larger holes on either side of horizontal crease on the right and left edges, tear in bottom right edge, pin holes in top and bottom centre, 12.5 inch tear extending from centre to bottom centre see full repaired with tape on verso, tape repairs in verso, condition image visible on verso, ink and dirt transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-03-16

2012-01403.0440

National Screen 850117 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Murphy's Romance

1985 Ritt, Martin

USA

Half-Sheet

Murphy's Romance

Beige background, title in brown text vertically aligned along the left edge, Sally Field leanes on the title, cast in red text in top and bottom right, tagline in gray text in the centre of image, two lines of credits in gray text at the bottom of image. Tagline: "Just when you think you've found the right guy, someone even worse 1985 comes along." C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the novella by Max Schott.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; slight yellowing, creasing along right edge, creasing along left edge, brown stain along bottom edge, seperation of substrate in left see full corners, small tears and creasing in top left, pin condition holes in all four corners, sun damage along right 2016-06-24 record edge of verso.

2016-03-16

2012-01403.0441

67/225

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Naked Runner

1967 Furie, Sidney J. USA

Half-Sheet

The Naked Runner

"Sinatra:" in white text and title in red text at the top centre, red dark image of a man running with a sniper rifle in a grassy area, tagline in black text in bottom right of image, three lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Slowly they stripped Sam Laker 1967 down until there was nothing but animal left..." C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the novel by Francis Clifford.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; vertical and horizontal creases intersecting in centre, slight creasing throughout, small tears in bottom right, small tear in top left, see full creasing in top left corner, horizontal crease in condition bottom, slight ink transfer in centre of verso, image 2016-06-24 record slightly visible in verso. 2016-03-16 Fair condition; yellow, yellow adhesive damge in all four corners, creasing along edges, small one inch tear in centre right edge repaired with tape on verso, loss of substrate in bottom left, adhesive damage in all four corners and along right edge of see full verso, image visible on verso, title in pencil in condition bottom right corner of verso, stamp in centre left of 2016-06-24 record verso, slight ink transfer in verso. 2016-03-16 Okay condition; slight yellowing, loss of paper in bottom left, one inch tear in centre left edge, several tears along right edge, tear in bottom right corner, tears and crushed substrate in top right corner, abrasions in top right of image causing loss of colour, creasing along right edge, dirt smudges under title, rippling from rolling, smudges in top left corner, slight loss of colour, stain in bottom left corner, slight creasing throughout, tape repairs on see full verso, fold in bottom right corner, staple holes in all condition four corners, ink transfer on verso, image visible on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-03-16

2012-01403.0442

60-218

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

One Foot in Hell

1960 Clark, James B. USA

Half-Sheet

One Foot in Hell

Two lines of cast in white text on a blue background at the top, title in red text in the centre with five lines of caption, on the right of title a cowboy shoots at the sheriff on the left of title, image of characters and scenes creating bottom border, three lines of credits 1960 in blue text at the bottom. C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2012-01403.0443

66/58

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Oscar

1966 Rouse, Russell USA

Half-Sheet

The Oscar

Tagline in white text in top left corner, various drawn images of characters in several colours in centre, title in gold shinning text under images, five lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "The breath1966 taking race for Hollywood's highest award." C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the novel by Richard Sale.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2012-01403.0444

61-51

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Pepe

1960 Sidney, George USA

Half-Sheet

Pepe

Cartoonish drawing of a man raising his hat on the left, two lines of credits in red text at the top left, caption in yellow text on a green box at the top, "Catinflas" in yellow text with caption above title, title in red, green, and yellow text in the centre, eight lines of cast in red text under title with an announcement of the 35 guests stars to be seen in the film, two lines 1961 of credits in black text at the bottom. C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Thinner stock. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; large hole in top left, slight creasing throughout, horizontal and vertical creases intersecting in the centre, stain in top right, tear in top edge, creasing in top left corner, stain in bottom right, creasing in bottom right corner, pin holes in all four corners, image visible in verso, "61see full 51" in china pencil in both top corners of verso, title condition in pencil in bottom right corner of verso, stain in 2016-06-24 record top left of verso, smudge in bottom left corner. 2016-03-16

2012-01403.0445

67/300

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Point Blank

1967 Boorman, John USA

Half-Sheet

Point Blank

Central image of the top half of a man holding a gun, behind him various images of him performing various crimes and with a woman, tagline in blue text at the bottom left of central image, three lines of credits and title in red text in bottom right of man, two lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "There are two kinds of people in his up-tight world: his victims and his women. And sometimes you can't tell them 1967 apart." C Two lines of cast and credits in top centre, title in black text with a stop light designed 'O' in centre, central still of a man holding a shovel sitting on a couch next to a laughing woman with grocery bags, tagline in black text above woman, orange border with white bubbles around image, two lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "... and you think 1975 you've got problems." C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the novel "The Hunter" by Richard Stark.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition; slight creasing throughout, yellow, large stain in centre of image, six inch tear in left edge with yellow adhesive damage from previous repairs, vertical crease, severe creasing and crushed substrate in right edge, loss of substrate in centre right, one inch tear in bottom centre and left centre repaired on verso, creasing and small tear in top left, folds in left corners, creasing in top right corners, rip in bottom left corner, deposit and residue in top right, adhesive damage and tape repairs in verso, sun damage on verso, image visible see full on verso, thinning of paper in bottom, ink transfer condition in verso, "67-176" in china pencil in top right corner 2016-06-24 record of verso, deposit in bottom left of verso. 2016-03-16

2012-01403.0446

75/34

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Prisoner of Second Avenue

1975 Frank, Melvin

USA

Half-Sheet

The Prisoner of Second Avenue

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the play by Neil Simon.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Great condition; slight yellow, curling from rolling, see full crease in top right corner and centre right edge, condition slight wear in bottom right corner, sun damage in 2016-06-24 record left of verso.

2016-03-16

2012-01403.0447

64/266

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Rio Conchos

Douglas, 1964 Gordon

USA

Half-Sheet

Rio Conchos

Four cowboys stand on a hillside and shoot towards a battler scene below and to the right of them, tagline in yellow text on a black banner at the top, two lines of cast in red text on the right of image, title in yellow text in a rocky design in the background of a battle scene, three lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "-four men stalking the Apache nation... on a mission that could drench the whole Southwest in 1964 blood and flames!" C Tagline in black text in top right, title in black and red painted design, five lines of credits in black text under title, on the left of text the silhouette of a man shooting a tommy gun to the right on a red background, black & white still of a woman standing on a chair on the silhouette of the man, on the bottom left ghost-like images of men next to a fence, three portraits of men in centre right to bottom right, a man chokes another on the left of portraits. Tagline: "The epic story of the secret seven who ripped apart the Capone empire! Love, loot and lawlessness was 1962 the Capone creed!" O

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition; yellow, blue ink layer, one horizontal line and three vertical creases, deposit in bottom left, creasing throughout edges, wear and small tears in bottom right, staple holes in all four corners, small pin holes in bottom left, creasing in right corners, stain in bottom left, blue stain in top right, slight creasing throughout, stain in centre left of verso, smudges in top right of verso, ink and dirt transfer on verso, stain in top right corner verso, see full title in blue text in bottom right corner of verso, condition tape pieces in top and bottom of verso, yellow 2016-06-24 record stains in top centre. 2016-03-16

2012-01403.0448

62/362

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Scarface Mob

1959 Karlson, Phil

USA

Half-Sheet

The Scarface Mob

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the novel "The Untouchables" by Eliot Ness and Oscar Fraley. Originally released on television and received a theatrical release in 1962.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; curling from rolling, yellow, slight creasing along right edge, slight creasing along bottom edge, creasing in top right, stain in top left see full corner, small burn hole in centre of image of condition woman, image visible on verso, ink transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso. Fair condition; very yellow, adhesive damage throughout edges from repairs, staple holes throughout edges, dirt smudges in bottom left, creasing and wear along top edge, creasing in centre right edge, smudges in top left, three see full horizontal creases, "61-208" in china pencil in top condition left of verso, image visible on verso, sun damage in 2016-06-24 record verso, yellowing tape in centre of all four edges.

2016-03-16

2012-01403.0449

61/208

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Spartacus

Kubrick, 1960 Stanley

USA

Half-Sheet

Spartacus

Title in large red block letters in centre, drawings of a man in a Roman uniform leading a group of men, a battle between slaves and Romans in the background, a woman looks on in bottom right, one line of credits in gray at the bottom right, "Winner of 4 Academy 1961 Awards!" in top left. C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the novel by Howard Fast.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-16

2012-01403.0450

63/61

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Spencer's Mountain

1963 Daves, Delmer USA

Half-Sheet

Spencer's Mountain

Central family portrait of a large family standing around the seated father, tagline in blue text under image on a yellow background, line drawing of a couple on a picnic in bottom right, title in red and yellow text in bottom centre, three lines of credits in black and blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "These here are the Spencers and this here is a picture about 'em and this here is just about the most wonderful movie you ever saw! It's mostly about that big boy on the right, and the summer he found a girl on 1963 Spencer's Mountain." C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the novel by Earl Hamner, Jr.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; creasing throughout, yellow, rippling from rolling, creasing along top and bottom edges, blue surface layer, small hole in bottom left corner, creasing in bottom right corner, loss of colour from creasing, smudge in bottom rihgt, "63-61" in china see full pencil in top left of verso, stain in top left of verso, condition ink transfer on verso, stain in centre, more 2016-06-24 record yellowing in left of verso. 2016-03-16

73

2012-01403.0451

64-17

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Three Lives of Thomasina

1964 Chaffey, Don

USA

Half-Sheet

The Three Lives of Thomasina

Tagline in red and black text at the top and in centre, the head of a cat repeated and fading from left centre to centre, on the right of tagline: the images of a little girl, a man carrying a little girl, and a woman laughing with animals, Walt Disney and title in gray and red under image of the cat, five lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "I am Thomasina - a most unusual cat... they say I'm enchanted and I am! I gave three of my nine lives to a little girl lost... a lonely man 1964 and a beautiful witch!" C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the book "Thomasina" by Paul Gallico.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition; yellow, dirt transfer throughout, creasing throughout, tears along bottom edge, tears in centre left edge repaired with tape, tears and wear in right edge, black smudges in centre, "61-17" in pen in bottom right corner, wear and creasing in bottom right corner, separation in bottom right, severely crushed substrates in top left, loss of colour from creasing, image visible on see full verso, tape repairs on verso, title in pencil in centre condition left of verso, stain and smudges in bottom centre of 2016-06-24 record verso, ink transfer on verso. 2016-03-16

2012-01403.0452

61/302

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Twenty Plus Two

Newman, 1961 Joseph M.

USA

Half-Sheet

Twenty Plus Two

Tagline in top, title in red text in the centre, second tagline in blue text under title, four colour stills ripped in half on either side of title, image of a girl falling in title, a blonde woman stands on the left of title looking back at the viewer, small book in bottom left, five lines of credits in black and blue text in the bottom right corner. Tagline: "20 hidden clues... plus 2 beautiful victims! The terror-ridden riddle of murder... mystery... and the missing heiress... raging from the gay glitter of Hollywood... the glamour of 1961 Park Avenue... to the Tokyo street of lost women!" C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Known as "It Started in Tokyo." Based on the novel by Frank Gruber.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; yellow, red ink transfer along left edge, slight creasing along bottom edge, creasing in see full bottom right corner, small tear in bottom right, red condition tone in top right, slight creasing in centre, image 2016-06-24 record visible on verso. 2016-03-16 Okay condtion; blue tone throughout, rippling throughout (possible water damage), loss of paper in top left, creasing along bottom edge, tear in bottom centre, fold and crushed substrate in top left, black smudge in bottom right corner, black ink stains in top centre, stain in top left, three red see full stamps in centre of verso, "60-73" in china pencil in condition three corners of the verso, ink transfer, image 2016-06-24 record visible on verso. 2016-03-16

2012-01403.0453

60-73

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Wild River

1960 Kazan, Elia

USA

Half-Sheet

Wild River

Title in red text in top left corner, central background of water with yellow toned stills and images of characters and scenes from the film in the forground, image of a tree in top right corner, three lines of 1961 credits in black and blue text at the bottom. C Tagline in black text in top centre on a yellow background, central image of a rocket ship on a blue sky, man in orange space suit on the right of ship, title in red text on the bottom right, two images of women in bottom right corner, three lines of credits in blue text on the right of black title. Tagline: "The authentic... fantastic story of the world's first rocket 1961 ship actually filmed in space!" C Four lines of cast in black text in top centre, tagline in yellow text on a black box in centre left, seven character cards with portraits, scenes, and character descriptions, title in yellow text on a black box in bottom right, two lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "Everything happens in the yellow 1965 Rolls-Royce!" C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the novels by William Bradford Huie and Borden Deal.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2012-01403.0454

61/323

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

X-15

Donner, 1961 Richard D.

uSA

Half-Sheet

X-15

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; yellow, horizontal and vertical creases intersecting in centre, tear in right centre edge, creasing and crushed fibers along top and bottom edge, creasing in bottom left, ripped corner see full in bottom left corner, ink transfer along left edge, condition two tape pieces in centre left of verso, image visible 2016-06-24 record on verso. 2016-03-16 Good condition; creasing in right, finger marks in top right, small tears in centre bottom right, wear in top right corner, creasing in top left corner, slight creasing along left edge, stain in top right, pen see full marks in centre left of verso, stains in top left, black condition marks in bottom left, ink transfer on verso, image 2016-06-24 record slightly visible on verso. 2016-03-16

2012-01403.0455

65/18

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Yellow RollsRoyce

Asquith, 1965 Anthony

USA

Half-Sheet

The Yellow RollsRoyce

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2012-01403.0456

64/301

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Americanization of Emily

1964 Hiller, Arthur

USA

One-Sheet

The Americanization of Emily

Tagline in red text in top right, tagline continued in left corner of image, central image of a smiling couple, a cartoon uniformed hand pulls the zipper to reveal James Coburn surrounded by three women, four lines of credits in black and blue text above the title in red text with a zippered 'Y,' image of James Garner at the battle of Normandy (D-day) on the left of title, six lines of credits in bottom left corner, review on right of zipper and in bottom right corner. Tagline: "Charlie, tell us again how you won the war! Tell us why Emily 1964 called you the most immoral man she'd ever met!" C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel by William Bradford Hue.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; slight yellowing, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, large peeling sticker in centre of the credits with recommendations, small tears along bottom edge, fold in bottom right corner, tear in centre left edge, slight creasing throughout, tear in top centre, small see full hole in top of vertical crease, NSS stamp in top condition centre and top left corner of verso, heavy yellowing 2016-06-24 record in top centre of verso. 2016-03-21

2012-01403.0457

69/339

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Comic

1969 Reiner, Carl

USA

One-Sheet

The Comic

Central image of Dick Van Dyke in character, six colour toned stills along right vertical edge, seven lines of tagline in red text on the left, title in red text in centre left, six lines of cast in blue text on the left of image, one line of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "A funny new motion picture that tells Hollywood like 1969 it was." C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good conditon; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, yellowing in creases, tear in bottom corners, slight creasing throughout, Adult Entertainment sticker in top centre, pin holes see full in four corners, yellow damage in vertical edges on condition verso, yellow in creases on verso, NSS stamps in top 2016-06-24 record centre and top right corner of verso. 2016-03-21

2012-01403.0458

68/49

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Deadfall

1968 Forbes, Brian

USA

One-Sheet

Deadfall

Tagline in black text at the top, central focus on man climbing a rope ladder, smaller yellow image of man falling on the right side of main image, three stills with chracter descriptions below main image and to the left of falling man, title in pink-purple text with a falling design, three lines of cast in purple and blue text on left, one line of credits in black text at the bottom, blue border. Tagline: "Michael Caine plunges into the world of the adulterous... the treacherous ... 1968 and the preverse!" C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

From the novel by Desmon Cory.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, yellowing in vertical crease, slight colour loss from creases, sticker see full above MPAA suggestion, hole in first intersection of condition creases, NSS stamp in top centre and top right 2016-06-24 record corner of verso, yellowing in creases of verso. 2016-03-21

2012-01403.0459

67/197

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Don't Make Waves

Mackendrick, 1967 Alexander

USA

One-Sheet

Don't Make Waves

Three lines of credits at the top, central images of women in bikinis and people working out, tagline in blue text in top left corner continued on the left of image in red text and in title area, title in white text on a red pin design, "make love" on a blue heart under title, six lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Turn on! Stay loose! Make out! Wild waves and wilder women ... in a tidal wave of comedy! When 1967 you've got it made "don't make waves" - make love. " C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel "Muscle Beach" by Ira Wallach.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; yellow, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, heavy yellowing in creases, creasing and wear along bottom edge, sun damage in bottom left corner, small tear in left edge next to top horizontal crease, see full hole in first intersection of creases, slight creasing condition in top, yellowing in creases and edges of verso, NSS 2016-06-24 record stamps in top centre and top left of verso. 2016-03-21

2012-01403.0460

72/127

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Emperor of the North Pole

1973 Aldrich, Robert USA

One-Sheet

Emperor of the North

"Meet the Emperor of the North" in large red block letters at the top, black & white still of a man sitting on his car in centre, eight lines of description in black text under still, title in red text under description, tagline in black text under title, five lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "It's not a place... 1973 it's a prize."

O

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, yellowing in creases, creasing in bottom right, browning along bottom edge, sticky adhesive damage from sticker of MPAA raiting, hole in first intersection of creases, beedthrough in centre top, creasing and folding in see full top right, loss of substrate in top left, stamp in top condition centre of verso, adhesive residue bleedthrough of 2016-06-24 record verso, yellowing in creases of verso. 2016-03-21

2012-01403.0461

73/356

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Anche gli angeli mangiano fagioli

1973 Barboni, Enzo

USA

One-Sheet

Even Angels Eat Beans

Tagline in black text in top centre on a blue background, small box with producer credits on the left of image, central cartoon images of various characters with a gangster and angel sitting on the pile of characters, title in red text under image with the 'A' having wings, three lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Al Capone... get lost! Dillinger... phooey on you! Here comes the funniest 1973 crooks since crime began!" C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

see full Good condition; yellowing, three horizontal and condition one vertical crease from delivery method, severe 2016-06-24 record yellowing in creases.

2016-03-21

2012-01403.0462

67/298

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Games

Harrington, 1967 Curtis

USA

One-Sheet

Games

Tagline in black text on a white rectangle at the top, central colour image of a woman's head, yellow stills of a woman, man stabbing a knife towards a dead person on the left of head, a couple kisses on the right, images of a woman screaming, a man without an eye in her hair, and a man carries a body under her, "Simone Signoret" in black text on the left of bottom image, title in red text in the centre under image, five lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Passion wears a mask of terror in this strangest of all 1967 games!" C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on an original story by Curtis Harrington.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; slight yellowing, three horizontal and three vertical creases from delivery method, yellowing along central vertical crease, hole in first intersection of central vertical crease, crease in bottom left, small tear in bottom centre, fold in bottom left corner, small tear in bottom right corner, fold in top left corner, creasing on left of title, fold in bottom right, creasing in centre, abrasion in centre left, tear in top centre, hole in see full top right of tagline, NSS stamp in top centre and condition top right of verso, yellowing in creases on verso, 2016-06-24 record concentration of yellowing in top of verso.

2016-03-21

74

2012-01403.0463

70/25

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Happy Ending

Brooks, 1969 Richard

USA

One-Sheet

The Happy Ending

Quote in pink at the top, central still of a metal garbage can with beer bottles and a destroyed anniversary cake thrown out, title in blue text centred under image, four lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Quote: "We're not in love. We just make love. 1970 And damn little of that." C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

47 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; glossy, three horizontal and vertical creases from delivery method, yellowing in vertical crease, loss of colour from creasing, slight creasing in top, staple holes in corners and centres of horizontal edges, fold in bottom right corner with tear, stain in bottom right under image, sticky adhesive residue from other poster on bottom right see full of verso, NSS stamps in top right corner and top condition centre, yellowing at creases on verso and 2016-06-24 record concentrated in top centre. 2016-03-21

2012-01403.0464

63/247

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Harbor Lights

1963 Dexter, Maury USA

One-Sheet

Harbor Lights

Tagline in white text in top left corner, orange image of a man punching another on a dock while two men restrain a woman in the background, under the dock a boat tries to escape a harbour, title in yellow text between the deck and the boat, two lines of credtis in black text on yellow background. Tagline: "Each light 1963 spelled danger in the harbor of no return." C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Great condition; three horizontal and vertical creases from delivery method, bleedthrough in bottom right corner, crushed fibers in right bottom edge, slight loss of colour from creasing, hole in see full bottom intersection of creases, stain in bottom condition centre and bottom left, yellowing in creases on 2016-06-24 record verso, severe in bottom centre of verso.

2016-03-21

2012-01403.0465

66/298

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Hawaii

Hill, George 1966 Roy

USA

One-Sheet

Hawaii

A woman whistfully looks in the distance, on the right a man holds his fist in the air, on the left another man screams,title in volcano design on a beach, ships sail towards title, six short lines in red and black text centred under image, two lines of credits in black text 1966 at the bottom. C Tagline in blue text at the top on a pink background, caption for actor in centre, also in centre a man on fire, on the right the close-up of a man, image of a dead woman in a bathtub in the bottom centre of main image, in bottom right a man holds a gun, title in red text with lines extending from centre under image, four lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Take a 'trip' with a man who took L.S.D. by 1968 mistake!" C Tagline at the top, central image of a capsule with the Earth below and another Earth on the far side of the sun, three coloured stills and one caption box along the left edge, title in red text under main image, four lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Man has conquered the moon with the epic Apollo 11 flight! Now take another momentous journey! YOU will meet yourself face-to-face... when Earth meets its 1969 duplicate in outer space!!!" C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel by James Michener.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition; very yellow, white rectangular void in top from removed sticker, residue in top right of void, three horizontal and vertical creases from delivery method, browning along vertical edge, staple in four corner areas, small tear in top left see full edge, tear and fold in centre left edge, smudge in condition bottom right, NSS stamp in bottom centre of verso, 2016-06-24 record yellowing in creases on verso. 2016-03-21

2012-01403.0466

68/210

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Jigsaw

Goldstone, 1968 James

USA

One-Sheet

Jigsaw

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Great condition; three horizontal and one vertical creases from delivery method, yellowing along vertical crease, sticker in right (MPAA) that is fading and peeling, creasing along edges, holes in top and see full bottom intersections of creases, yellow in creases condition on verso, NSS stamp in top centre and top right 2016-06-24 record corner of verso. 2016-03-21

2012-01403.0467

69/307

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Doppelgänger

1969 Parrish, Robert USA

One-Sheet

Journey to the Far Side of the Sun

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Great condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, slight yellowing of vertical crease, slight creasing throughout, pin see full holes in four corners, small holes at the top condition intersections, NSS stamps in top centre and top 2016-06-24 record right centre of verso.

2016-03-21

2012-01403.0468

R64/340

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Lili

Walters, 1953 Charles

USA

One-Sheet

Lili

Pink background with a white and red heart border, white line drawings of cupids in top corners, caption in red and purple text at the top, drawing of a woman in centre, "Leslie Caron" in red text on her purse and title in red text on the suitcase, small line drawing of a fair in bottom right above MGM logo, ten short lines 1964 of credits in black text in bottom left. C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on a tory by Paul Gallico.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; slight yellowing at edges, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, dirt in bottom horizontal crease, loss of colour in bottom left corner, small tear in bottom centre edge, crushed substrate in bottom corner, slight colour loss in top centre, slight creasing in top left corner, sligh creasing in centre, scratches in left of bottom crease, NSS stamps in top centre and top see full right corner of verso, yellow in creases of verso, condition yellowing severe in top centre, small tear in 2016-06-24 record intersection of top horizontal crease. 2016-03-21

2012-01403.0469

64/316

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Lilith

1964 Rossen, Robert USA

One-Sheet

Lilith

"To make you dream" repeated in a black outline on a peach background at the top, distorted dreamlike image of three people on a red circle, four lines of credits in purple text above title in thick black letters, 1964 four lines of credits in purple text at the bottom. C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel by J. R. Salamanca.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, smudges along bottom, crease in bottom right corner, loss of colour in bottom, hole in centre of top intersection, two holes in right of top horizontal edge, slight creasing along the top, crushed substrate in top see full right edge, NSS stamps in top centre and top left on condition verso, smudge in centre left, yellow and dirt in 2016-06-24 record edges of verso, severe yellowing in top centre. 2016-03-21

2012-01403.0470

66/230

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Mister Buddwing

1966 Mann, Delbert USA

One-Sheet

Mister Buddwing

Three lines of credits in top left corner, title in blue and red text on the left of man running in top corner, tagline in black text under title, four images with description of the four women and actions in the images, three lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "The story of a man who had to live 1966 twelve years in one day with four women!"

C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel "Buddwing" by Evan Hunter.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; yellowing, four horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, yellowing along creases, tear in bottom corner, fold in bottom left corner, fold in centre left edge, small tears along bottom edge, 'Adult Entertainment' sticker in centre right causing warpage, residue above AE sticker, loss of substrate in centre right, smudges in top, small tears in top right, creasing throughout, loss of colour from creasing, holes in see full intersections of creases, yellowing on creases in condition verso with a concentration on vertical crease, NSS 2016-06-24 record stamp in top centre and top left centre of verso.

2016-03-21

2012-01403.0471

65/10

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Night Walker

1964 Castle, William USA

One-Sheet

The Night Walker

Caption in black text in a white box at the top, a devil figure crouches above a sleeping woman in the central image, title in large yellow block letters at the top, tagline in white text in centre left, four lines of credits at the bottom. Tagline: "Will it drive you to dream of 1965 things you're ashamed to admit." C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, slight yellowing, pin holes in four corners and throughout edges, one pin hole in left credits and right edge, smudges in top right corner and along bottom edge, hole in top right corner, tear and loss of paper in top left corner, dirt track in right under image, hole in centre of bottom horizontal crease, NSS stamps in see full centre bottom and bottom left of verso, dirt and condition yellowing in creases of verso with a concentration 2016-06-24 record in bottom centre. 2016-03-21

2012-01403.0472

66/355

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Not With My Wife, You Don't!

Panama, 1966 Norman

USA

One-Sheet

Not With My Wife, You Don't!

One line of credits in red text at the top, light blue background, blond woman in a black bikini between two thought bubbles, one man in bottom left smiles while another yells the title (in red text) at him, three 1966 lines of credits in black text at the bottom.

C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; yellowing, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, yellowing of vertical and central crease, hole at the intersection of vertical and bottom horizontal crease, staple holes in all four corners, smudges in centre, stain in bottom right of central vertical creases, stain in title, loss of paper in bottom left corner, blue ink stain in centre, red ink transfer in bottom centre, slight bleedthrough in bottom centre, slight creasing throughout top section, NSS stamps in see full bottom centre and bottom left corner of verso, condition showtimes in pen in bottom left of verso, yellowing 2016-06-24 record and dirt in creases in verso. 2016-03-21 Good condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, slight creasing throughout, colour loss from creasing, creasing in bottom corner, peeling 'Restricted' sticker right above credits, small tear in top right, pin holes in four corners, stains in top centre, holes at intersections of creases, NSS stamp in top centre see full and top left centre of verso, yellow in creases of condition verso, tear in top centre repaired with tape on 2016-06-24 record verso, loss of paper in top left. Fair condition; slight yellowing along edges and creasing (concentration on vertical crease), three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, folded in bottom left corner, black smudges in bottom corners, small tear in bottom see full centre edge, yellowing of creases in verso, holes in condition top and bottom intersections, NSS stamps in top 2016-06-24 record centre and top right corner of verso.

2012-01403.0473

64/300

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Outrage

1964 Ritt, Martin

USA

One-Sheet

The Outrage

Title in red text at the top above the image, tagline in white text on an image of a man tied to a tree, a man attacks and rips the necklace of a woman in bottom right corner of image, five lines of credits in black text on a yellow background. Tagline: "There... before her husband's eyes... was it an act of violence or an act of 1964 love?" C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-21

2012-01403.0474

67/335

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Rosie!

Rich, David 1967 Lowell

USA

One-Sheet

Rosie!

Tagline at the top centre, central image of woman dancing and throwing money, line drawings on the right of her, eight lines of credits on the left of woman, title in white text on a pink background with a black dot border, line drawing of a car and of man climbing a lamp post on the bottom right, three lines 1967 of credits in black text in bottom centre.

C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-21

75

2012-01403.0475

65/136

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Sandpiper

Minnelli, 1965 Vincente

USA

One-Sheet

The Sandpiper

Central image of a couple holding each other, stream of images of people from the top right to centre right of image with scenery at the bottom of image, five lines of credits in red and black text in top left corner, title in red cursive design under credits, tagline in blue text on the bottom right, twelve short lines of credits in black text in bottom left corner. Tagline: "From the beginning they knew it was wrong... but nothing could 1965 keep them apart!" C Title in red shock design at the top, orange image of a man getting electro-shock therapy in centre left, a woman in bottom right corner of image injects someone, four portraits of cast and character descriptions along right edge, blue background, 'Warning' under image of man, three lines of cast in 1964 black text in bottom left corner. C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the story by Martin Ransohoff.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition, very fragile; yellow, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, colour loss from creasing, yellow adhesive damage in all four corners and centre, bleedthrough in top centre fo stamp, adhesive damage along edges from crease repairs and in top corners, pin holes in four corners and centre of vertical edge, loss of substrate in bottom left, adhesive stains in centre of horizontal edges, residue in small drops in bottom right of bottom horizontal creases, in top corners, in top right and in centre left, three NSS stamps in top section of verso, showings in pen in see full top left of verso, eleven tape repairs throughout condition verso, yellow adhesive damage in bottom right and 2016-06-24 record left edges of verso. 2016-03-21

2012-01403.0476

64/67

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Shock Treatment

1964 Sanders, Denis USA

One-Sheet

Shock Treatment

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel by Winfred Van Atta.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Great condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, fold in bottom left see full corner, two stamps in top corner of verso, one in condition top right corner, yellowing in creases of verso, holes 2016-06-24 record in top two intersections of creases. 2016-03-21

2012-01403.0477

68/76

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Sweet November

Miller, Robert 1968 Ellis

USA

One-Sheet

Sweet November

Sepia still of a couple kissing at the top, seven lines of description under image, green key in background of description, title in purple text in bottom left of image, four lines of credits in green text at the 1968 bottom.

C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; slight yellowing, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, yellowing in creases, sticker in bottom right, holes at the intersections of creases, fragile vertical see full creases, one inch tear in top centre, tear in bottom condition right, NSS stamp in top centre and top right corner, 2016-06-24 record yellowing of creases on verso. 2016-03-21

2012-01403.0478

70/226

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

There Was a Crooked Man...

Mankiewicz, 1970 Joseph L.

USA

One-Sheet

There Was a Crooked Man...

Two lines of cast in black and tan text at the top, central image of five men chained to each other with a the sheriff on the right, a cowboy rides in the desert in the background, tan circle and line design in background of image, "once upon a time..." in tan above the title in black text, three lines in black text at 1970 the bottom. C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition and very fragile; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, holes at intersections of creases, creasing throughout, folds in bottom corners, tear and fold in bottom left, holes and abraisons in bottom left, water damage, sticker over MPAA warping, top left corner missing; large tear and fold in top right corner, loss of colour from creasing, bleedthrought of adhesive in top left corner, red ink transfer in left of cast, very thin, six inch tear in top horizontal crease, see full yellow adhesive damage on verso, yellow in creases condition on verso, NSS stamp in top centre, showtimes in 2016-06-24 record red pen in top right of verso. 2016-03-21

2012-01403.0479

63/244

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Twilight of Honor

1963 Sagal, Boris

USA

One-Sheet

Twilight of Honor

Grey caption at the top, two lines of credits in top left, tagline in red and black text in top left, large central image of a man with an amalgamation of images around him (clockwise from man: two men fighting, woman dancing, a courtroom, a smoking prisoner, a couple kissing), title in red and black text in centre 1963 under image, three lines in black and white. C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel by Al Dewlen.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition but fragile; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, very fragile creases, tears in creases, pin holes in corners, above credits and in centre left, stain in centre left, tear in left of top horizontal crease, bleedthrough of stamp in top centre, several pin holes throughout top, severe creasing and seperation of substrate in left centre, finger marks in top centre, tear in centre from vertical crease, tape repairs see full along vertical crease and top corners of verso, NSS condition stamps in top centre and top left corner of verso, 2016-06-24 record yellowing and dirt in creases in verso. 2016-03-21

2012-01403.0480

64/3

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Victors

1964 Forman, Carl

USA

One-Sheet

The Victors

Six yellow portraits of women with names, caption about the women in black text under portraits, title in red wavy design in centre left under the caption, green and black toned image of soldiers at ease around a fountain with a building in background, three lines of credits in pink on black banner on the 1964 bottom. C Tagline in red text at the top on a yellow background, drawing of various characters running towards top left away from a man about to detonate TNT, two titles divided by a dark turquoise line, on the right: seven lines of cast in violet text above a yellow title in a violet bubble, six lines of credits in blue text at the bottom, on the left: two lines of cast in violet above title, six lines of credits in blue text. Tagline: "If you want to know 'what's new' and 'how to' - see these 1967 two!" C Tagline in red and black text at the top on a light green background, central image of a couple kissing, above a dotted border stills of several characters including a cop with a net, four lines of cast under dotted line on the left of couple, title in red text on the right, line drawings along bottom dotted line, three lines of credits in black text under dotted line. Tagline: "It's good for what bugs you!!! (and what's so 1968 bad about that?)" C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel by Alexander Baron.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; slight yellowing, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, ink stains and transfer along bottom edge, yellowing in creases, tear in top centre edge from creases, creasing in top left corner, fold in top right corner, tear and fold in centre left edge, black stain in see full centre right of image, NSS stamps in top centre and condition top left of verso, yellowing and dirt in creases of 2016-06-24 record verso, stains in centre of verso. 2016-03-21

2012-01403.0481

R67/305

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

What's New Pussycat? ; How to Murder Your Wife

Donner, Clive; 1965 Quine, Richard USA

One-Sheet

What's New Pussycat? ; How to Murder Your Wife

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Double feature.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, slight yellowing, hole see full in first intersection of creases, slight creasing at the condition top, stamps in top centre and top right of verso, 2016-06-24 record yellowing in creases on verso. 2016-03-21

2012-01403.0482

68/201

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

What's So Bad About Feeling Good?

Seaton, 1968 George

USA

One-Sheet

What's So Bad About Feeling Good?

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; curling, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, yellowing along vertical crease, tears in left, centre, and right see full of top and bottom horizontal creases, crease in top condition right corner, NSS stamp in top centre an top right 2016-06-24 record corner of verso, yellowing in creases in verso. 2016-03-21

2012-01403.0483

63/217

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

A New Kind of Love

Shavelson, 1963 Melville

USA

One-Sheet

A New Kind of Love

Four lines of cast in top left corner, a couple looks at each other as they fall in opposite directions (i.e. woman on right falls from top to bottom and man falls from bottom to top), tagline in black text with 'New' in red text on the centre right, small portrait with caption about soundtrack in bottom centre above two stagered lines of credits. Tagline: "It's time 1963 for a change... time to take a new attitude on." C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition; slight yellowing, browning along left edge, slight creasing throughout, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, smudges along edges and top centre, bleedthrough in bottom centre and bottom right, pin holes in all four corners, creasing along edges, small tears in vertical crease, brown stain in bottom left and bottom right corner, smudges in bottom left corner, adhesive damage in bottom centre, folding in centre horizontal crease, holes in centre poorly repaired with tape on verso, coffee stains along right edge, tears and folding along top edge, larger pin holes in top right and top centre, fold in bottom right corner, yellow in creases of verso, see full stamps in bottom corner and bottom left corner of condition verso, '63-217' in china pencil in bottom corner of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-03-23

2012-01403.0484

60/205

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Apartment

1960 Wilder, Billy

USA

One-Sheet

The Apartment

Red background, tagline in yellow text in top left with the title in white text, couple walks away from viewer, six lines of cast in white text on bottom left, in centre right a key is turned in a lock, the keychain reads "a Billy 'some like it hot' Wilder production," three lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Moviewise, there has never been anything like 'The 1960 Apartment' love-wise laugh-wise or other-wise!" C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition; yellow, chalk damage along right edge, pin holes in four corners and centre of edges, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, tears in all creases with adhesive stains from previous repairs, stain in bottom right edge, tear and fold in centre left, hole in left of first horizontal crease with tape sticking out, hole in top left, tear in top right, tear and hole in centre, see full several tape repairs on verso, smudges and dirt in condition top of verso, large hole in top left, stamp in top left 2016-06-24 record of verso, yellow adhesive damage on verso. 2016-03-23

76

2012-01403.0485

R68/81

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Around the World in Eighty Days

Anderson, 1956 Michael

USA

One-Sheet

Around the World in 80 Days

Tagline in red text in the top left corner, central cartoon image of a hot air balloon with various modes of travel represented at the top (ship, train, chariot), one man in the basket with another hanging from a string, drawing of the Earth with Big Ben and the Eiffel Tower in bottom left corner, fifteen lines of credits in orange, blue, green, and purple text at the bottom, title in red text on the yellow balloon. Tagline: "It's a wonderful world, if you'll only take the time to go around!" Stamp of 'Deschamps' in bottom left of 1968 basket. C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the nove by Jules Verne.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, yellowing in creases, slight creasing throughout, residue in bottom right corner, small holes at intersections of creases, heavy creasing along the top, tears and folding along top repaired with tape, yellowing in edges see full concentrated in top centre of verso, NSS stamps in condition top center and top right of verso, residue in top 2016-06-24 record corners of verso.

2016-03-23

2012-01403.0486

66/56

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Chase

1966 Penn, Arthur

USA

One-Sheet

The Chase

Various images of characters extending from top left to centre right, central image of a man standing and smoking, sixteen lines of a caption in top left, "Marlon Brando" and "Sam Spiegel" above title in red dragged design with arrow on the 'e' pointing to a gray silhouette, six lines of credits in black text on a yellow 1966 background. C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the play by Horton Foote.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition; slight yellowing, five horizontal and two vertical creases from delivery method, creasing throughout, small tears along top left edge, tear in top corner and bottom corners, top right of first horizontal crease, staple holes throughout, stains and residue in bottom section, yellow stains along bottom section, creasing and holes in bottom corners, crushed substrate in top right, stains in top centre and top right, crease in bottom left corner, see full tape repairs in verso, yellow and brown tape in top condition centre, NSS stamps in top centre and top left, 2016-06-24 record smudges in centre of verso. 2016-03-23

2012-01403.0487

64/138

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

FBI Code 98

Matinson, 1963 Leslie H.

USA

One-Sheet

FBI Code 98

Tagline in red text at the top, several G-men in various poses around the FBI seal under the tagline, title in a black bullet hole design in centre, quote from J. Edgar Hoover in bottom right of title, horizontal image of a shootout under title, a couple embraces on the left above image, three lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "You are looking at the hard-hitting hand-picked heroes of the FBI moving into action. The next time you see them they will be in the bomb1964 ticking middle of the deadliest of all manhunts." C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Originally released as a TV pilot, the film was released in theatres in April 1964.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; yellowing, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, yellow stain at the top, stain in bottom centre edge, creasing in corners, smudge in centre left, centre, and centre right, hole in right of horizontal creases, NSS stamps in bottom centre and bottom left corner of see full verso, yellow-red stain in bottom right of verso, condition yellowing in creases of verso, holes in intersections 2016-06-24 record of creases.

2016-03-23

2012-01403.0488

62/241

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Hemingway's Adventures of a Young Man

1962 Ritt, Martin

USA

One-Sheet

Hemingway's Adventures of a Young Man

Red tagline in top right, image of a couple kissing in top right, along right edge: images of battles, fire, saufragettes, and other characters, title in red text on the centre left of image, two columns with seven lines of cast in blue text under title, three more images of hunting, conversations, and couples under cast, one line of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "The 1962 hungers of a young man's springtime..." C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition; slight yellowing, severe yellowing along edges, curling, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, hole at bottom intersection of creases, yellowing in creases, slight creasing throughout concentrated at edges, heavy creasing and folding along bottom and top edge, slight see-through in bottom centre, tape repair in centre left edge, tear in right corners see full repaired on verso, tear in top centre, tape repairs condition on verso fixing tears in creases, title in pen in 2016-06-24 record bottom right of verso, stain in bottom centre. 2016-03-23

2012-01403.0489

62/14

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Innocents

1961 Clayton, Jack

USA

One-Sheet

The Innocents

Tagline in top right above a fuzzy smudged image of a couple on a round background, central image of a woman's face with circular lines on her face (targetlike), negative image of man and woman in bottom right of main image, "Deborah Kerr" and title in red text in the centre right, nine lines of credits in blue text on the bottom right, box with studio credits on bottom left. Tagline: "Apparition? Evil? Corruptions? A 1962 strange new experience in shock." C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel "The Turn of the Screw" by Henry James.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition; culring, yellowing, slight vertical and horizontal creases, tear in bottom centre, pin holes in all four corners, stain in bottom section, rippling from liquid damage, stain in centre and top see full right, yellow stain in top left, slight yellowing in condition creases, NSS stamps in top centre of verso, 2016-06-24 record yellowing in creases on verso. 2016-03-23

2012-01403.0490

National Screen 770131 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Julia

Zinnemann, 1977 Fred

USA

One-Sheet

Julia

Tagline in white text at the top on the portrait of a woman, title in white text in the centre, another woman stands in the centre with her head between the 'J' and 'A' of the title, a man stands on the right of the woman, ten lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "The story of two women whose friendship suddenly became a matter of life and death." Signature of Amsel in botom right corner of 1977 image. C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the story by Lilian Hellman.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition; yellow, three severe horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, curling, creasing, heavy creasing in corners, creasing, folding, and tears along right edge, tear in bottom and top centre, loss of colour because of creasing, loss of top left corner, heavy creasing along central see full vertical crease, two inch tear in centre right, tape condition repairs of creases on verso, NSS stamp in top 2016-06-24 record centre of verso. 2016-03-23 Fair condition; yellow, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, smudges and drop stains along bottom edge and left edge, tears in bottom centre, sun damage throughout, drop stains in centre, tear in top centre, fold in top right see full corner, hole in top two intersections of creases, condition yellowing in creases of verso, NSS stamp in top left 2016-06-24 record of verso.

2012-01403.0491

60-147

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Let No Man Write My Epitaph

1960 Leacock, Philip USA

One-Sheet

Let No Man Write My Epitaph

Tagline in black text in top right, image of a couple on a market street on the right, title in white text on a book in bottom left, seven lines of credits in black and red text in bottom right. Tagline: "Seathing... 1960 Searching... Surging to greatness!" C Tagline in the form of game instructions at the top, image of a couple getting married with the man's head missing on the left and a playboy missing his head on the right, two cutout heads in centre with instructions for the game, two lines of cast in blue text under image, blue toned stills from cast to bottom right corner including dancers in a cage, bagpiper, and crowd, title in brown on the left, three 1965 lines of credits in black at the bottom.

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel by Willard Motley.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-23

2012-01403.0492

65-304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Marriage on the Rocks

1965 Donohue, Jack USA

One-Sheet

Marriage on the Rocks

C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; slight yellowing, vertical creases, four severe horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, slight creasing in bottom, tear in see full centre right, NSS stamps in bottom centre and condition bottom left corner of verso, severe yellowing in 2016-06-24 record bottom centre of verso.

2016-03-23

2012-01403.0493

65/116

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

My Blood Runs Cold

Conrad, 1965 William

USA

One-Sheet

My Blood Runs Cold

Two black & white heads in top right corner, tagline in red text along left vertical edge, four red and pink stills in centre, black & white grave stone in bottom left, caption and cast in black text above title in red text along right edge, three lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Perhaps it is not for the living to know the truth about reincarnation... that, in fact, we have all returned from the dead to the flesh and bodies we now inhabit - for this lifetime, at 1965 least..." O

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; slight yellowing, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, yellowing in vertical crease, tear in first intersection of creases, small tear in top centre and left edge, see full slight bleedthrough in top centre and top left, NSS condition stamp in top centre and top left corner of verso, 2016-06-24 record yellowing in creasing of verso. 2016-03-24

2012-01403.0494

R64/144; R64/145

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Operation Petticoat; Pillow Talk

Edwards, Blake; Gordon, 1959 Michael USA

One-Sheet

Operation Petticoat; Pillow Talk

Tagline in a speech bubble at the top on a red background, two title cards for each film, on the left: caption above a cartoon of a blue submarine, central image of a woman standing on a ladder while two men stare at her, four lines of cast, tagline, and title in red text, six lines of credits in black at the bottom. On the right: six lines of tagline beween image of man (left) and woman (right), central image of a man and woman smiling, three lines of cast in white text above the title in red text, nine lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Apart... They rocked the house! Together they'll raise the roof! The greatest 1964 double fun and love show ever!" C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, yellowing and red transfer in bottom horizontal crease, bleedthrough in top centre, small hole in first intersection of see full creases, tear in top right edge, NSS stamps in top condition centre and top centre right of verso, yellow in 2016-06-24 record creases of verso, fold in top right corner.

2016-03-24

2012-01403.0495

66/58

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Oscar

1966 Rouse, Russell USA

One-Sheet

The Oscar

Tagline in white text on a brown-gold background, title in gold under tagline, colourful drawings of several characters in three different sized rectangles under title, five lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "This is the story of... the dreamers and the schemers... the hustlers and the hopefuls... the free-loaders and the phonies... the fakers and the 1966 famous... all fighting for the highest possible award!" C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel by Richard Sale.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; yellow, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, stain in bottom right corner, small tears along right edge, adhesive damage in bottom left and centre right, pin holes in left edge, hole in top intersection and top centre, hole with adhesive damage in top right of image, staple holes in top right, rippling along vertical edge possibly from water damage, bleedthrough in top left, small tears along bottom see full edge, NSS stamp in top centre and top right corner condition of verso, tape repairs on verso, yellow adhesive 2016-06-24 record damage on verso, yellowing in creases of verso.

2016-03-24

77

2012-01403.0496

National Screen 810064 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Postman Always Rings Twice

1981 Rafelson, Bob

USA

One-Sheet

The Postman Always Rings Twice

Tagline in white text in top centre, central image of a couple embracing and caressing each other in a dark room, three lines of credits in white text above title also in white, white 50's style border, five lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "You will 1981 feel the heat."

C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel by James M. Cain.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, loss of colour from see full creasing, very yellow, slight creasing throughout condition concentrated at edges, tears along right edge and 2016-06-24 record folding, two inch tear in top right. Okay condition; glossy, very yellow, severe horizontal creases, one vertical crease, slight creasing throughout, loss of colour from creasing, adhesive damage causing warpage in bottom right, adhesive damage and loss of paper from bottom centre to bottom right corner, tear in bottom centre repaired with tape, bleedthrough in top see full centre, fold in top left corner, holes at condition intersections, NSS stamp in top centre of verso, 2016-06-24 record title in pencil in top left, tape repairs on verso.

2016-03-24

2012-01403.0497

75/1

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Return of the Pink Panther

1975 Edwards, Blake USA

One-Sheet

The Return of the Pink Panther

Four lines of cast in blue text in top right corner, centre left caption about returning cast, in bottom left the pink panther creeps along while a blowup of his shadow is formed into Inspector Clouseau, the title in pink text on the shadow, RW stamp in bottom right (Richard Williams Studio), five lines of credits in black 1975 text at the bottom. C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-24

2012-01403.0498

62/362

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Scarface Mob

1962 Karlson, Phil

USA

One-Sheet

The Scarface Mob

Caption at the top, title in black text in top right under caption, tagline in centre on a pink card,on the left of text the silhouette of a man shoots a tommy gun towards the right on a red background, black & white still of a woman standing on a chair on the silhouette of the man, on the bottom left ghost-like images of men next to a fence, three portraits of men in centre right to bottom right, a man chokes another on the left of portraits, six lines of credits in black text in bottom right corner. Tagline: "Love, loot and lawlessness was their creed... The Epic Story of the 1962 Secret Seven who ripped apart the Capone Empire." O

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel "The Untouchables" by Eliot Ness and Oscar Fraley. Originally released on television and given a theatrical release later.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition; four horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, brown stains and residue in bottom right corner, top right corner and along bottom edge (look like burn marks), tear in bottom left edge, stains in top section, tear and fold in top centre, bleedthrough in top centre, small see full loss of substrate in top right, staples holes in top condition right, showings in pencil in top right of verso, NSS 2016-06-24 record stamp in top centre of verso, stains visible on verso. 2016-03-24

2012-01403.0499

65/234

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Third Day

1965 Smight, Jack

USA

One-Sheet

The Third Day

Tagline in gray text at the top continued in bottom left above credits, central rainbow psychadelic design of a man in bottom left, the black & white close-up of a woman's face on a black horizontal banner, small image of two people running on the right of tagline, six lines of credits in red and black text at the bottom, black book on the right above the credits. Tagline: 1965 "Along on the deadliest manhunt of all..." O

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel by Joseph Hayes.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, yellowing, yellowing in creases, bleedthrough in bottom centre and bottom right corner, red stamp in bottom left see full corner, holes in intersection, yellowing in creasing condition of verso, NSS stamp in bottom centre and bottom 2016-06-24 record left corner of verso. Good condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, loss of colour in creases, slight creasing throughout and concentrated on the right, crushed substrate in bottom centre, staple holes in four corners, hole in see full first intersection, bleedthrough in top centre and condition top right, NSS stamp in top centre and top left 2016-06-24 record corner of verso, yellow in creases on verso. Good condition; staples holes throughout, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, yellowing, creasing in bottom right corner and top right corner, smudges in bottom left see full corner, NSS stamp in top centre and top left of condition verso, theatre stamp in top left of verso, yellow in 2016-06-24 record creases of verso.

2016-03-24

2012-01403.0500

65/35

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Those Calloways

1965 Tokar, Norman USA

One-Sheet

Those Calloways

Tagline in yellow at the top, background image of a sunset with a family of four in bottom centre with dogs, birds, and a bear, title in a white outline in top centre, three images from the film above family, five lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "They laughed together, loved together, fought 1965 together for a dream as big as the sky!"

C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel "Swift Water" by Paul Annixter.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-24

2012-01403.0501

60/68

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Too Soon to Love

1960 Rush, Richard

USA

One-Sheet

Too Soon to Love

Tagline in white text in top left, couple lying on a beach with heads between the title in yellow text on the right, black & white still and quote in bottom right, four lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Too young to marry... Too late to turn 1960 back..."

O

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-24

2012-01403.0502

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

It Happened to Jane

1959 Quine, Richard USA

One-Sheet

Twinkle and Shine

Central image of a smiling couple with captions about the actors, five lines of cast in yellow text in the centre, title in red curved design with blue stars, laughing head on the right of title, two lines of credits 1988 in black text at the bottom. C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the story by Max Wilk and Norman Katkov.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; yellow, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, slight loss of colour from creases, tear in top and bottom of vertical crease, smudges and stains in bottom right corner, tears and folding in bottom left corner, tears along left edge with adhesive damage from previous repairs, small holes in top left, black smudges along top edge, tape repairs on verso, see full stamp in top left of verso, adhesive damage in top condition right of verso, "63-506" in pen in top centre of 2016-06-24 record verso, black smudges in top of verso.

2016-03-24

2012-01403.0503

64/312

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Youngblood Hawke

1964 Daves, Delmer USA

One-Sheet

Youngblood Hawke

Central right vertical image of a man kissing a woman's neck while papers float to the floor, tagline in black and blue text on the left, 'Adult Entertainement' sticker in bottom left, three lines of credits in black and red text at the bottom. Tagline: "A 1964 woman could feel him accross the room." C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel by Herman Wouk.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, smudges in bottom left, yellowing in centre crease, peeling of AE sticker, smudges in centre, finger marks in top left corner, staple holes in four corners, tear in top see full right, small tear in top left, yellowing in creases of condition verso, NSS stamp in bottom centre and bottom left 2016-06-24 record corner. 2016-03-24

2012-01403.0504

63/211

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

A Gathering of Eagles

1963 Mann, Delbert USA

One-Sheet

A Gathering of Eagles

Tagline in red and black text at the top, drawing of red phone in top left, a man sleeps in bed as a woman looks at him, two men in bottom right corner with jet planes in the background, "Rock Hudson" in black text in centre left above the title in blue text, four lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "The Red 1963 Phone... his mistress... her rival..." C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition; yellowing, browning, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, yellowing in creases, stains and smudges through top and bottom sections, severe yellow adhesive damage in four corners and bottom horizontal crease, brown water/coffee stains along bottom edge, crease in bottom corners, fold in bottom right corner, tear in bottom right corner, pin holes in four corners and centre, black stain in centre left, red stain in top left, folding in top left corner, tearing in top right, tear and adhesive damage in top centre, slight loss of colour from see full creases, large tear in top left corner, adhesive condition damage on verso, NSS stamp in bottom centre of 2016-06-24 record verso, "63-211" in pen in bottom right of verso.

2016-03-29

2012-01403.0505

65/108

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

A Rage to Live

Grauman, 1965 Walter

USA

One-Sheet

A Rage to Live

Tagline in pink text at the top, centre left turquoise image of a woman undressing in the mirror, under central image and to the left a yellow still of a man kissing a woman's neck, to the right a woman stands, title in white text on red background on the right of still, two lines of caption above title, six lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Take it easy, Grace...! Think of a good lie to tell your husband. Tell him you're late because the car broke down...tell him anything! Even make love to him...after all, you need 1965 him more than other men!" C Three horizontal stills from top to centre with tagline in black text between them (from top to bottom): men aiming their guns, a herd of running buffalo, men on horseback, title in red text with a black rifle overlay, six lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Who were the misfits? The men who killed 1971 for sport... or those who fought for the buffalo!" C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel by John O'Hara.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition; yellowing at edges and in creases, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, loss of colour from creases, large tape censor in top centre causing damage to paper (rippling and warping), slight creasing throughout, holes in intersection of creases, severe crease in top see full centre, yellowing in creases of verso, small fold in condition top right corner, NSS stamp in bottom left and 2016-06-24 record bottom centre of verso. 2016-03-29

2012-01403.0506

71-183

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Bless the Beasts & Children

Kramer, 1971 Stanley

USA

One-Sheet

Bless the Beasts & Children

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method,yellow in vertical crease and centre horizontal crease, small tear in see full bottom left edge, hole in interections of creases, condition yellow in creases of verso, NSS stamp in bottom 2016-06-24 record centre and bottom right of verso. Fair condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, slight creasing throughout, slight loss of colour from creases, staple holes in four corners and centre of edges, see full holes in intersection of creases, "72/71" in pen in condition top centre of verso, small stain in centre of verso, 2016-06-24 record yellowing in creases of verso.

2016-03-29

2012-01403.0507

72/71

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Le casse

1971 Verneuil, Henri USA

One-Sheet

The Burglars

Yellow background, three lines of credits in black text at the top, a man runs down a flight of stairs in top centre, 'Catch' in black text and title in red text in centre, stills of characters and two fight scenes under 1972 title, three lines in credits in black text at the bottom. C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-29

78

2012-01403.0508

verify

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Dear Heart

1964 Mann, Delbert USA

One-Sheet

Dear Heart

Tagline in top centre in blue text above the drawing of man tossing a woman in the air, aqua blue stills of scenes along centre, one line of continued tagline in black text under image, one line of cast in blue text on the left of title in turquoise on a black box, three lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "The unconventional love affair that began at a convention in New York. 'Dear Heart' Evie Jackson... tonight she'd get herself a man and they'd never call her that 1964 again." C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, yellowing, tears in edges of creases, small tears along bottom edge, adhesive damage in four corners, peeling 'Adult Entertainment' sticking also causing rippling, red paper residue from removed sticker, stain from title to bottom centre, yellow adhesive in centre left, staining along vertical edges, finger marks and see full smudges in top section, holes at the intersections condition of creases, large two inch tear in top right, adhesive 2016-06-24 record damage on verso, yellowing in creases of verso. 2016-03-29

2012-01403.0509

66/378

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Fortune Cookie

1966 Wilder, Billy

USA

One-Sheet

The Fortune Cookie

Pink background, tagline in black text on the left edge, green image of a man tumbling into the black border breaking it, central drawing of a woman hugging a man while she tries to get money from his cash register, a blue man in background also steals money while a man and woman grab fallen money on the right, three lines of credits above title in black text, three lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "How Harry Hinkle became a fortune cookie. 1966 Some people will do anything for $249,000.92." C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Sheet B style.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, tear in top centre, yellowing in creases, bleedthrough in top centre, slight loss of colour, small tear in left of top horizontal crease, yellowing in creases on verso, see full NSS stamp in top centre and top right corner, condition browning along edges of verso, holes in 2016-06-24 record intersections of creases, creasing in centre.

2016-03-29

2012-01403.0510

67/91

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Hurry Sundown

Preminger, 1967 Otto

USA

One-Sheet

Hurry Sundown

Eight lines of credits in white in top centre on a black tree with an orange background, title in white text on a black background in centre, brown images from the film on the mirror image of the tree on a green background under the title, 'American Entertainment' and censor sticker in bottom right of image, six lines of credits in black at the bottom. Designed by David 1967 Weissman. C Warning this is the' and title in red and blue text with line drawings of characters, water, and activities at the top, under the title two men carry a bed and luggage while following a bikini clad woman, one line of cast with red character descriptions under image, 1963 two lines of credits in black text at the bottom.

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel by K.B. Gilden.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, slight image loss from creasing, slight yellowing in vertical crease, holes in intersection of creases, slight creasing throughout, fold and tear in bottom left corner, small tears and folds at edges of horizontal creases, staple holes in four corners and top centre, peeling of 'Adult Entertainment' sticker, slight yellowing, smudges see full along top edge, NSS stamp in bottom centre and condition bottom centre left of verso, yellowing in creases of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-03-29 Fair condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, yellow, browning along creases, creasing along bottom, smudges see full along top left, pin holes in four corners and condition throughout edges, '63-187' in bottom right of 2016-06-24 record verso, yellowing in creasing of verso.

2012-01403.0511

63/187

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Island of Love

DaCosta, 1963 Morton

USA

One-Sheet

Island of Love

C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-29

2012-01403.0512

72/197

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Junior Bonner

Peckinpah, 1972 Sam

USA

One-Sheet

Junior Bonner

Tagline in centre right, central figure of a cowboy (Steve McQueen) carrying a saddle with a blue cloudy sky in the background, line drawings of a town in the background at the bottom centre of image, seven lines of credits in blue text in bottom centre, 'Steve McQueen' in blue and title in red text in centre right. Tagline: "Going down his own road... Steve McQueen 1972 as 'Junior Bonner' The Last of his kind." C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition; very yellow, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, browning along edges, hole in bottom right corner and missing bottom right corner, staple holes in four corners and centre of top and bottom, loss of colour, creasing throughout, pink holes in centre left, hole in top left, smudges in top and bottom right, tear in top left repaired with tape, tear in top centre repaired, missing top right corner, tear in top right, tears in centre and edges of creases see full repaired with tape on verso, NSS stamp in top right condition of verso, '72-197' in pen in top centre, stain in top 2016-06-24 record left and top centre of verso. 2016-03-29

2012-01403.0513

72/435

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Lost Horizon

1973 Jarrott, Charles USA

One-Sheet

Lost Horizon

One line in black text at the top, title in white text on a blue mountainous background, central outline of a man and woman's faces, on the left of man characters walk away from a plane crash, tagline in black text on the right of woman, a woman dances in bottom right with a mountain resort in the background, four lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Have you ever dreamed of a place far away from the raging fury of a world in turmoil? Ross Hunter's musical production gives new excitement to James Hamilton's 1972 adventure masterpiece." C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Great condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, yellowing adhesive see full and creasing, slight yellowing along edges, condition bleedthrough in top centre, NSS stamp in top 2016-06-24 record centre of verso, slight yellowing in creases of verso.

2016-03-29

2012-01403.0514

72/44

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Mary, Queen of Scots

1972 Jarrott, Charles USA

One-Sheet

Mary, Queen of Scots

The two queens confront each other in a scene with a shield shaped border, character descriptions on the right and left of shield, tagline in white text above their heads, painted characters and scenes along the bottom of shield radiating out, five lines of credits above title in white text on a red banner and three lines under title. Tagline: "They used every passion in their incredible duel... and every man in their savage 1972 games of intrigue." C Tagline in yellow text at the top, various cartoon images on a black background, a green silhouette of a man hangs on a clothes hanger in the centre with the title in white text on the body, four lines of credits in blue text under image. Tagline: "This motion picture will probably do as much for mothers as 'Moby Dick' 1967 did for whales..." C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; very yellow, more severe in creases, five horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, creasing throughout, holes in intersection of larger creases, staples in four corners and centre of edges, tear in bottom left, hole in top right see full corner, tear in top centre, smudges in centre left, condition NSS stamps in top right and top centre of verso, 2016-06-24 record yellowing in creases of verso. 2016-03-29

2012-01403.0515

67/53

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Oh Dad, Poor Dad, Mamma's Hung You in the Closet and I'm Feelin' So Sad

1967 Quine, Richard USA

One-Sheet

Oh Dad, Poor Dad, Mamma's Hung You in the Closet and I'm Feelin' So Sad

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; slight yellowing, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, holes in intersection of creases, slight creasing along left see full vertical edge, smudge in bottom left corner, NSS condition stamp in bottom centre and bottom left corner in 2016-06-24 record verso, yellowing in creases of verso. 2016-03-29

2012-01403.0516

68/101

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Pretty Poison

1968 Black, Noel

USA

One-Sheet

Pretty Poison

Main large turquoise image of a woman pointing a gun, tagline in white text above the couple on the left of gun, tagline continued in turquoise text under couple, two lines of cast above pink title in bottom right, three lines of credits in black and blue text at the bottom. Tagline: "What brought a nice kid like Sue Ann to a shocking moment like this? A shook-up story 1968 of the up-right generation." C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Style B sheet.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; slight yellowing, concentration in creases, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, holes in intersection of creases, larger hole in centre, MPAA suggestion crossed out with marker, abraision in top right, see full slight creasing in image, rippling in centre and top condition right, NSS stamp in top centre and top right of 2016-06-24 record verso, severe yellowing on verso.

2016-03-29

2012-01403.0517

66/299

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

An American Dream

1966 Gist, Robert

USA

One-Sheet

See You in Hell, Darling

Tagline in black text at the top, central pale turquoise still of a woman standing on a bed with the outline of a man on the left, one line of cast in light turquoise at the bottom of image, in centre right a glued title card over the original title, title in red text with various designs in letters, eight lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "This is Mrs. Rojack. Be glad 1966 you're not Mr. Rojack!" C Six lines of tagline in white text at the top, central image of a couple lying on a beach, 'Richard Thomas' in black text above the title in red text, six lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "In twentyfour hours, a nice college kid named Jimmy J. robbed a liquor store, got drunk, held a séance, crawled through a cemetery, raided lovers' lane, dropped the Homecoming Queen, and went to jail. It happened on September 30, 1955, the day that shook up a 1977 generation!" C Yellow background, central image of a woman in bed, various images from the film border the central image, tagline above the woman and continued under title in yellow text, title in black text on a white rectangle in centre, three lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Carroll Baker is the fury. 1965 George Maharis is the force. 'Sylvia' is the explosion!" C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel by Norman Mailer.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition; yellowing, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, browning along creases and edges, title sticker has severe browning, two inch tear in bottom centre and top centre, crease in bottom left corner, loss of colour from creases, red scraping in centre, abraisons in bottom left, slight creasing in centre, see through of stamp, adhesive damage on verso, yellowing in see full creasing of verso, NSS stamp in bottom centre and condition bottom left corner of verso, creasing along top 2016-06-24 record edge. 2016-03-29

2012-01403.0518

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

September 30,, 1955

1977 Bridges, James USA

One-Sheet

September 30,, 1955

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; three horizontal and one vertical see full crease from delivery method, yellowing in creases, condition creasing throughout, loss of colour from creases, 2016-06-24 record slight yellowing in creases on verso.

2016-03-29

2012-01403.0519

65/60

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Sylvia

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

One-Sheet

Sylvia

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel by E.V. Cunnigham.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, slight yellowing, bleedthrough in top left corner, yellowing in vertical crease, hole in top left of image, hole in see full intersections of creases, creasing along bottom, condition stain in centre, NSS stamp in top centre and top 2016-06-24 record right of verso, stain in centre top of verso. 2016-03-29

79

2012-01403.0520

74/260

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Taramind Seed

1974 Edwards, Blake USA

One-Sheet

The Tamarind Seed

Caption in blue text at the top, three lines of credits in black and red text above image, central image of a man looking at a woman, above and behind the main image several scenes from the film including an explosion, a jungle, and a beach, title in red text on a yellow rectangle, four lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Julie and Omar... together as only lovers worlds apart can be. The Tamrind Seed... 1974 where love grows and passion flowers." C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel by Evelyn Anthony.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, loss of colour from see full creasing, slight creasing along edges, tear in top condition left, bleedthrough in top centre, NSS stamp in top 2016-06-24 record centre of verso, yellowing in creases of verso. Okay condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, four lighter vertical creases, creasing throughout, loss of colour from creasing, small tears along edges, holes in intersections in creases, large tear in top right see full corner repaired with tape, yellowing, browning at condition edges, tear in top centre, NSS stamp in top centre 2016-06-24 record of verso, residue in corners of verso.

2016-03-29

2012-01403.0521

74/149

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

That's Entertainment!

1974 Haley, Jack, Jr. USA

One-Sheet

That's Entertainment!

Title in white text on a lit up marquee design, famous names from the golden age of Hollywood lit up in various sign designs, eleven small portraits of famous names in bottom right of the image, tagline in white text under image, four lines of credits in black text at 1974 the bottom. Tagline: "Boy. Do we need it now."

C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-29

2012-01403.0522

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Thoroughly Modern Millie

Hill, George 1967 Roy

USA

One-Sheet

Thoroughly Modern Millie

Awards poster. Large '7' in neon pink on the left of a list of nominations, 'Julie Andrews' in black text above the title in white text on a neon pink banner, two lines of credits in black text at the bottom, black & white 1972 image of Andrews on the bottom right. O

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, holes in intersection of creases, dirt transfer throughout, yellow, adhesive damage in four corners, see-through of adhesive damage from verso in top and bottom right, creasing throughout, tear in edges, small tear in centre bottom, fold in bottom corners, hole in see full bottom right, NSS stamp in top centre of verso, condition severe adhesive damage on verso, yellowing in 2016-06-24 record creases of verso. 2016-03-29 Fair condition; coffee stains throughout concentrated in bottom section, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, slight yellowing, adhesive damage in top corners, staple holes in four corners, tears along left edge and in centre right, smudges in top left, peeling 'Adult Entertainment' sticker, holes at intersections of creases, stain in bottom left corner and centre, very see full yellow on verso, adhesive damage in top corners of condition verso, '63-227' in centre and bottom centre of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-03-29 Fair condition; very yellow, creasing throughout, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, scratching in bottom centre, small tear in bottom left corner, tear in centre left edge see full and top right, water damage in top left, pin holes in condition four corners, small holes in intersection of creases, 2016-06-24 record yellowing in creases of verso. 2016-03-29 Poor condition; yellow, bleedthrough in bottom right corner and bottom centre, three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, creasing throughout, rippling throughout, holes in left corners, pin holes in top right, small tears along left edge, smudges in centre left, peeling of 'Adult see full Entertainment' sticker, NSS stamp in bottom centre condition and bottom left centre of verso, '63-133' in bottom 2016-06-24 record right. 2016-03-29

2012-01403.0523

63/227

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Toys in the Attic

Hill, George 1963 Roy

USA

One-Sheet

Toys in the Attic

Tagline in white text on a red background above a black & white image of a man slapping a woman, 'Adult Entertainment' sticker on the image, three lines of cast in red text in bottom left, title in red text on the image of a broken house in bottom centre, five lines of credits in black text in bottom right corner. 1963 Tagline: "Toys in the attic play with fire." O Metallic backing, tagline in black text in top right, central image of a father and son with their foreheads touching, three lines of cast and title in white text on the right of image, horizontal line of hands clapping in centre, eleven lines of credits in silver text at the bottom. Tagline: "There's a lot more to being a father 1980 than just having a son." C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the stage play by Lillian Hellman.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2012-01403.0524

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Tribute

1980 Clark, Bob

Canada

One-Sheet

Tribute

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2012-01403.0525

63-133

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Yellow Canary

1963 Kulik, Buzz

USA

One-Sheet

The Yellow Canary

'Adult Entertainment' sticker in top centre, yellow background, title in gray with the 'y' in the shape of a gun with a black bird on it, tagline in centre, four colour toned images on the right and under tagline, four lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "The yellow canary is a soft yellow thing. 1963 That's what you are Paxton... a soft, yellow thing..."

C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel "Evil Come, Evil Go."

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2012-01403.0526

79-515

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

1941

Spielberg, 1979 Steven

USA

One-Sheet

1941

Caption in yellow at the top, three cartoon images of four men in exaggerated army outfits, title in a stone designs in centre, in bottom centre a cartoon image of a submarine with images of one man throwing another man off and a woman holding onto the periscope, seventeen lines in white text on either side of submarine, exploding port under line of title. 1979 'Green' signature in bottom right of title. C Tagline in yellow text in top centre, two vertical images of main cast with credits in centre in pink text, title in black in centre, horizontal banner of scenes from the film including battle scenes, four lines of credits in bottom left (in pink and black), sandcoloured book in bottom centre. Tagline: "From the age of magnificence comes a new magnificient motion 1965 picture." C Central image of characters piled into a convertible with a 'NIPNTUCK' license plate, a boy sits on the hood, a man in the background pulls the scarf of a man in the car, palm trees in the background, title in yellow and red text on a brown shield in the top left corner, tagline in yellow text under title, cast in red text in bottom right, eight lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Scooter's in trouble now. His 1989 kidnappers don't take credits cards." C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Style F sheet

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; three severe horizontal and one severe vertical crease from delivery method, slight creasing throughout, curling, tears and crushed see full fibers in top left edge, NSS stamps in top centre condition and top left, sun damage in top of verso, stains in 2016-06-24 record top right corner of verso.

2016-03-30

2012-01403.0527

65-371

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Agony and the Ecstasy

1965 Reed, Carol

USA

One-Sheet

The Agony and the Ecstasy

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel by Irving Stone.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Great condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, very slight creasing in centre, yellowing in vertical crease, yellowing at edges, bleedthrough in bottom centre, slight see full creasing in top right edge, stains in bottom centre condition and bottom right centre, yellow, yellowing severe in 2016-06-24 record creases on verso. 2016-03-30

2012-01403.0528

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Beverly Hills Brats

Sotirakis, 1989 Dimitri

USA

One-Sheet

Beverly Hills Brats

27 x 40 inches

27 in

40 in

Poster for home release.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, cresing throughout, see full holes in intersection of creases, tear in top centre condition and tear in top right, slight loss of colour from 2016-06-24 record creasing, list of stars on verso.

2016-03-30

2012-01403.0529

National Screen 790024 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Champ

Zeffirelli, 1979 Franco

USA

One-Sheet

The Champ

Faded portraits of actors with names in burgundy above portraits, tagline in burgundy text in centre between portraits, black & white stills of a man shadow boxing with a small boy, title in burgundy text under image, nine lines of credits in orange-brown text at the bottom. Tagline: "The more you love.... the 1979 harder you fight." O Cast in white text at the top, title in white and red text under cast, little rundown house with stormy sky in the background, stills of three actors along right edge, six lines in grey text at the bottom, review in bottom left of image, one inch banner with 'Coming in April' in 1994 red text (removable). C Mel Gibson' in white text at the top, large image of Gibson on a sky background, tagline in black text on the left of face, title in white text in bottom right corner with continued tagline, a couple kisses in bottom left with a lighthouse in the background. Tagline: "Fifty years ago he volunteered for a dangerous experiment. All in the name of love. Time 1992 waits for no man, but true love waits forever."

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, loss of colour from creases, creasing throughout, adhesive damage and removal of paper in top right corner, several tears along left edge, tear in top left, adhesive damage in top left, stain in top left, creasing in two corners, small tears in top right, holes in intersections of see full creases, yellowing, tape repairs on verso, '79-24' in condition top centre of verso, title in top left of verso, yellow, 2016-06-24 record sun damage in top of verso. 2016-03-30

2012-01403.0530

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Flesh and Bone

1993 Kloves, Steve

USA

One-Sheet

Flesh and Bone

27 x 42 inches

27 in

42 in

Poster for home release.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; creasing and rippling from rolling, see full slight curling, severe crease in top left corner, tear condition in top left corner, loss of colour from creases, small 2016-06-24 record tear in bottom right, title in pen in top left of verso. 2016-03-30

2012-01403.0531

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Forever Young

1992 Miner, Steve

USA

One-Sheet

Forever Young

C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; one horizontal crease at the bottom, loss of paper in bottom left, creasing along bottom see full edge, small tears along left and right edge, one inch condition tear in top right, slight curling, title in pen in top 2016-06-24 record right corner of verso, fold in bottom right. 2016-03-30

2012-01403.0532

National Screen 790132 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Frisco Kid

1979 Aldrich, Robert USA

One-Sheet

The Frisco Kid

Yellow background, tagline in brown text at the top, central image of a crazy looking man on a horse in a lasso design, title in a lasso design with cast names above and a portrait of Harrison Ford underneath, five lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "The greatest cowboy who ever rode into the wild 1979 west... from Poland." C 40th Anniversary poster. Two lines of credits at the top, central image of a couple looking at each other while another man sits in his car with a house in the background, title in black under image, seven lines of 1996 credits in brown and black the bottom.

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, yellowing, adhesive damage along bottom edges, pin holes in all four corners and centre of edges, loss of paper along bottom edge, slight creasing throughout, loss of colour from creasing, tear in bottom centre, fold in bottom left, yellow stain in top left, tear in top see full centre, holes in intersections repaired with tape on condition verso, NSS stamp in bottom centre of verso, title in 2016-06-24 record pen in bottom of verso.

2016-03-30

2012-01403.0533

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Giant

Stevens, 1956 George

USA

One-Sheet

Giant

C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel by Edna Ferber.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

see full condition Great condition; very slight creasing throughout, 2016-06-24 record small tear in bottom left.

2016-03-30

80

2012-01403.0534

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Giant

Stevens, 1956 George

USA

One-Sheet

Giant

40th Anniversary poster. Two lines of credits at the top, central image of a couple looking at each other while another man sits in his car with a house in the background, title in black under image, seven lines of 1996 credits in brown and black the bottom.

C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Based on the novel by Edna Ferber.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

see full condition Great condition; very slight creasing throughout, 2016-06-24 record yellow lines in centre of verso.

2016-03-30

2012-01403.0535

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Honeymooners

1950s-1970s

USA

One-Sheet

The Honeymooners

Poster for 35th anniversary of the original "Honeymooner" TV series. Shield in top centre with 'Home Classic 39,' title in white text at the top, twenty 1993 square images of characters in various cartoon styles. C 'Mel Gibson' in white text at the top, still of a man talking while a child looks on, tagline in light blue under still, title in white text above a stone cottage on a lake at the bottom, five lines of credits in blue text under the image. Tagline: "A fatherless boy had almost given up all his dreams... Until one man 1993 believed in him enough to make them come true..." C

25 x 36 inches

25 in

36 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

see full Good condition; creasing throughout, slight loss of condition colour, small tears and loss of substrate in top 2016-06-24 record corners, browning stain along left edge of verso.

2016-03-30

2012-01403.0536

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Man Without a Face

1993 Gibson, Mel

USA

One-Sheet

The Man Without a Face

25 x 39.5 inches

25 in

39.5 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; vertical edge damage from cutting, see full tears along top edge, creasing throughout, slight condition yellowing, title in pen in bottom left corner of 2016-06-24 record verso.

2016-03-30

2012-01403.0537

National Screen 790017 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Norma Rae

1979 Ritt, Martin

USA

One-Sheet

Norma Rae

Faded black & white image of a woman in the sky of an industrial town, tagline in orange text in the centre, title in orange cursive above seven lines of credits in orange text. Tagline: "The story of a woman with the courage to risk everything for what she 1979 believes is right." O

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, creasing throughout, slight yellowing, loss of colour from creasing, creasing in bottom right corner, tears at edges of creases repaired with tape, yellow adhesive damage throughout edges, ripped top left and right corners, tear in top right, holes at intersections of creases see full repaired with tape, title in pen in centre of verso, condition residue in four corners of verso, water damage at 2016-06-24 record the bottom. 2016-03-30

2012-01403.0538

National Screen 790017 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Norma Rae

1979 Ritt, Martin

USA

One-Sheet

Norma Rae

Title in red text with twenty-eight short lines of reviews in black text, a woman stretches her arms up in the centre right, six lines of credits in black text at 1979 the bottom.

C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Sheet B style.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method (severe), yellow, yellowing and stains in vertical crease, creasing along bottom edge, fold in bottom corners, staple holes in four corners and centres of edges, yellow stains over MPAA raiting, tear in bottom right, seethrough of residue in top two corners, yellow adhesive damage in top two corners, tear in top centre and top left, loss and folding in top left, residue in top centre, title in pen in top left of see full verso, NSS stamp in centre of verso, title in pen in condition centre of verso, holes in intersections repaired with 2016-06-24 record tape. 2016-03-30

2012-01403.0539

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Scent of a Woman

1992 Brest, Martin

USA

One-Sheet

Scent of a Woman

Image of two men walking in a park with the skyline in the background, two lines of credits at the top, ten short lines of the tagline in top centre, title in white text in bottom right, three lines of credits in white text at the bottom. Tagline: "Col. Grank Slade has a very special plan for the weekend. It involves travel, women, good food, fine wine, the tango, chauffered limo and a loaded forty-five. And he's bringing Charlie 1992 along for the ride." C 20th Anniversary poster. Metallic sheen. Tagline at the top, Kirk, Spock, and McCoy in top centre under tagline, the Enterprise in the centre, various other characters on the bridge, title in red text on the Academy logo, 'on video' in white text on the right of logo. Tagline: "These are the voyages where the 1986 legend began." Three portraits of cast with names at the top, title in brown text in the center with "And other lies your friends let you get away with" in black, two old men sit on park benches in front of a lake, five lines of 1993 credits in light blue text at the bottom.

25 x 39 inches

25 in

39 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

see full Good condition; rippling from rolling, slight condition creasing throughout, slight loss of colour along 2016-06-24 record edges, title in bottom right and top left of verso.

2016-03-30

2012-01403.0540

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Star Trek

1966-1969

USA

One-Sheet

Star Trek

C

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

Poster for home release.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; curling, slight creasing throughout, see full slight loss of colour, small tears along left edge, condition crease in bottom corners, tear in top centre, tear 2016-06-24 record and fold in top left, stains in top right. 2016-03-30

2012-01403.0541

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Wrestling Ernest Hemingway

1993 Haines, Randa USA

One-Sheet

Wrestling Ernest Hemingway

C

27 x 39 inches

27 in

39 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

see full Good condition; slight creasing throughout, small condition tears along left bottom edge, slight loss of colour, 2016-06-24 record title in pen in bottom left corner of verso. Okay condition; slight creasing throughout, loss of colour from creasing, tear and fold in top right see full corner, creasing in bottom corners and rip in condition bottom left corner, yellow, wear along top and 2016-06-24 record bottom edges.

2016-03-30

2012-01403.0542

71-212

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Anderson Tapes

1971 Lumet, Sidney Italy

Poster

The Anderson Tapes

A man and woman talk while three people enter from the right in their nightclothes, one man is wearing a green mask, at the bottom three lines of credits in blue text with title in red text, one line of credits in 1971 white text on a blue banner. C

25.5 x 18 inches

25.5 in

18 in

Printed in Italy by Rotograph-Roma, Inc.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-31

2012-01403.0543

71-212

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Anderson Tapes

1971 Lumet, Sidney Italy

Poster

The Anderson Tapes

A man helps to undress a woman on the left of background, close-up of another man smiling at the viewer on the right, at the bottom three lines of credits in blue text with title in red text, one line of 1971 credits in white text on a blue banner. On the left a woman lies in her bed, on the right two men greet each other, at the bottom three lines of credits in blue text with title in red text, one line of 1971 credits in white text on a blue banner. Profile of a man in foreground, still of a police emergency in background, at the bottom three lines of credits in blue text with title in red text, one line of 1971 credits in white text on a blue banner.

C

25.5 x 18 inches

25.5 in

18 in

Printed in Italy by Rotograph-Roma, Inc.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition; curling, very yellow, slight creasing throughout with concentration at edges, loss of colour, wear and abraisons along edges, yellow adhesive damage in bottom right, rip in bottom left corner, tear in top right repaired with tape, large creases in bottom corners, staple holes along see full edges, tear in bottom right repared with tape which condition is yellowing and losing adhesive, '71-212' in red pen 2016-06-24 record in bottom left corner of verso. 2016-03-31 Fair condition; slight creasing throughout, see full concentration at edges, slight loss of colour, condition crushed fibers in bottom left corner, tear and fold 2016-06-24 record in bottom right edge, yellow, tear in centre left. Okay condition; yellow, slight creasing throughout, see full two large tears in right edge with a number of condition smaller tears, red stain in bottom right, wear along 2016-06-24 record top edge and small tears along top.

2012-01403.0544

71-212

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Anderson Tapes

1971 Lumet, Sidney Italy

Poster

The Anderson Tapes

C

25.5 x 18 inches

25.5 in

18 in

Printed in Italy by Rotograph-Roma, Inc.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-31

2012-01403.0545

71-212

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Anderson Tapes

1971 Lumet, Sidney Italy

Poster

The Anderson Tapes

C

25.5 x 18 inches

25.5 in

18 in

Printed in Italy by Rotograph-Roma, Inc.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-31

2012-01403.0546

71-212

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Anderson Tapes

1971 Lumet, Sidney Italy

Poster

The Anderson Tapes

2012-01403.0547

71-212

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Anderson Tapes

1971 Lumet, Sidney Italy

Poster

The Anderson Tapes

On the left a woman gets strangled by a masked man, on the right a man looks at two people sleeping in bed in the background while another masked man looks on in the far right of foreground, at the bottom three lines of credits in blue text with title in red text, one 1971 line of credits in white text on a blue banner. C In the background three masked men talk to another man, close-up of a man in left foreground, at the bottom three lines of credits in blue text with title in red text, one line of credits in white text on a blue 1971 banner. C

25.5 x 18 inches

25.5 in

18 in

Printed in Italy by Rotograph-Roma, Inc.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; yellow, slight creasing throughout concentrated at edges, wear, tear and folding along bottom edge, slight wear along the top, slight loss see full of colour in top centre, small tear in top left, '71condition 212' in bottom left corner of verso, stain in top left 2016-06-24 record of verso, residue in bottom left of verso. 2016-03-31

25.5 x 18 inches

25.5 in

18 in

Printed in Italy by Rotograph-Roma, Inc.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

see full Good condition; slight creasing throughout, loss of condition colour, wear and creasing along top and bottom 2016-06-24 record edge, small tears in top edge, yellow.

2016-03-31

2012-01403.0548

71-212

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Anderson Tapes

1971 Lumet, Sidney Italy

Poster

The Anderson Tapes

On the left a man looks at jewels from a small safe, on the right a woman in pink stares at the viewer, at the bottom three lines of credits in blue text with title in red text, one line of credits in white text on a blue 1971 banner. C

25.5 x 18 inches

25.5 in

18 in

Printed in Italy by Rotograph-Roma, Inc.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Poor condition; bottom edge severely ripped with most of the bottom 1.5 inches of border removed, creasing throughout, yellow, loss of colour, fold in top left corner, stains in bottom right corner, stains see full in top right, small tears along right edge, several condition stains along top edge of verso, vertical stain in left 2016-06-24 record of verso, tape residue along bottom ripped edge. 2016-03-31 Okay condition; yellow, slight creasing throughout, slight colour loss in right, rips with 1.5 inch loss of border in bottom right, fraying and creasing in see full bottom left corner, stains and residue in top left condition above the man's head, stain in top right, staining in 2016-06-24 record ripped edges on verso, abraisons in verso. Okay condition; very yellow, slight creasing along edges, wear along bottom edge, rip with one inch loss of border in bottom right corner, stain in centre next to man's feet, residue in top above see full man, very small tears along top edge, stain and condition residue in top right of verso, yellow stain in top of 2016-06-24 record verso.

2012-01403.0549

71-212

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Anderson Tapes

1971 Lumet, Sidney Italy

Poster

The Anderson Tapes

On the left a man walks towards the viewer, in the background police officers on rooftops hold a man repairing a powerline, at the bottom three lines of credits in blue text with title in red text, one line of 1971 credits in white text on a blue banner.

C

25.5 x 18 inches

25.5 in

18 in

Printed in Italy by Rotograph-Roma, Inc.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-31

2012-01403.0550

71-212

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Anderson Tapes

1971 Lumet, Sidney Italy

Poster

The Anderson Tapes

2012-01403.0551

72/435

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Lost Horizon

1973 Jarrott, Charles Italy

Poster

Lost Horizon

A suited man walks through a prison cell block, in the right forground the close-up of a woman, at the bottom three lines of credits in blue text with title in red text, one line of credits in white text on a blue 1971 banner. C Central still of a couple smiling, two stills of scenes and characters on either side of couple (four in total) on an orange background, title in light blue text at the bottom centre, five lines of credits in black text at the 1973 bottom. C

25.5 x 18 inches

25.5 in

18 in

Printed in Italy by Rotograph-Roma, Inc.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-31

25.75 x 18 inches

25.75 in

18 in

Based on the novel by James Hilton.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; curling, slight yellowing, very slight see full creasing concentrated at edges, light scratches condition throughout, small tears along top edge, creasing in 2016-06-24 record top right corner. 2016-03-31

81

2012-01403.0552

69/38

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Mackenna's Gold

Thompson, J. 1969 Lee

Italy

Poster

Mackenna's Gold

Main image of a man cocking his gun, a woman crouches on his left and two others stand at the mouth of a cave, twelve small black & white portraits in two columns along left edge, twelve lines of credits 1969 in red and black text at the bottom right. O

26 x 18 inches

26 in

18 in

Based on the novel by Will Henry.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; very yellow, creasing, wear and small tears along right edge, small tears in top right corner, yellow stain in bottom left, very slight see full creasing throughout with minimal colour loss, two condition tears in top left corner with wear along the top left 2016-06-24 record edge. 2016-03-31 Okay condition; yellow, slight creasing throughout, wear and small tears throughout edges, three inch tear in bottom left repaired with tape on verso, see full missing bottom left corner, browning along bottom condition left from tape on verso, fold in top left corner, tape 2016-06-24 record repairs on verso, tear in top right. 2016-03-31

2012-01403.0553

69-341

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Marooned

1969 Sturges, John

Italy

Poster

Marooned

A man gets interviewed by press while helicopters are carrying a bomb in the background, three lines of credits in blue text above the title in red text, two 1969 lines of credits in black at the bottom. C On the left a couple cowers in fear in their bed, on the right a still of a couple trying to enter the cabin, three lines of credits in blue text above the title in red text, 1973 one line of credits in white on a blue banner. C On the left a man points a rifle at another man on a cart, in the centre a woman stands guard with a gun, on the right two men sit on a hill while an oil well booms in the background, three lines of credits in blue text above the title in red text, one line of credits in 1973 white on a blue banner. C Two lines of cast at the top, image of Bogart and Bergman cheek-to-cheek in centre left, Warner Brothers in blue text in centre right of title, title in red text diagonally from bottom left to right, five lines in 1978 credits in black text at the bottom. C

26 x 18 inches

26 in

18 in

Based on the novel by Martin Caidin.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2012-01403.0554

73/159

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Oklahoma Crude

Kramer, 1973 Stanley

Italy

Poster

Oklahoma Crude

25.5 x 18 inches

25.5 in

18 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

see full Good condition; slight creasing throughout, small condition tears and wear along bottom edge, slight colour 2016-06-24 record loss, stain in centre right of verso.

2016-03-31

2012-01403.0555

73/159

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Oklahoma Crude

Kramer, 1973 Stanley

Italy

Poster

Oklahoma Crude

25.5 x 18 inches

25.5 in

18 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; curling, yellowing, slight creasing concentrated at edges, wear along bottom edge, see full creases in bottom left corner and top left corner, condition slight loss of colour along bottom edge, yellow in 2016-06-24 record top left of verso.

2016-03-31

2012-01403.0556

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Casablanca

1942 Curtiz, Michael USA

Poster

Casablanca

19 x 26 inches

19 in

26 in

Reproduction by IRA Roberts production inc.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Okay condition; pin holes in all four corners, wear see full along edges, small tears along edges, vertical condition scratches, fold in top right corner, slight yellowing, 2016-06-24 record stains in centre left and right of verso. Okay condition; creasing throughout, slight yellowing, yellow stains in four corners, stains in centre, residue along left and right edges, pin holes in vertical edges, tear in top centre repaired with tape, red ink lines in top left, tears along vertical see full edges, fold in bottom right corner, residue in four condition corners of verso causing damage, stain in centre of 2016-06-24 record vertical edges on verso.

2016-03-31

2012-01403.0557

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Casablanca

1942 Curtiz, Michael USA

Poster

Casablanca

Two lines of cast in black text at the top, red image of characters above a colour image of Bogart with a gun, title in red paint at the bottom, three lines of credits 1970 in black text at the bottom. C

20 x 28 inches

20 in

28 in

Reproduction by Portal Publications

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-31

2012-01403.0558

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Giant

Stevens, 1956 George

USA

Poster

Giant

Caption in blue text above the large title in red and blue text, central image of Dean Martin relaxing in a car with a house in the background, two lines of credits in red and orange text at the bottom.

C

26 x 38 inches

26 in

38 in

Reproduction.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; slight yellowing in edges, sligth creasing throughout, loss of colour in bottom, small tears along bottom right edge, slight wear along see full bottom and top edges, small tear in top centre, condition adhesive damage in four corners of verso, image 2016-06-24 record visible on verso, slight abraisons throughout verso. 2016-03-31 Fair condition; yellow, pin holes in four corners and throughout edges, three horizontal and three vertical creases from delivery method, holes at intersections of creases, stains in bottom right corner, stain along right edge, stain in bottom left corner, slight rippling throughout, wear along right edge, bleedthrough in centre, browning in creases, see full NSS stamps in centre right of verso, title in black condition pen in centre of verso, stain in bottom right of 2016-06-24 record verso. Okay condition; yellow, holes in intersections of creases, three horizontal and three vertical creases from delivery method, severe wear, tear, and folding along bottom edge, creasing throughout, loss of colour from creasing, fold in top left corner, see full wear along top edge, black lines in right, wear and condition tear along top right, title in pen in left of verso, 2016-06-24 record yellowing in creases of verso.

2012-01403.0559

57-131

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Raintree County

Dmytryk, 1957 Edward

USA

Three-Sheet

Raintree County

Large vertical portraits at the top with cast in black text under each portrait, title in red text with yellow shadow in bottom centre, four lines of credits in black 1957 text at the bottom. C

41 x 81 inches

41 in

81 in

Based on the novel by Ross Lockridge, Jr.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-31

2012-01403.0560

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Jaws 2

Szwarc, 1978 Jeannot

USA

Poster

Jaws 2

Tagline in white text in top left, red sunset on the ocean with a single dorsal fin peaking out of the water in the centre, tittle in red in bottom right corner, 1978 three lines of credits in white text in bottom right. C Tagline in red at the top, Bueller reclines in his iconic outfit, five lines of credits in red and black text at the 1986 bottom.

59 x 45 inches

59 in

45 in

TBLB

FRL holding room FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-31

2012-01403.0561

poster

A

N

Ferris Bueller's Day Off

1986 Hughes, John

USA

Poster

Ferris Bueller's Day Off

C

24 x 14.5 inches

24 in

14.5 in

TBLB

Poster cabinet

PF58

see full condition 2016-06-24 record Great condition; slight creasing throughout, yellow. 2016-03-31

2012-01403.0562

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

A Night for Life - A Tribute Through Dance

1992

Canada

Poster

A Night for Life - A Tribute Through Dance

2012-01403.0563

poster

A

N

A Day of Celebration

1992

Canada

Poster

A Day of Celebration

White background, image of a woman in a dance pose with a green leotard on a cloudy sky background, title in blue and turquoise under image, four lines of information at the bottom. Martin Priuph signature in 1992 top left of image. C Dedication in pen in top left, title in red text at the top, Walter Graham illustration of people dancing around a maypole, information and logos under 1992 image. C

17 x 25 inches

17 in

25 in

Stratford Festival Tribute. Celebrating 40 years of the Stratford Festival.

TBLB

FRL holding room FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

see full condition Good condition; rippling from rolling, creasing 2016-06-24 record along bottom edge, yellowing on verso. see full Fair condition; rippling from rolling, fold in bottom condition left corner, wear along right edge, blue stain in 2016-06-24 record entre right, stain in top left of verso.

2016-0321

19 x 25 inches

19 in

25 in

TBLB

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-31

2012-01403.0564

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Every Day's a Holiday

Sutherland, A. 1938 Edward USA

Poster

Every Day's a Holiday

"Mae West" in red text at the top, her portrait in red dress with a fur boa and feathered hat, title in blue text in centre left, yellow title card on the right, six 1978 lines of credits in black text at the bottom.

C

19.5 x 25 inches

19.5 in

25 in

Reproduction.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; yellow, curling, slight creasing and rippling in centre, tears, stains, and creasing in top right, pin in four corners, stain in centre right, small see full tears along right edge, tears along bottom repaired condition with tape, adhesive stains in top corner, stains in 2016-06-24 record top verso. 2016-03-31

2012-01403.0565

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Rebel Without a Cause

1955 Ray, Nicholas

USA

Poster

Rebel Without a Cause

On the right top to bottom, James Dean's character in the iconic red jacket leans on a brick wall smoking, on the top left a blue image of a man and woman, six lines of cast in blue text under image, title in black text with red lines under cast, tagline in yellow text in bottom left on a still of a woman pulling a Dean's hand. Tagline: "...and they both come from 'good' 1973 families!" C Central amalgamation of drawn portraits of characters with the outline of a blade in the centre with the caption "The who's who in the woodunit!" the hilt of the blade in top centre with the design of the train and Middle Eastern designs in the background, seventeen lines of cast in white text on the left, "Agatha Christie's" and title in red text on the right of image, three lines of credits in white text at 1974 the bottom. C

20 x 23 inches

20 in

23 in

Portal Publications reproduction. TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Laminated. Good condition; slight creasing see full throughout, seven slight horizontal creases that condition cause delamination, slight creasing along right 2016-06-24 record edge, image slightly visible on verso.

2016-03-10

2012-01403.0566

74/292

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Murder on the Orient Express

1974 Lumet, Sidney USA

Half-Sheet

Murder on the Orient Express

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on the novel by Agatha Christie.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Laminated. Fair condition; creasing throughout, small circular residue along vertical edges, creasing in top edge, loss of colour from creasing, stain in see full top left of verso, stain in bottom right of verso, condition staple holes in all four corners, dirt transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso, delamination on verso. Laminated. Fair condition; two severe vertical creases, creasing along bottom edge, crushed substrate in bottom centre, slight creasing throughout, grey deposit in top right under lamination, hole in top centre, staple holes along vertical edges, delamination in top right edge next to crease, slight creasing in top corners, see full delamination in bottom centre, slight dirt transfer condition on verso, blue stamp in bottom right corner of 2016-06-24 record verso, yellow adhesive in centre left edge of verso.

2016-03-10

2012-01403.0567

76/214

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Network

1976 Lumet, Sidney USA

Half-Sheet

Network

Background line drawing of a teribble storm raining down on skyscrapers and people at the bottom, a lighting bolt comes out of the top clouds and points to the title in yellow text in the centre of the sheet, tagline in top left and top centre, four black & white stills in bottom left corner of image, four lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "Prepare yourself for a perfectly outrageous motion picture. 1976 Television will never be the same." O

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-10

2012-01403.0568

National Screen 800151 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Seems Like Old Times

1980 Sandrich, Jay

USA

Half-Sheet

Seems Like Old Times

Central image of man reading a book in bed while a woman has her hand on the head of another man under the bed, seven dogs on and around the bed, cast in black text at the top, title in red text under image, three lines of credits in black text at the 1980 bottom. Signature of Tannen Barum.

C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Laminated. Fair condition; one vertical and one horizontal crease crossing in the centre, yellow, creasing throughout, staple and pin holes in all four corners, small tear in bottom left, tape repair in top right corner, creasing in top right, tape repairing tear in top right, tear in bottom left corner, adhesive residue in centre right edge, residue in top right of image causing delamination, crease in bottom right, pin holes in lamination in all four see full corners, creasing in top centre, tape repairs in left, condition smudge in top centre of verso, blue stamp in top 2016-06-24 record right corner. 2016-03-10

82

2012-01403.0569

68/193

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Swimmer

1967 Perry, Frank

USA

Half-Sheet

The Swimmer

Caption in white text on a black background on the left of image, man and woman embrace as the image desolves into horizontal lines that create the likeness of a man in centre, "Burt Lancaster" and title in red text on the bottom right of image, three lines of 1968 credits in black text on the bottom right.

C

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on a story by John Cheever.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Laminated. Poor condition; creasing throughout, severe creases in centre left causing delamination, loss of substrate in top right and centre of sheet, creasing along right edge, crushed substrate in bottom centre, slight yellowing, stain in top right corner, creasing in bottom corners, stain in top left corner, deposit in bottom left, loss of substrate to see full the left of credits, yellow, verso: stain in bottom condition centre, tape pieces in right centre edge, dirt 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso.

2016-03-10

2012-01403.0570

66/163

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?

1966 Nichols, Mike

USA

Half-Sheet

Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?

Black & white fuzzy image of a woman appearing to strike a man behind the head, the background extends to the right, tagline in white text on a purple background, three lines of cast and credits in purple and black above the title in purple and turquoise text in bottom right, age limit in purple box in bottom left corner, three lines of credits in black text at the 1966 bottom.

O

22 x 28 inches

22 in

28 in

Based on a stage play.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Laminated. Fair condition; central vertical crease, adhesive damage in bottom left edge, creasing in bottom right corner, creasing along right edge, creasing in top left corner, pencil mark in bottom left white section, deposits in bottom centre, slight creasing throughout top section, pin holes in four see full corners, image visible on verso, yellow, slight dirt condition transfer on verso, delamination along right ledge of 2016-06-24 record verso, stop in centre right edge of verso. 2016-03-10 Fair condition; curling, creasing throughout, tear in see full bottom left corner, slight loss of colour from condition creasing, fold in top left corner, slight wear along 2016-06-24 record right edge, stain in bottom left of verso.

2012-01403.0571

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

poster

Harlow

Title in white text at the top on a lilac satin sheet background, central image of Harlow seated in front 1986 of a vanity, logos in two bottom corners.

C

23 x 32 inches

23 in

32 in

Home release poster.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

2016-03-31

2012-01403.0572

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

PrimeTime: One More Time

USA

Poster

PrimeTime: One More Time

Advertisement for four television programs on VHS, turquoise background, two lines of caption at the top, four tv screens with titles next to VHS boxes from the shows (including prices): "The Untouchables," "When Things Were Rotten," "Working Stiffs Vol. II," and 1986 "Star Trek," four lines at the bottom. C Quote at the top, central blue still of a woman smoking beside a graffiti laden building, three images on the centre left, two lines of cast in mustard above the title in orange text, tagline under title, two lines of credits in black at the bottom. Quote: "...and a special word of thanks to all the slobs, creeps, and finks of the world. Without you my story could never be 1966 told..." Tagline: "The story of what they did to a kid..." C

23 x 32 inches

23 in

32 in

Home release poster.

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Good condition; curling, yellow, wear and tears see full along vertical edges, creases throughout, fold in condition top right corner, sun damage in top of verso, 2016-06-24 record residue in top right corner of verso.

2016-03-31

2012-01403.0573

66/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inside Daisy Clover

Mulligan, 1966 Robert

USA

One-Sheet

Inside Daisy Clover

27 x 41 inches

27 in

41 in

TBLB

FRL holding room

Poster cabinet

PF58

Fair condition; three horizontal and one vertical crease from delivery method, yellow and browning at edges, tear at edges of creasing and intersections of creases, pin holes in four corners, see full tape repairs on verso, title in pen in centre of verso, condition '2$' in pen in bottom right of verso, NSS stamp in 2016-06-24 record bottom centre and bottom left corner of verso. 2016-03-31 Fair condition; warping from water damage, creasing along edges, creasing and folding in bottom right corner, tear in bottom right corner, creasing in top right corner, yellow adhesive see full damage in four corners of verso, removal of condition substrate from removed tape, sticky backing in 2016-06-24 record bottom right corner of verso.

2012-01403.0574

67/293

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Bonnie And Clyde

1967 Penn, Arthur

USA

Lobby Card

Bonnie and Clyde

Card 1 of 1. Still of a man running and pointing a shotgun while a blurred woman runs behind him. 1967 Credits in black text at the bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-05

2012-01403.0575

62/229

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Chapman Report

1962 Cukor, George USA

Lobby Card

The Chapman Report

Card 1 of 3. Still of two men looking at reports and 1962 folders. Credits in black text at the bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Based on the novel by Irving Wallace. Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; creasing throughout, staple holes in top centre, small tear in centre, tear in entre right see full edge, creasing in left corners, adhesive damage in condition four corners of verso, smudges in verso, deposits in 2016-06-24 record top centre of verso. 2016-04-04 Okay condition; creasing concentrated at edges, tears in top corners with yellow adhesive damage from previous repairs, rip in bottom left corner with see full adhesive damage from previous repairs, yellow condition adhesive damage in bottom right corner, adhesive 2016-06-24 record damage in all four corners of verso. 2016-04-04 Fair condition; yellow adhesive damage in top left, pin holes in four corners, creasing throughout concentration on right edge, staple holes in top see full centre, wear and tear along edges, tear in top left, condition yellow adhesive in four corners of verso, smudges in 2016-06-24 record verso, tear in top right edge. 2016-04-04 Good condition; slight creasing in centre left and see full right, tear in top right, residue in centre right of condition image, creasing in top left from paper clip, smudges 2016-06-24 record in verso. 2016-04-05 Good condition; yellowing at edges, staple holes in see full four corners, wear in bottom right edge, creasing in condition bottom corners, slight creasing along right edge, 2016-06-24 record smudges in top right corner of verso. 2016-04-05 Great condition; slight yellowing, creasing in right, see full residue in bottom right of image, slight surface condition scratches in center, small abraison in centre, slight 2016-06-24 record creasing in left corners. 2016-04-05 Good condition; bleedthrough in bottom right corner, creasing along right, small tear in bottom right edge, bleedthrough in top left corner, ahesive see full damage in top left corner, damage in top left from condition paper clip, adhesive damage in top right and 2016-06-24 record bottom left of verso, dirt transfer in verso.

2012-01403.0576

62/229

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Chapman Report

1962 Cukor, George USA

Lobby Card

The Chapman Report

Card 2 of 3. A man sits on a desk talking to women 1962 sitting in a library. Credits in black text at the bottom. B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Based on the novel by Irving Wallace. Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0577

62/229

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

The Chapman Report

1962 Cukor, George USA

Lobby Card

The Chapman Report

Card 3 of 3. Still of a man writing at this desk, a wall seperates him from a woman leaning on a cabinet. 1962 Credits in black text at the bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Based on the novel by Irving Wallace. Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0578

64/42

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Dead Ringer

1964 Henreid, Paul

USA

Lobby Card

Dead Ringer

Card 1 of 13. Two women (Bette Davis) argue with each other in a home office. '879-12' in bottom left of 1964 image. Credits in black text at the bottom. B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0579

64/42

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Dead Ringer

1964 Henreid, Paul

USA

Lobby Card

Dead Ringer

Card 2 of 13. A man leans in to kiss a well dressed woman's neck. '879-75' in bottom right of image. 1964 Credits in black text at the bottom. Card 3 of 13. Bette Davis stares frighteningly at a man. '879-64' in bottom right of image. Credits in 1964 black text at the bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0580

64/42

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Dead Ringer

1964 Henreid, Paul

USA

Lobby Card

Dead Ringer

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0581

64/42

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Dead Ringer

1964 Henreid, Paul

USA

Lobby Card

Dead Ringer

Card 4 of 13. A man lies on the ground screaming and covered with blood. '879-55' in bottom right. Credits 1964 in black text at the bottom. B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-05

2012-01403.0582

64/42

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Dead Ringer

1964 Henreid, Paul

USA

Lobby Card

Dead Ringer

Card 5 of 13. Bette Davis shuts the door on a large dog. '879-29' in bottom right corner. Credits in black 1964 text at the bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0583

64/42

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Dead Ringer

1964 Henreid, Paul

USA

Lobby Card

Dead Ringer

Card 6 of 13. Bette Davis loads a revolver. '879-20' in bottom right corner. Credits in black text at the 1964 bottom. B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0584

64/42

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Dead Ringer

1964 Henreid, Paul

USA

Lobby Card

Dead Ringer

Card 7 of 13. A man is attacked by a large dog. '87958' in bottom right corner. Credits in black text at the 1964 bottom. B Card 8 of 13. A man talks to a woman while holding her hand. '879-52' in bottom right corner. Credits in 1964 black text at the bottom.

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Good condition; slight creasing in bottom right see full corner, stain in bottom left, wear in top right, condition yellowing at edges, slight creasing in top, smudges 2016-06-24 record in verso, yellow stain in centre left of verso. 2016-04-05 Good condition; smudges and finger marks in verso, see full dent in top left from paper clip, slight creasing condition throughout, slight yellowing at edges, small tear in 2016-06-24 record bottom right of WB logo. 2016-04-05 Good condition; slight yellowing at edges, bleedthrough in top left and bottom right corners, slight creasing along vertical edges and bottom see full centre, adhesive damage along top left edge, yellow condition adhesive damage in top right and bottom left 2016-06-24 record corners of verso. 2016-04-05 see full condition Great condition; crease in bottom right, small 2016-06-24 record creases in bottom corners. 2016-04-05 Good Condition; bleedthrough in top left and bottom right corners, slight creasing along right edge, scratch in top centre, yellow adhesive see full damage in top right and bottom left corners of condition verso, smudges in top left and bottom right corners 2016-06-24 record of verso. 2016-04-05 Good condition; dirt smudges and transfer on see full verso, finger dents in bottom centre and centre let, condition dent in top left from paper clip, creasing in bottom 2016-06-24 record left corner, slight yellowing. 2016-04-05 Good condition; slight yellowing at edges, creasing see full in corners, scratches in centre, creasing along right condition edge, stain in bottom left of verso, smudge in 2016-06-24 record centre left of verso. 2016-04-05 see full Good condition; dirt smudges in bottom right condition corner of verso, scratch in top left, slight creasing in 2016-06-24 record centre. 2016-04-05 see full Fair condition; water damage in bottom right condition causing warpage, dent from paper clip in top left, 2016-06-24 record slight yellowing at edges, slight creasing in corners,

2012-01403.0585

64/42

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Dead Ringer

1964 Henreid, Paul

USA

Lobby Card

Dead Ringer

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0586

64/42

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Dead Ringer

1964 Henreid, Paul

USA

Lobby Card

Dead Ringer

Card 9 of 13. Two men in suits exchange papers. '87957' in bottom right corner. Credits in black text at the 1964 bottom. B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0587

64/42

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Dead Ringer

1964 Henreid, Paul

USA

Lobby Card

Dead Ringer

Card 10 of 13. Bette Davis angrily slaps another woman's hands away. '879-36' in bottom right corner 1964 of image. Credits in black text at the bottom. B Card 11 of 13. A suited man holds another man back from attacking Bette Davis. '879-74' in bottom left of 1964 image. Credits in black text at the bottom.

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0588

64/42

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Dead Ringer

1964 Henreid, Paul

USA

Lobby Card

Dead Ringer

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0589

64/42

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Dead Ringer

1964 Henreid, Paul

USA

Lobby Card

Dead Ringer

Card 12 of 13. Bette Davis looks at her watch while a man leans on the wall next to her. '879-42' in bottom 1964 right corner. Credits in black text at the bottom. B Card 13 of 13. A woman's hand holds a gun to another Bette Davis's temple. '879-34' in bottom left 1964 of image. Credits in black text at the bottom.

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0590

64/42

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Dead Ringer

1964 Henreid, Paul

USA

Lobby Card

Dead Ringer

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-05

83

2012-01403.0591

62/3

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Errand Boy

1961 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Errand Boy

Card 1 of 5. One man stands looking guilty while another man sits on the right pointing at something. '10376-x-4' in centre right edge. Credits in black text 1962 at the bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; scratches in centre, creasing in centre and along left edge, tear in centre left edge, yellow adhesive in top right edge, tear in top left corner, yellow adhesive in top left corner, loss of see full substrate in 4 corners of verso, yellow adhesive condition damage in 4 corners of verso, smudges along right 2016-06-24 record edge of verso. Okay condition; rippling from water damage, creasing throughout, bleedthrough in four corners, see full yellow adhesive damage in four corners, yellow condition adhesive damage in four corners of verso, blue 2016-06-24 record smudges along top edge of verso.

2016-04-05

2012-01403.0592

62/3

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Errand Boy

1961 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Errand Boy

Card 2 of 5. A eats his lunch at a table in front of a crumbled and destroyed restaurant. '10376-x-7' in 1962 centre right edge. Credits in black text at the bottom. B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-05

2012-01403.0593

62/3

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Errand Boy

1961 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Errand Boy

Card 3 of 5. A man screams while sitting in an office chair. '10376-x-15' in centre right edge. Credits in 1962 black text at the bottom. Card 4 of 5. A bespectacled man shakes another man's hand while a painter looks on. Two individuals are seated at a boardroom table on the left. '1037618' in bottom right edge. Credits in black text at the 1962 bottom. Card 5 of 5. A man pretend to be hanging like a mannaquin between two mannaquins in cowboy and soldier outfits. '10376-x-16' in centre right edge. 1962 Credits in black text at the bottom. Card 1 of 5. Harper carries an unconscious man in his arms. '486-1' in bottom right corner. Credits in black 1966 text at the bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; severe creasing throughout, pin holes in four corners, bleedthrough in four corners, loss of colour and residue in top right, scratches, see full creasing in corners, tear in centre left edge, condition smudges on verso, tear in top right edge, adhesive 2016-06-24 record damage in four corners of verso. 2016-04-05 Good condition; yellowing at edges, creasing in corners, scratches in centre, smudges along bottom see full edge, slight bleedthrough in four corners, adhesive condition damage in four corners of verso, loss of substrate in 2016-06-24 record four corners of verso, smudges in verso. 2016-04-05 Okay condition; rippling from water damage with scratches and dirt in ripples, stain in left centre, see full wear in bottom left corner, bleedthrough in four condition corners, stain and residue in bottom right, surface 2016-06-24 record scratches. 2016-04-05 Poor condition; brown liquid stains and residue see full causing damage throughout, bleedthrough in four condition corners, adhesive damage in four corners, 2016-06-24 record yellowing. 2016-04-06 Fair conditon; title in pen in bottom left, creasing throughout, dogeared bottom right corner, see full adhesive damage in corner edges, residue in condition bottom right, scratches in centre, adhesive damage 2016-06-24 record in four corners of verso, yellow. 2016-04-06 Good condition; adhesive damage in bottom see full corners, abraisons in centre left, dimpling in centre, condition yellow adhesive damage in four corners of verso, 2016-06-24 record yellow in verso. 2016-04-06 Fair condition; slight creasing throughout, adhesive damage in four corners, small tear in centre left edge, creasing in four corners, smudges along bottom edge, crease in centre left, stain along right see full edge, yellow adhesive damage in four corners of condition verso, smudges along edges of verso, stain in top 2016-06-24 record centre of verso. 2016-04-06 Fair condition; slight water damage on the surface, slight creasing in centre and four corners, finger marks in bottom corners, slight bleedthrough in corners, yellow adhesive damage in four corners of see full verso, loss of substrate in four corners of verso, condition finger marks and smudges in centre of verso, 2016-06-24 record yellowing. see full Good condition; yellowing at edges, creasing in condition centre, creasing in bottom right, stain in top right 2016-06-24 record edge, smudges in centre of verso. see full Good condition; dimpling in centre, scratches in condition centre, slight residue in centre, small tear in top 2016-06-24 record centre edge, yellow, smudges in centre of verso.

2012-01403.0594

62/3

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Errand Boy

1961 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Errand Boy

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0595

62/3

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

The Errand Boy

1961 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Errand Boy

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills). Based on the novel by Ross Macdonald. Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0596

66/102

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Harper

1966 Smight, Jack

USA

Lobby Card

Harper

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0597

66/102

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Harper

1966 Smight, Jack

USA

Lobby Card

Harper

Card 2 of 5. A robed man holds a falcon in the middle of the room while Harper and a woman enter in the background. '486-46' in bottom right corner. Credits 1966 in black text at the bottom. Card 3 of 5. Two police officers attempt to arrest a man in front of two others. '486-14' in bottom right 1966 corner. Credits in black text at the bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Based on the novel by Ross Macdonald. Mini Lobby Card (stills). Based on the novel by Ross Macdonald. Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0598

66/102

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Harper

1966 Smight, Jack

USA

Lobby Card

Harper

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0599

66/102

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Harper

1966 Smight, Jack

USA

Lobby Card

Harper

Card 4 of 5. A woman looks dismayed while looking at a man with his back to the viewer. Background image of a glassed in patio. '486-4' in bottom right corner. 1966 Credits in black text at the bottom. B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Based on the novel by Ross Macdonald. Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0600

66/102

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Harper

1966 Smight, Jack

USA

Lobby Card

Harper

Card 5 of 5. A cop and two detectives have a discussion while another man exits the police car. '486-15' in bottom right corner. Credits in black text 1966 at the bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Based on the novel by Ross Macdonald. Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-06

2012-01403.0601

60/258

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

High Time

1960 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

High Time

Card 1 of 12. A crowd of people enjoy an event with a close-up of Bing Crosby with a confused girl on the 1960 right. Credits in black text at the bottom. B Card 2 of 12. A woman talks angrily to Bing Crosby and another man while driving in the backseat of a 1960 car. Credits in black text at the bottom. Card 3 of 12. A woman kisses Crosby's cheek as three young men look on in a fraternity house. Credits in 1960 black text at the bottom.

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-06

2012-01403.0602

60/258

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

High Time

1960 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

High Time

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-06

2012-01403.0603

60/258

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

High Time

1960 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

High Time

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

see full condition Good condition; dimpling in centre, yellowing, 2016-06-24 record creasing in centre right, smudges in centre of verso. 2016-04-06 see full Good condition; creasing and dumpling in centre, condition creasing along edges and bottom left corner, slight 2016-06-24 record separation of substrate in bottom right corner. Fair condition; pin holes in four corners, creasing throughout, severe crease in bottom left with see full cracked emulsion, wear in bottom right , crease in condition top right corner, yellow, smudges along right edge 2016-06-24 record of verso, staple holes in bottom left. Good condition; yellow, slight creasing in bottom see full right and centre, creasing in bottom right and left condition corners, image visible on verso, smudges and 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso.

2012-01403.0604

60/258

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

High Time

1960 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

High Time

Card 4 of 12. A young couple look worriedly at each 1960 other. Credits in black text at the bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-06

2012-01403.0605

60/258

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

High Time

1960 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

High Time

Card 5 of 12. Bing Crosby looks suspiciously at a girl while a young man turns to look at him. Credits in 1960 black text at the bottom. Card 6 of 12. Two men pull on a rope while a third pulls a woman through a window, Bing Crosby 1960 attempts to help. Credits in black text at the bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-06

2012-01403.0606

60/258

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

High Time

1960 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

High Time

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-06

2012-01403.0607

60/258

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

High Time

1960 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

High Time

Card 7 of 12. Crosby and a woman sing while driving a horse drawn hay wagon. Credits in black text at the 1960 bottom. B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

see full Good condition; slight creasing in centre, small tear condition in bottom right edge, creasing in corners, yellowing, 2016-06-24 record smudges in verso. 2016-04-06 Fair condition; yellowing, scratches and abraision in see full centre, creasing in bottom left, dogeared top right condition corner, creasing throughout bottom section, tear in 2016-06-24 record top right edge, dirt smudges on verso. 2016-04-06 Fair condition; circular removal of gelatin in centre, see full yellowing, small dent from paper clip in top left, condition wear along top edge, smudging along edges of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-06 see full Okay condition; water damage causing warpage condition and bulging in centre and top centre, yellow, yellow 2016-06-24 record stain in centre left. 2016-04-06 see full Good condition; slight scratches and abraisons in condition centre, creasing in bottom right corner, small tear 2016-06-24 record in bottom right edge, yellow. see full Fair condition; creasing in centre, creasing in four condition corners, rippling, wear along top left edge and 2016-06-24 record bottom edge, smudges in verso. Good condition; residue in centre, abrasions along see full right edge, yellowing at edges, slight creasing in condition bottom left corner, wear in top centre, smudges in 2016-06-24 record verso.

2012-01403.0608

60/258

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

High Time

1960 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

High Time

Card 8 of 12. Crosby shakes a young man's hand while three others look on. Credits in black text at the 1960 bottom. B Card 9 of 12. During a party a man and woman stop dancing to look and point to the right of image. 1960 Credits in black text at the bottom. Card 10 of 12. Bing Crosby dressed as a woman looks angrily at a young man. Credits in black text at the 1960 bottom. Card 11 of 12. Crosby in a dress tries to help a man seated in a chair and holding his injured foot. Credits 1960 in black text at the bottom.

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0609

60/258

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

High Time

1960 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

High Time

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0610

60/258

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

High Time

1960 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

High Time

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0611

60/258

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

High Time

1960 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

High Time

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-06

2012-01403.0612

60/258

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

High Time

1960 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

High Time

Card 12 of 12. A dancing lesson in a small dorm room. 1960 Credits in black text at the bottom. B Card 1 of 8. A crowd gathers around a car while a woman exits her home to enter the car. Credits in 1964 black text at the bottom.

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-06

2012-01403.0613

65/68

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

1964 Aldrich, Robert USA

Lobby Card

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-07

2012-01403.0614

65/68

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

1964 Aldrich, Robert USA

Lobby Card

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

Card 2 of 8. A man and woman look worriedly at each 1964 other. Credits in black text at the bottom. B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, slight creasing throughout, creasing in 4 corners, loss of substrate in bottom see full corners, wear along bottom edge, small tear in condition bottom right corner, yellow adhesive damage along 2016-06-24 record edges of corners, smudges in verso. 2016-04-07 Good condition; abraison in bottom centre, slight see full scratching and residue in centre, dent in centre left, condition loss of emulsion in top centre and centre right, 2016-06-24 record yellowing at edges, smudges in right of verso. 2016-04-07 Fair condition; creasing in centre, dent and loss of see full emulsion in centre, creasing in bottom left corner, condition creasing and wear in top left corner, creasing along 2016-06-24 record right edge, yellowing in verso. Good condition; dent in bottom centre, wear in bottom centre, crushed fibers in bottom corners, see full slight creasing in centre, creasing in top right condition corner, yellowing, slight smudging in centre of 2016-06-24 record verso.

2012-01403.0615

65/68

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

1964 Aldrich, Robert USA

Lobby Card

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

Card 3 of 8. Bette Davis in a nightgown points a shot gun from her balcony. Credits in black text at the 1964 bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0616

65/68

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

1964 Aldrich, Robert USA

Lobby Card

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

Card 4 of 8. Bette Davis stares shocked at something 1964 out of frame. Credits in black text at the bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-07

2012-01403.0617

65/68

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

1964 Aldrich, Robert USA

Lobby Card

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

Card 5 of 8. Bette Davis holds her hands in front of her 1964 mouth in fear. Credits in black text at the bottom. B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-07

84

2012-01403.0618

65/68

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

1964 Aldrich, Robert USA

Lobby Card

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

Card 6 of 8. Bette Davis angrily sits up from her chair. 1964 Credits in black text at the bottom. Card 7 of 8. An elderly man gets interviewed by a detective and an officer. Credits in black text at the 1964 bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

see full Good condition; creasing in centre, abraison in condition bottom right centre, yellowing, small tear in centre 2016-06-24 record right edge, smudges in verso. see full condition Good condition; slight abraisons through, crease in 2016-06-24 record bottom left, smudges along edges of verso. Okay condition; abraisons and loss of emulsion in see full right, fold in bottom left corner, creasing in four condition corners, creasing throughout, red marks in centre 2016-06-24 record of verso, smudges in verso. Fair condition; bleedthrough in four corners, creasing in four corners, tear in top left corner, pin hole in bottom right corner and top left corner, see full wear in bottom edge, adhesive damage in top left condition edge, slight scratching in top right, yellow adhesive 2016-06-24 record damage in four corners of verso. Fair condition; slight creasing throughout, scratches in centre left, pin hole in bottom right, see full bleedthrough in four corners, creasing in four condition corners, yellowing, yellow adhesive damage in four 2016-06-24 record corners of verso, smudges on verso.

2016-04-07

2012-01403.0619

65/68

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

1964 Aldrich, Robert USA

Lobby Card

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

Duplicate.

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-07

2012-01403.0620

65/68

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

1964 Aldrich, Robert USA

Lobby Card

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

Card 8 of 8. An elderly man gets interviewed by a detective and an officer. Credits in black text at the 1964 bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

Duplicate.

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-07

2012-01403.0621

66/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inside Daisy Clover

Mulligan, 1966 Robert

USA

Lobby Card

Inside Daisy Clover

Card 1 of 10. Natalie Wood drops a large metal basin in fright in front of a shabby building. Credits in black 1966 text at the bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-07

2012-01403.0622

66/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inside Daisy Clover

Mulligan, 1966 Robert

USA

Lobby Card

Inside Daisy Clover

Card 2 of 10. Natalie Wood looks disgusted at a man 1966 in a bowler hat. Credits in black text at the bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-07

2012-01403.0623

66/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inside Daisy Clover

Mulligan, 1966 Robert

USA

Lobby Card

Inside Daisy Clover

Card 3 of 10. A couple kisses while a garden party takes place in the background. Credits in black text at 1966 the bottom. B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0624

66/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inside Daisy Clover

Mulligan, 1966 Robert

USA

Lobby Card

Inside Daisy Clover

Card 4 of 10. Two fighting women are seperated by a man while an officer controls the crowd in front of a 1966 shabby building. Credits in black text at the bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; several pin holes in bottom right and top left corners, small tears in centre left edge, stain in bottom centre, yellowing, stain in top centre, scratches in centre, dents in centre, see full bleedthrough in four corners, yellow adhesive condition damage in four corners of verso, loss of substrate in 2016-06-24 record four corners of verso. 2016-04-07 Good condition; several pin holes in top left and bottom left, yellow, creasing and wear along see full bottom edge, creasing in top corners, bleedthrough condition in four corners, yellow adhesive damage in four 2016-06-24 record corners of verso. 2016-04-07 Good condition; scratches in centre, bleedthrough in four corners, creasing in top corners, crushed substrate in bottom left corner, adhesive damage in see full edges of top left corner, yellow adhesive damage in condition four corners of verso, dirt transfer and smudges in 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-07 Fair condition; scratches in centre, slight yellowing, residue in bottom left corner, bleedthrough in four corners, finger marks in centre, dent in top right, see full slight creasing along right edge, yellow adhesive condition damage in four corners of verso, smudges in centre 2016-06-24 record left of verso. 2016-04-07 Fair condition; severe yellowing in top left corner and bottom right corner, slight yellowing throughout, adhesive damage in bottom corners, see full small tear in bottom right corner, bleedthrough in condition four corners, yellow adhesive damage in four 2016-06-24 record corners of verso. 2016-04-07 Fair condition; scratches in centre, bleedthrough in four corners, wear in bottom left corner, yellow see full adhesive damage in edges of top corners, creasing condition in bottom right corner, yellow, yellow adhesive 2016-06-24 record damage in four corners of verso. Good condition; slight creasing throughout centre, creasing in bottom right corner, adhesive damage see full in bottom right corner, bleedthrough in four condition corners, dent in centre, yellow, yellow adhesive 2016-06-24 record damage in four corners of verso.

2012-01403.0625

66/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inside Daisy Clover

Mulligan, 1966 Robert

USA

Lobby Card

Inside Daisy Clover

Card 5 of 10. A woman, on the phone, has her arm around a young woman. Credits in black text at the 1966 bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0626

66/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inside Daisy Clover

Mulligan, 1966 Robert

USA

Lobby Card

Inside Daisy Clover

Card 6 of 10. A smiling couple hug each other outside 1966 a window. Credits in black text at the bottom. B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0627

66/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inside Daisy Clover

Mulligan, 1966 Robert

USA

Lobby Card

Inside Daisy Clover

Card 7 of 10. A woman walks away from an exploding 1966 building. Credits in black text at the bottom. B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0628

66/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inside Daisy Clover

Mulligan, 1966 Robert

USA

Lobby Card

Inside Daisy Clover

Card 8 of 10. Christopher Plummer restains a distraught Natalie Wood. Credits in black text at the 1966 bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-07

2012-01403.0629

66/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inside Daisy Clover

Mulligan, 1966 Robert

USA

Lobby Card

Inside Daisy Clover

Card 9 of 10. Natalie Wood dressed in a sheet in front of the window of the bedroom. Credits in black text at 1966 the bottom. B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-07

2012-01403.0630

66/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inside Daisy Clover

Mulligan, 1966 Robert

USA

Lobby Card

Inside Daisy Clover

Card 10 of 10. Two woman, one old and one young, run around on the beach. Credits in black text at the 1966 bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; creasing throughout, water damage, see full bleedthrough in four corners, yellowing, creasing in condition top corners, dirt transfer on surface, yellow 2016-06-24 record adhesive damage in four corners of verso. 2016-04-07 Okay condition; hole in centre, yellow, water damage, yellow sticker with credits, stains in see full bottom left, abraisons, tear in top centre, condition bleedthrough in four corners, adhesive damage in 2016-06-24 record four corners of verso, smudges on verso.

2012-01403.0931

65/4

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Kiss Me, Stupid

1965 Wilder, Billy

USA

Lobby Card

Kiss Me, Stupid

Card 1 of 2. A man drinks in bed while a woman opens 1965 her arms to him. Credits in black text at the bottom. B Card 2 of 2. A man spreads his arms to a crowd as showgirls dance behind him. Credits in black text at 1965 the bottom.

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-06

2012-01403.0632

65/4

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Kiss Me, Stupid

1965 Wilder, Billy

USA

Lobby Card

Kiss Me, Stupid

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0633

65/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Marriage on the Rocks

1965 Donohue, Jack USA

Lobby Card

Marriage on the Rocks

Card 1 of 5. A group of people sit around and toast 1965 each other. Credits in black text at the bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

see full Good condition; small tears in bottom right corner, condition yellowing, creasing along right edge, abraisons in 2016-06-24 record centre, smudges in verso 2016-04-06 Fair condition; creasing throughout, dog eared bottom left corner, slight rippling from possible see full water damage, yellowing, separation of substrate in condition bottom right corner, smudge in top left corner of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-07 Poor condition; rippling from possible water damage, large crease and scratch in centre, bleedthrough in top right and bottom left corners, creasing in four corners, tears in top left corner, see full severe wear along top edge, creasing throughout, condition yellow adhesive damage in bottom right and top 2016-06-24 record left of verso, yellow. see full Good condition; creasing throughout, smudges condition along bottom edge, creasing in top right corner, 2016-06-24 record scratches in centre, yellow. see full condition Great condition; creasing in top, dent in top left 2016-06-24 record from paper clip, yellowing. see full Fair condition; scratches in centre, marks from pen condition strokes in centre, creasing along edges, yellowing, 2016-06-24 record slight creasing in bottom corners.

2012-01403.0634

65/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Marriage on the Rocks

1965 Donohue, Jack USA

Lobby Card

Marriage on the Rocks

Card 2 of 5. A man lies sick in bed while a man and woman look concerned. Credits in black text at the 1965 bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-07

2012-01403.0635

65/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Marriage on the Rocks

1965 Donohue, Jack USA

Lobby Card

Marriage on the Rocks

Card 3 of 5. A man sits up in bed talking on the phone while a woman next to him looks up. Credits in black 1965 text at the bottom. B Card 4 of 5. A woman in a bikini lounges on a chair while another woman looks at her dispprovingly. 1965 Credits in black text at the bottom. Card 5 of 5. Two men lean on a bar counter looking annoyed at a woman playing the bagpipes. Credits in 1965 black text at the bottom. Card 1 of 1. Peter Sellers and a woman smile while washing a baby elephant in a room covered in 1965 bubbles. Credits in black text at the bottom.

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-07

2012-01403.0636

65/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Marriage on the Rocks

1965 Donohue, Jack USA

Lobby Card

Marriage on the Rocks

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0637

65/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Marriage on the Rocks

1965 Donohue, Jack USA

Lobby Card

Marriage on the Rocks

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-07

2012-01403.0638

68/143

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

The Party

1968 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

The Party

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0639

64/170

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Robin and the 7 Hoods

Douglas, 1964 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Robin and the 7 Hoods

Card 1 of 8. Sammy Davis, Jr. sings atop a bar while holding a tommy gun. Credits in black text at the 1964 bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

see full Fair condition; slight creasing in centre, fold in top condition right corner, curling, stain in bottom centre, slight 2016-06-24 record yellowing. 2016-04-06 Fair condition; scratches in centre, tear in bottom left corner, dents in bottom corners, staple holes in four corners, residue in centre, dents in centre, see full dent in top left from paper clip, stain in centre left condition edge, yellow, finger marks in centre right edge of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-07

2012-01403.0640

64/170

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Robin and the 7 Hoods

Douglas, 1964 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Robin and the 7 Hoods

Card 2 of 8. Three men with hats and canes dance. 1964 Credits in black text at the bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, staple holes in four corners, crease and crushed substrate in top centre, small tear in bottom right corner, creasing along right edge, scratches in centre, finger mark in centre left, see full bleedthrough in top left corner, yellow adhesive condition damage in four corners of verso, smudges in top 2016-06-24 record right corner and in centre of verso. 2016-04-07 see full Good condition; small tears in bottom left corner, condition creasing in bottom right corner, creasing in top left 2016-06-24 record corner, crease in centre left, yellowing. see full Good condition; creasing in top corners and condition bottom left corner, yellowing, scratches in bottom 2016-06-24 record right corner, smudges in verso.

2012-01403.0641

64/170

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Robin and the 7 Hoods

Douglas, 1964 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Robin and the 7 Hoods

Card 3 of 8. Three men in Santa suits start fighting on 1964 a street. Credits in black text at the bottom. B Card 4 of 8. Sinatra sits in a chair looking at another man taking notes with a damaged bar in the 1964 background. Credits in black text at the bottom.

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-07

2012-01403.0642

64/170

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Robin and the 7 Hoods

Douglas, 1964 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Robin and the 7 Hoods

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-07

85

2012-01403.0643

64/170

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Robin and the 7 Hoods

Douglas, 1964 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Robin and the 7 Hoods

Card 5 of 8. Sinatra spreads his hands in front of a well 1964 dressed couple. Credits in black text at the bottom. B Card 6 of 8. A seated man shakes his hand at a standing woman who is smoking in a parlour. Credits 1964 in black text at the bottom.

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; creases, scratches and staple holes in centre, staple holes in four corners, creasing in see full four corners, adhesive damage in bottom corners, condition smudges throughout verso, yellow adhesive 2016-06-24 record damage in four corners. see full Good condition; staple holes in four corners, wear condition along bottom edge, slight creasing in centre, dent 2016-06-24 record in top left from paper clip, yellowing.

2016-04-07

2012-01403.0644

64/170

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Robin and the 7 Hoods

Douglas, 1964 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Robin and the 7 Hoods

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-07

2012-01403.0645

64/170

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Robin and the 7 Hoods

Douglas, 1964 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Robin and the 7 Hoods

Card 7 of 8. A woman dressed in a Robin Hood outfit delivers her money can to two men seated in front of a sign for 'Robin Hood Charities.' Credits in black text 1964 at the bottom.

B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0646

64/170

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Robin and the 7 Hoods

Douglas, 1964 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Robin and the 7 Hoods

Card 8 of 8. A man points to the sky in front of a large crowd holding signs, officers, and musicians. Credits in 1964 black text at the bottom. B

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; staple holes in four corners, rip in bottom left corner, yellowing, creasing in centre, see full yellow adhesive damage in top centre, creasing in condition four corners, adhesive damage in four corners, 2016-06-24 record smudges and dirt in verso. 2016-04-07 Fair condition; small tears along bottom edge, see full creasing along edges, scratchs and dents in centre, condition small fold in top right corner, yellow, smudge in top 2016-06-24 record right of verso. 2016-04-07 Okay condition; slight yellowing, slight wear along edges, creasing in bottom right corner and top left corner, large crease/scratch in centre right causing loss of colour, abraisons throughout, slight scratching in centre, pen mark in centre left, dent in see full top left corner from paper clip, yellow adhesive condition damage in four corners of verso, loss of substrate in 2016-06-24 record top centre of verso, dirt smudges in centre. 2016-04-13 Fair condition; very yellow, creasing and small tears along bottom edge, staple holes along all edges, abraisions and scratching in centre, creasing in centre and top left causing slight loss of colour, see full scratching in centre left, adhesive damage in four condition corners of verso, loss of substrate in bottom left 2016-06-24 record corner of substrate, 2016-04-13 Fair condition; yellow, yellow adhesive damage in four corners of verso, slight creasing in bottom see full corners, creasing in bottom centre and slight centre condition right causing loss of colour, slight creasing and 2016-06-24 record dents in top right. 2016-04-13 Okay condition; yellow, creasing in four corners, large crease in bottom right causing colour loss, abraisons in bottom right, scratching in bottom see full center and top left corner, yellow adhesive damage condition in four corners of verso, streaks from mounting in 2016-06-24 record four corners of verso. 2016-04-13 Fair condition; yellow, pin holes and damage in top two corners, dent in top left from paper clip, stains in bottom corners, creasing in 4 corners, scratching in left centre and centre, residue in top left corner, see full yellow adhesive damage in four corners of verso, condition loss of substrate in four corners of verso, residue in 2016-06-24 record centre right of verso. 2016-04-13 see full Good condition; slight yellowing, scratches along condition top edge, dent in centre, smudges in right. Dirt 2016-06-24 record transfer in verso.

2012-01403.0647

64/97

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Carpetbaggers

Dmytryk, 1964 Edward

USA

Lobby Card

The Carpetbaggers

Card 1 of 5. Four men and a woman drink coffee in a 1964 closed restaurant. Credits in black text at the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Based on the novel by Harold Robbins. Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0648

64/97

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Carpetbaggers

Dmytryk, 1964 Edward

USA

Lobby Card

The Carpetbaggers

Card 2 of 5. A woman in an evening gown and hat looks down at a man in an office chair, files and papers litter the room. Credits in black text at the 1964 bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Based on the novel by Harold Robbins. Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0649

64/97

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Carpetbaggers

Dmytryk, 1964 Edward

USA

Lobby Card

The Carpetbaggers

Card 3 of 5. A man holding a phone hugs a brunette woman with a bar in the background. Credits in black 1964 text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Based on the novel by Harold Robbins. Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0650

64/97

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Carpetbaggers

Dmytryk, 1964 Edward

USA

Lobby Card

The Carpetbaggers

Card 4 of 5. A man smokes behind a bar while a woman wears his hat on the left of him. Credits in 1964 black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Based on the novel by Harold Robbins. Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0651

64/97

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

The Carpetbaggers

Dmytryk, 1964 Edward

USA

Lobby Card

The Carpetbaggers

2012-01403.0652

63/138

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Come Blow Your Horn

1963 Yorkin, Bud

USA

Lobby Card

Come Blow Your Horn

Card 5 of 5. Two men confront each other on the set 1964 of a film. Credits in black text at the bottom. Card 1 of 12. Man in the foreground contemplates something while another in the background waits with his hands in his pockets. Credits in black text at 1963 the bottom. Card 2 of 12. A woman reclines on the top of a sofa while a man sits smoking on her left. Credits in black 1963 text at the bottom. Card 3 of 12. Sinatra grabs another man's arm, another man drinks with his back to the viewer. 1963 Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Based on the novel by Harold Robbins. Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

2012-01403.0653

63/138

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Come Blow Your Horn

1963 Yorkin, Bud

USA

Lobby Card

Come Blow Your Horn

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0654

63/138

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Come Blow Your Horn

1963 Yorkin, Bud

USA

Lobby Card

Come Blow Your Horn

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0655

63/138

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Come Blow Your Horn

1963 Yorkin, Bud

USA

Lobby Card

Come Blow Your Horn

Card 4 of 12. A man and a barber exchange a look while a man gets his hair cut. Credits in black text at 1963 the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

see full Good condition; slight yellowing, dent in top left condition from paper clip, dent in centre, slight creasing in 2016-06-24 record bottom corners, dirt transfer on verso. 2016-04-13 Fair condition; scratching in centre right, slight see full scratching in top left, creasing in bottom corners, condition abraisons throughout, slight yellowing, dirt transfer 2016-06-24 record on verso. 2016-04-13 Fair condition; yellowing, staple holes in four corners, residue in right, loss of glossy coat in top, see full creasing in left centre, abraisons throughout, condition smudges in bottom corners, severe dirt transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-13 Poor condition; finger marks and residue throughout, scratches with loss of colour throughout, dent in top left corner from paper clip, creasing in centre, creasing in centre, possible water damage, red ink staining in bottom, see full bleedthrough in 4 corners, sticky verso, yellow condition adhesive damage in four corners of verso, dirt 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso. 2016-04-13 Fair condition; yellowing, pin holes in four corners, creasing in top corners, scratches in centre, see full bleedthrough in four corners, yellow adhesive condition damage in four corners of verso, dirt transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-13 Poor condition; finger smudges and stains in centre, scratches and creases throughout causing colour loss, possible water damage, dirt smudges at see full the bottom, dent in top left from paper clip, yellow condition adhesive damage in four corners of verso, severe 2016-06-24 record dirt and ink transfer on verso. 2016-04-13 Okay condition; scratching and loss of colour throughout, dent in top left from paper clip, see full smudging in bottom corners, pin holes in bottom condition corners, wear along left edge, yellow adhesive 2016-06-24 record damage in four corners, dirt transfer on verso. Okay condition; scratching and loss of colour at the top, dent in top left from paper clip, staple holes see full and damage in four corners, severe creasing in condition centre right, abraison in centre left, dirt transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso. Fair condition; finger marks and smudges in centre, dent in top left from paper clip, abraisons throughout, creasing from previous mounting in four corners, small tears in centre right edge, dirt see full and smudging along right edge, yellow adhesive condition damage in four corners of verso, dirt transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso. Fair condition; staple holes in four corners, see full yellowing, severe scratching in top right, creasing in condition top centre, dirt transfer on verso, dent in top left 2016-06-24 record from paper clip. Fair condition; staple holes in four corners, dent in top left from paper clip, yellowing, scratching and see full dents in bottom corners, creasing in corners, '63condition 138' in china pencil in top right of verso, dirt 2016-06-24 record transfer in verso.

2012-01403.0656

63/138

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Come Blow Your Horn

1963 Yorkin, Bud

USA

Lobby Card

Come Blow Your Horn

Card 5 of 12. A man lifts his hat in an exaggerated fashion on a crowded street. Credits in black text at 1963 the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0657

63/138

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Come Blow Your Horn

1963 Yorkin, Bud

USA

Lobby Card

Come Blow Your Horn

Card 6 of 12. A family portrait. Credits in black text at 1963 the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0658

63/138

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Come Blow Your Horn

1963 Yorkin, Bud

USA

Lobby Card

Come Blow Your Horn

Card 7 of 12. Individuals lounging around at a party. 1963 Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0659

63/138

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Come Blow Your Horn

1963 Yorkin, Bud

USA

Lobby Card

Come Blow Your Horn

Card 8 of 12. A man in an orange jacket steps into a car while a woman in a fuzzy white jacket stands on 1963 the right. Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

2012-01403.0660

63/138

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Come Blow Your Horn

1963 Yorkin, Bud

USA

Lobby Card

Come Blow Your Horn

Card 9 of 12. Blurry image of a family talking in the 1963 living room. Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

2012-01403.0661

63/138

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Come Blow Your Horn

1963 Yorkin, Bud

USA

Lobby Card

Come Blow Your Horn

Card 10 of 12. A man looks at his hand while another man leans on the counter in front of him. Two woman and a young man stand in the background. Credits in 1963 black text at the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

2012-01403.0662

63/138

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Come Blow Your Horn

1963 Yorkin, Bud

USA

Lobby Card

Come Blow Your Horn

Card 11 of 12. A couple laughs together. Credits in 1963 black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

2012-01403.0663

63/138

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Come Blow Your Horn

1963 Yorkin, Bud

USA

Lobby Card

Come Blow Your Horn

Card 12 of 12. A man blows a horn while three women 1963 fawn over him. Credits in black text at the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

2012-01403.0664

64/168

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Good Neighbor Sam

1964 Swift, David

USA

Lobby Card

Good Neighbor Sam

Card 1 of 10. While a man eats some grapes behind a counter, another man leans close to a woman who sits on a pile of carpets. Credits in black text at the 1964 bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; marks from previous mounting in 4 corners, bleedthrough in four corners, smudges and marks in four corners, pin holes in four corners, loss of substrate in bottom right corner, scratches in centre right, slight creasing in top right corner, see full and in centre left, yellow adhesive damage in four condition corners of verso, loss of substrate in four corners of 2016-06-24 record verso, dirt transfer on verso. 2016-04-13 Poor condition; yellow, large scratches in centre affecting image, stain along bottom edge, creasing see full in bottom left corner, staple holes in bottom condition center, yellow adhesive damage in four corners of 2016-06-24 record verso, dirt transfer on verso.

2012-01403.0665

64/168

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Good Neighbor Sam

1964 Swift, David

USA

Lobby Card

Good Neighbor Sam

Card 2 of 10. A woman reclines in her ship-shaped bed while Jack Lemmon in polk-a-dot pyjamas leans on the 1964 bow. Credits in black text at the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

86

2012-01403.0666

64/168

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Good Neighbor Sam

1964 Swift, David

USA

Lobby Card

Good Neighbor Sam

Card 3 of 10. Jack Lemmon and two woman toast in a crowded restaurant. Credits in black text at the 1964 bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; yelllow, stains throughout bottom and on the right, scratching in centre, stain in centre left, liquid damage, bleedthrough in four corners, marks from perious mountings in four corners, abraisons in top right corner, smudges in see full left corners, yellow adhesive damage in four condition corners of verso, stain in bottom centre of verso, 2016-06-24 record slight dirt transfer in verso.

2016-04-13

2012-01403.0667

64/168

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Good Neighbor Sam

1964 Swift, David

USA

Lobby Card

Good Neighbor Sam

Card 4 of 10. A couple stands beside a pile of random objects on the back patio. Credits in black text at the 1964 bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellowing, pin holes in four corners, blue pencil marks in bottom corners, marks from previous mounting in four corners, bleedthrough in see full top corners, adhesive damage in four corners of condition verso, loss of substrate in four corners of verso, ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso. 2016-04-13 Okay condition; yellow, abraisons throughout, finger marks and smudges in centre right, crease in centre left, dirt smudges along edges, marks from see full previous mounting in four corners, loss of colour in condition centre left, yellow adhesive damage in four corners 2016-06-24 record of verso, slight dirt transfer on verso.

2012-01403.0668

64/168

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Good Neighbor Sam

1964 Swift, David

USA

Lobby Card

Good Neighbor Sam

Card 5 of 10. A woman in red smiles while walking away from another woman carrying a coffee tray. 1964 Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

2012-01403.0669

64/168

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Good Neighbor Sam

1964 Swift, David

USA

Lobby Card

Good Neighbor Sam

Card 6 of 10. A woman laughs uproariously in bed while Jack Lemmon in polk-a-dot pyjamas tries to 1964 quiet her. Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0670

64/168

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Good Neighbor Sam

1964 Swift, David

USA

Lobby Card

Good Neighbor Sam

Card 7 of 10. One man has another in a headlock while a woman tries to break them up. Credits in black 1964 text at the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0671

64/168

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Good Neighbor Sam

1964 Swift, David

USA

Lobby Card

Good Neighbor Sam

Card 8 of 10. Portrait of a group at a party. Credits in 1964 black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; finger marks and smudges in centre, pin holes in bottom centre, marks from previous see full mountings in four corners, stain in top, blue line in condition centre, scratches throughout, dirt in verso, yellow 2016-06-24 record adhesive damage in four corners of verso. 2016-04-13 Fair condition; severe creases in right corners causing loss of image, scratches and smudging in centre, blue marks from previous mounting in four see full corners, blue line in top centre, yellow adhesive condition damage in four corners of verso, dirt transfer in 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-13 Good condition; yellow, blue line in top centre, marks in right corners from previous mounting, see full smudges in centre, adhesive stains in four corners condition of verso, red smudges in centre, dirt transfer in 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-13 Good condition; transfer throughout, marks from see full previous mounting in four corners, slight scratching condition and abraisons throughout, yellow adhesive damage 2016-06-24 record in four corners, creasing in top right corner. 2016-04-13 Fair condition; yellow, pin holes in four corners, stains along bottom edge, smudges and marks in centre, blue marks in top left corner, red line in see full bottom left, scratching along bottom edge of condition image, yellow adhesive damage in four corners of 2016-06-24 record verso, loss of substrate in top right corner of verso. see full Poor condition; several severe staple holes in four condition corners and in edges, slight scratching throughout, 2016-06-24 record yellow, dirt transfer on verso.

2012-01403.0672

64/168

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Good Neighbor Sam

1964 Swift, David

USA

Lobby Card

Good Neighbor Sam

Card 9 of 10. A woman paints a comical face over a black and white image of a man on a billboard. Credits 1964 in black text at the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0673

64/168

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Good Neighbor Sam

1964 Swift, David

USA

Lobby Card

Good Neighbor Sam

Card 10 of 10. A man and woman covered in paints talk to a couple carrying paint cans. Credits in black 1964 text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

2012-01403.0674

67/307

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Kramer, 1967 Stanley

USA

Lobby Card

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Card 1 of 3. A man points an accusing finger at anoher 1967 seated man. Credits in black text at the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

2012-01403.0675

67/307

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Kramer, 1967 Stanley

USA

Lobby Card

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Card 2 of 3. Two couples have drinks at a club. Credits 1967 in black text at the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; yellow, staple holes in four corners, smudging in centre right, scratches in bottom right, see full abraisons throughout, crease in top left corner, dirt condition transfer on verso, loss of substrate in four corners 2016-06-24 record with adhesive residue on verso. 2016-04-13 see full condition Okay condition; yellow, severe pin holes in top 2016-06-24 record corners and in top centre, dirt transfer on verso. Fair condition; staple holes in four corners, yellow adhesive residue in bottom right corner, abraisons throughout, finger mark in bottom right, dirt see full smudges throughout, dent in top left corner from condition paper clip, two small dents in centre, yellow 2016-06-24 record adhesive damage in four corners of verso. Fair condition; abraisons in centre, crease in top see full centre with loss of colour, abraisons throughout, condition yellow, yellow adhesive damage in four corners of 2016-06-24 record verso, slight dirt transfer on verso. Good condition; pin hole in top left, stain in bottom see full corners, crease in bottom right, yellow adhesive condition damage in four corners of verso, smudges in centre 2016-06-24 record left of verso. Good condition; creasing in top centre, yellow, creasing in bottom centre, smudges in bottom left see full corner, smudges in top left and bottom centre of condition verso, yellow adhesive damage in four corners of 2016-06-24 record verso. Good condition; yellow, residue in centre, adhesive see full residue in bottom left corner, creasing in top condition centre, yellow adhesive damage in four corners of 2016-06-24 record verso. Good condition; abraisons throughout, yellow, yellow stain in bottom left corner, creasing in top see full left and bottom right corners, small crease in condition centre, yellow adhesive damage in four corners of 2016-06-24 record verso. Fair condition; abraisons throughout, yellow, staple see full holes in four cornerrs, crease in top centre, smudge condition in bottom centre, yellow adhesive damage in four 2016-06-24 record corners of verso. see full Good condition; yellow, crease in top centre condition causing colour loss, yellow adhesive damage in four 2016-06-24 record corners of verso. Okay condition; staple holes in four corners, yellow, scratches in top left, abraison in bottom centre, see full creasing in centre, yellow adhesive residue in four condition corners of verso, ink transfer in bottom left of 2016-06-24 record verso. Fair condition; yellow, abraisons throughout, yellow see full adhesive damage in four corners, wear in bottom condition right corner, yellow adhesive damage in four 2016-06-24 record corners of verso. Good condition; yellow, abraisons and scratching in see full right, wear along top edge, yellow adhesive damage condition in four corners of verso, transfer along right edge of 2016-06-24 record verso. Fair condition; abraisons throughout, finger marks in centre, creasing in centre, creasing in bottom see full right corner, stain in top left corner, creasing in top condition right corner, yellow adhesive damage in four 2016-06-24 record corners of verso.

2012-01403.0676

67/307

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Kramer, 1967 Stanley

USA

Lobby Card

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Card 3 of 3. A young woman flips her hair at an 1967 annoyed maid. Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

2012-01403.0677

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

Card 1 of 12. A woman sits at a table while Harlow and a man stand around the table. Credits in black 1965 text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

2012-01403.0678

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

Card 2 of 12. Wide shot of a crowd at the World Premiere of a film. Harlow can be scene exiting her 1965 vehicle. Credits in black text at the bottom. Card 3 of 12. During a photoshoot, a smiling Harlow sits on large suitcases while two others stand behind 1965 her. Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

2012-01403.0679

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

2012-01403.0680

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

Card 4 of 12. A man and Harlow look at each other in shock while lying in a gold bed in a very lavish 1965 bedroom. Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

2012-01403.0681

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

Card 5 of 12. Harlow sits on a bed while her mother and stepfather look at her. Credits in black text at the 1965 bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

2012-01403.0682

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

Card 6 of 12. Harlow in the spotlight on an empty stage with an orchestra and crowd in the foreground. 1965 Credits in black text at the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

2012-01403.0683

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

Card 7 of 12. Harlow holds the arm of a man in her 1965 bedroom. Credits in black text at the bottom. Card 8 of 12. Two seamstresses try to alter Harlow's outfit while she strikes a pose. Credits in black text at 1965 the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

2012-01403.0684

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

2012-01403.0685

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

2012-01403.0686

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

Card 9 of 12. Harlow in a white dress and house coat holds the leashes of two long-haired greyhounds in a 1965 lavish room. Credits in black text at the bottom. Card 10 of 12. Harlow in a black dress in the centre with two men dressed as a cop and a 'frenchmen' while a crowd observes on the left. Credits in black 1965 text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

2012-01403.0687

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

Card 11 of 12. Wedding scene. Credits in black text at 1965 the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

2012-01403.0688

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

Card 12 of 12. Harlow sits at her makeup table talking to a man sitting on an ottoman. Credits in black text 1965 at the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-13

2012-01403.0689

61/177

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Ladies Man

1961 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Ladies Man

Card 1 of 12. A woman laughs at a man dancing on 1961 the right. Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0690

61/177

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Ladies Man

1961 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Ladies Man

Card 2 of 12. A man gets hugged roughly by a woman while a crowed of woman look on, balloons and party decorations in the background. Credits in black text at 1961 the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; surface abraisons from poor housing, loss of colour in top right, smudges and scrapes in centre, finger mark in centre, creasing in top centre and bottom centre, marks from previous mounting in four corners, stain in bottom centre, see full dent in top left from paper clip, yellow adhesive condition damage in four corners of verso, stain in centre left 2016-06-24 record of verso. 2016-04-14 Fair condition; surface abraisons, slight yellowing, smudges in centre, marks from previous mounting see full in four corners, creasing in bottom corners, surface condition dirt, yellow adhesive damage in four corners of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-14

87

2012-01403.0691

61/177

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Ladies Man

1961 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Ladies Man

Card 3 of 12. A frightened man hangs onto the oversized arch of a doorway in front of a staircase. 1961 Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Poor condition; stains throughout, scratching in centre causing loss of colour, stains and residue in see full top left, blue marks from previous mounting in four condition corners, yellow adhesive damage in four corners of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-14 Okay condition; surface dirt, smudges along left edge, blue stains in four corners, marks from previous mounting in four corners, smudges in four corners, creasing in top centre, scratch in centre see full left, residue in centre left, yellow adhesive damage condition in four corners of verso, blue stain in centre of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-14

2012-01403.0692

61/177

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Ladies Man

1961 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Ladies Man

Card 4 of 12. A man in a suit points to a woman in white face makeup and a black outfit. Credits in black 1961 text at the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0693

61/177

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Ladies Man

1961 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Ladies Man

Card 5 of 12. A man lies on the ground in front of a cage while a dog walks away, three women look concerned at the man. Credits in black text at the 1961 bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; surface dirt, scratching and loss of colour in top, large crease in bottom centre causing colour loss, finger marks in bottom right, adhesive residue in bottom right, blue transfer along left edge, dent in top left corner from paper clip, finger see full marks in centre right, smudges along bottom, condition marks from previous mounting in four corners, 2016-06-24 record yellow adhesive damage in four corners of verso. 2016-04-14 Fair condition; slight yellowing, creasing and surface scratching causing colour loss, light ink stains in corners, marks from previous mounting in see full four corners, slight creasing in centre, yellow condition adhesive damage in four corners of verso, smudges 2016-06-24 record and finger mark in centre of verso.

2012-01403.0694

61/177

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Ladies Man

1961 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Ladies Man

Card 6 of 12. A woman talks to an awkward man in the entrance of a home. Credits in black text at the 1961 bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-14

2012-01403.0695

61/177

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Ladies Man

1961 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Ladies Man

Card 7 of 12. A man smiles and holds a suitcase in the middle of a circle of woman. Credits in black text at 1961 the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; creasing in top causing colour loss, light scratches throughout, marks in corners from see full previous mounting, slight yellowing, creasing in top condition right corner, yellow adhesive damage in four 2016-06-24 record corners of verso. 2016-04-14 Okay condition; surface dirt and abraisons, stain in bottom center, light scratching throughout, marks from previous mounting in corners, yellow, loss of see full colour, yellow adhesive damage in four corners of condition verso, smudge in centre and slight ink transfer in 2016-06-24 record verso.

2012-01403.0696

61/177

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Ladies Man

1961 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Ladies Man

Card 8 of 12. Three women cuddle a man on an 1961 orange couch. Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-14

2012-01403.0697

61/177

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Ladies Man

1961 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Ladies Man

Card 9 of 12. A man in uniform interviews two woman as they set up for a party. Credits in black text at the 1961 bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0698

61/177

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Ladies Man

1961 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Ladies Man

Card 10 of 12. A man in a red jumpsuit tries to have a conversation with a man in a suit. Credits in black text 1961 at the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; yellowing, scratches, and dents in centre, smudges and residue throughout centre, crushed substrate in bottom left corner, marks from previous mounting in corners, dent in top left see full corner from paper clip, creasing in top right corner, condition smudges in verso, yellow adhesive damage in four 2016-06-24 record corners of verso. 2016-04-14 Poor condition; several creases and scratches throughout causing loss of colour, possible water damage in right, stain in centre right edge, marks see full from previous mounting in corners,yellow, yellow condition adhesive damage in four corners of verso, red ink 2016-06-24 record marks in verso. 2016-04-14 Fair condition; staple holes in four corners, stains and residue in four corners, smudging and streaks see full in bottom of image, slight loss of image from condition surface abraisons, stains in centre right edge, slight 2016-06-24 record ink transker on verso. 2016-04-14 Poor condition; yelllowing, brown stains along bottom of image into white border, marks from previous mounting in corners, dent in top left from paper clip, yellow adhesive damage in bottom right corner, blue film on surface, wear along right edge, creasing in right causing loss of colour, surface see full scratching in top causing colour loss, yellow condition adhesive damage in four corners of verso, stains 2016-06-24 record visible on verso.

2012-01403.0699

61/177

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Ladies Man

1961 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Ladies Man

Card 11 of 12. A man concentrates on a television or radio with headphones on. Credits in black text at the 1961 bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0700

61/177

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Ladies Man

1961 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Ladies Man

Card 12 of 12. A man in a suit and cap looks upset surrounded by debris. Credits in black text at the 1961 bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-14

2012-01403.0701

63/144

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Nutty Professor

1963 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Nutty Professor

Card 1 of 7. A large brass band serenades a crowded 1963 dance floor. Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0702

63/144

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Nutty Professor

1963 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Nutty Professor

Card 2 of 7. A man dances alone in front of seated 1963 couples. Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; surface scratches at the top causing loss of colour, yellow, creasing in centre and bottom right, smudging in centre, marks from previous mounting in corners, finger mark in see full bottom right, yellow adhesive residue along edges condition of corners, creasing in bottom right corner, yellow 2016-06-24 record adhesive damage in four corners of verso. 2016-04-14 Fair condition; yellowing, creasing in centre and top right, surface scratches throughout, creasing in right corners, small tear in small tear in top right corner, residue in top right, wear in top centre, see full yellow adhesive damage in four corners of verso, condition red stains in verso, finger marks in bottom left 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-14 Fair condition; crease in centre, yellowing, residue in top right corner, marks from previous mounting see full in corners, residue and surface scratches in bottom condition centre, yellow adhesive damage in four corners of 2016-06-24 record verso, ink residue on verso. 2016-04-14 Fair condition; staple holes in four corners, slight yellowing, creasing in bottom and right, residue in bottom centre, stain in centre, surface scratches see full throughout, crease in centre left causing colour condition damage, yellow adhesive damage in four corners of 2016-06-24 record verso, dirt transfer on verso. 2016-04-14 Okay condition; smudging and marks in centre, surface residue, slight scratching throughout, creasing centre right, marks from previous mount see full in corners, crease in bottom left corner, dent in top condition left from paper clip, yellow adhesive damage in four 2016-06-24 record corners of verso, smudge in verso. 2016-04-14 Okay condition; scratches throughout, smuging in centre, creasing in bottom centre-left with loss of colour, rip in top left corner, tear in bottom left corner, staple holes in four corners, yellow adhesive see full residue along edges of corners, crushed substrate condition in top right corner, yellow adhesive damage in four 2016-06-24 record corners of verso, ink transfer in verso. 2016-04-14 Okay condition; rips in both left corners, surface scratches throughout, staple holes in four corners, see full yellowing, deeper scratches in centre right, yellow condition adhesive damage in four corners of verso, ink 2016-06-24 record transfer in verso. 2016-04-14 see full Good condition; yellow, pen mark in top right, dent condition in top left from paper clip, crease in top right 2016-06-24 record corner, ink transfer on verso. 2016-04-14 see full Fair condition; yellow, dog-eared top right corner, condition small stains in top centre, dent in top left from 2016-06-24 record paper clip, ink transfer in verso.

2012-01403.0703

63/144

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Nutty Professor

1963 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Nutty Professor

Card 3 of 7. A man lies on a shelf in a cupboard. 1963 Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0704

63/144

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Nutty Professor

1963 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Nutty Professor

Card 4 of 7. A tall student wags his finger at the professor in front of a classroom. Credits in black text 1963 at the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0705

63/144

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Nutty Professor

1963 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Nutty Professor

Card 5 of 7. A young female student looks shocked sitting in a classroom. Credits in black text at the 1963 bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0706

63/144

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Nutty Professor

1963 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Nutty Professor

Card 6 of 7. On the right a professor in a lab coat lectures from a book to a confused classroom. Credits 1963 in black text at the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0707

63/144

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

The Nutty Professor

1963 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Nutty Professor

Card 7 of 7. The professor speaks to two other dance 1963 attendees. Credits in black text at the bottom. Card 1 of 4. A crowded party with foam covering the floor and people. Credits in green text on a yellow 1968 banner at the bottom. Card 2 of 4. Peter sellers and a woman clap while others look on in the background. Credits in green 1968 text on a yellow banner at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0708

68/143

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

The Party

1968 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

The Party

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0709

68/143

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

The Party

1968 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

The Party

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-14

2012-01403.0710

68/143

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Party

1968 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

The Party

Card 3 of 4. Peter Sellers and a woman stand with an elephant while the room gets filled with foam. Credits 1968 in green text at a yellow banner on the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Poor condition; yellow, staple holes in four corners, rips in staple holes in right corners, hole in right, see full pen mark in bottom left, yellow residue in bottom condition left corner, stain in centre right of verso, smudges 2016-06-24 record in top corners, creasing in centre right. 2016-04-14

88

2012-01403.0711

68/143

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Party

1968 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

The Party

Card 4 of 4. A man offers a flower to a woman sitting on a bed in a towel. Credits in green text on a yellow 1968 banner at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

see full condition Good condition; yellowing, dent in top left from 2016-06-24 record paper clip.

2016-04-14

2012-01403.0712

64/227

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

The Patsy

1964 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Patsy

Card 1 of 9. A man looks shocked while four executives talk to him. Credits in black text at the 1964 bottom. Card 2 of 9. A man falls in a pool fully clothed while two others swim in the background. Credits in black 1964 text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; staple holes in four corners, yellow, creasing in top right causing colour loss, tear and crushed substrate in centre right edge, scratches in centre, surface abraisons in centre, yellow adhesive see full damage in four corners of verso, loss of substrate in condition top centre, slight ink transfer in bottom centre of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-14 see full Good condition; slight scratching in centre, yellow, condition creasing in corners, dent in top left from paper clip, 2016-06-24 record smudges in verso. 2016-04-14 see full Fair condition; creasing in bottom corners, large condition crease along right edge of image, yellow, image 2016-06-24 record visible on verso, slight dirt transfer on verso.

2012-01403.0713

64/227

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

The Patsy

1964 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Patsy

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0714

64/227

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

The Patsy

1964 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Patsy

2012-01403.0715

64/227

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

The Patsy

1964 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Patsy

Card 3 of 9. A man in a fake mustache sings in the 1964 centre of a bar. Credits in black text at the bottom. Card 4 of 9. A man covered in dust has his hand crushed in a piano while another man leans on the piano, debris litters the floor and piano. Credits in 1964 black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-14

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

see full Fair condition; slight scratching in centre, yellow, condition creasing in bottom corners, residue in top left, stain 2016-06-24 record in top right, ink transfer in verso. 2016-04-14 see full condition Good condition; slight creasing throughout, yellow, 2016-06-24 record wear in left corners, dirt transfer on verso. 2016-04-14 see full Fair condition; creasing and scratching in centre, condition yellow, wear in four corners, crushed substrate in 2016-06-24 record bottom left, slight dirt transfer in verso. see full condition Good condition; yellowing, slight wear in corners, 2016-06-24 record surface abraisons, smudges in centre of verso. see full Good condition; yellow, surface abraisons, scratch condition in centre left, dent in top left from paper clip, 2016-06-24 record crease in centre left, smudge in centre of verso. Good condition; yellow, dent in top left from paper see full clip, slight wear along right edge, blue smudges in condition centre right, pen marks and smudges in centre of 2016-06-24 record verso. Fair condition; yellow, surface abraisons, marks from previous mounting in corners, slight bleedthrough in bottom corners, yellow residue in bottom right corner, dent in top left corner from see full paper clip, surface dirt, yellow adhesive damage in condition four corners of verso, stain in bottom left, ink 2016-06-24 record transfer in verso. Fair condition; creasing and crushed subtrate in bottom right corner, marks in four corners from former mounting, residue in centre left, slight surface scratching, dent in top left corner from paper clip, yellow, yellow adhesive residue in see full bottom left corner, yellow adhesive residue in top condition right corner edges, yellow adhesive damage in four 2016-06-24 record corners of verso, ink transfer on verso. Fair condition; yellow, dent in top left from paper clip, marks from previous mounting in corners, see full creasing in corners, bleedthrough in four corners, condition ink transfer on verso, yellow adhesive damage in 2016-06-24 record four corners of verso.

2012-01403.0716

64/227

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

The Patsy

1964 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Patsy

Card 5 of 9. A man sits with his mouth open at a radio stand and microphone. Credits in black text at the 1964 bottom. C Card 6 of 9. A man points at something as he speaks to two men and a woman sitting on a red circular 1964 couch. Credits in black text at the bottom. Card 7 of 9. A confused man holds a contract while a group of men and a woman surround him. Credits in 1964 black text at the bottom.

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0717

64/227

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

The Patsy

1964 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Patsy

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-14

2012-01403.0718

64/227

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

The Patsy

1964 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Patsy

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-14

2012-01403.0719

64/227

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

The Patsy

1964 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Patsy

Card 8 of 9. A man in uniform sits on an ottoman next to a woman working at a desk. Credits in black text at 1964 the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-14

2012-01403.0720

64/227

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

The Patsy

1964 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Patsy

Card 9 of 9. A man gets a makeover. Credits in black 1964 text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-14

2012-01403.0721

64/270

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Where Love Has Gone

Dmytryk, 1964 Edward

USA

Lobby Card

Where Love Has Gone

Card 1 of 8. A man in uniform and two well dressed women have a conversation in an art gallery. Credits 1964 in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Based on the novel by Harold Robbins. Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-15

2012-01403.0722

64/270

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Where Love Has Gone

Dmytryk, 1964 Edward

USA

Lobby Card

Where Love Has Gone

Card 2 of 8. A man confronts a woman in a California 1964 courtroom. Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Based on the novel by Harold Robbins. Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-15

2012-01403.0723

64/270

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Where Love Has Gone

Dmytryk, 1964 Edward

USA

Lobby Card

Where Love Has Gone

Card 3 of 8. A man and a woman embrace while 1964 talking in bed. Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Based on the novel by Harold Robbins. Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-15

2012-01403.0724

64/270

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Where Love Has Gone

Dmytryk, 1964 Edward

USA

Lobby Card

Where Love Has Gone

Card 4 of 8. A man holds a piece of paper out at an 1964 angry woman. Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Based on the novel by Harold Robbins. Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; creasing in right, smudges in centre left, surface scratches, yellow, marks from previous mounting, smudges in bottom centre, yellow see full adhesive damage in edges of corners, yellow condition adhesive damage in four corners of verso, ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso, hole in bottom centre. 2016-04-15 Fair condition; surface abraisons, yellow, marks in four corners from previous mounting, creasing in top right corner, creasing in centre, blue ink in see full bottom corner, residue in centre left of verso, condition yellow adhesive damage in four corners of verso, 2016-06-24 record ink transfer in verso.

2012-01403.0725

64/270

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Where Love Has Gone

Dmytryk, 1964 Edward

USA

Lobby Card

Where Love Has Gone

Card 5 of 8. A man holds a gift from a woman while 1964 sitting on a bed. Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Based on the novel by Harold Robbins. Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-15

2012-01403.0726

64/270

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Where Love Has Gone

Dmytryk, 1964 Edward

USA

Lobby Card

Where Love Has Gone

Card 6 of 8. A couple holds each other while looking suspiciously at someone out of frame. Credits in black 1964 text at the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Based on the novel by Harold Robbins. Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; residue and possible water damage throughout surface, holes in centre and bottom right of image, yellow, dent from paper clip in top left, finger mark in centre left, yellow adhesive damage in edges of corners, marks from previous see full mounting in corners, yellow adhesive damage in condition four corners of verso, stain in top right corner of 2016-06-24 record verso, ink transfer in verso. 2016-04-15 Okay condition; possible water damage, small creases throughout causing colour loss, yellow, stains and smudges in bottom edge, yellow adhesive damage in edges of four corners, surface see full scratches, hole in bottom right of image, yellow condition adhesive damage in four corners of verso, stains in 2016-06-24 record centre of verso. Fair condition; yellow, staple holes in four corners, surface abraisons, tear in bottom centre edge, marks from previous mounting in corners, surface see full dirt, dent in top left from paper clip, loss of condition substrate in top right corner, ink transfer on verso, 2016-06-24 record yellow adhesive damage in four corners of verso.

2012-01403.0727

64/270

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Where Love Has Gone

Dmytryk, 1964 Edward

USA

Lobby Card

Where Love Has Gone

Card 7 of 8. A man tries to block a woman from a crowd of media outside a courtroom. Credits in black 1964 text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Based on the novel by Harold Robbins. Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-15

2012-01403.0728

64/270

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Where Love Has Gone

Dmytryk, 1964 Edward

USA

Lobby Card

Where Love Has Gone

Card 8 of 8. A woman destroys a portrait with a fire 1964 pocker. Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Based on the novel by Harold Robbins. Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-15

2012-01403.0729

63/319

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Who's Minding the Store?

1963 Tashlin, Frank

USA

Lobby Card

Who's Minding the Store?

Card 1 of 12. A woman smiles at a young man who makes a face in the middle of the gourmet section of a 1963 grocery store. Credits in black text at the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; surface abraisons throughout, blue colour in abraisons, blue residue in bottom section, wear and tears in bottom corners, yellow adhesive damage in edges of corners, marks from previous see full mounting in four corners, creasing throughout, condition hole in centre, ink transfer on verso, yellow 2016-06-24 record adhesive damage in four corners of verso. 2016-04-15 Fair condition; abraisons and scratches throughout will blue exposed layer, yellow, smudge in bottom see full left corner, marks from previous mounting in left condition corners, surface dirt, yellow adhesive damage in 2016-06-24 record four corners of verso, slight ink transfer in verso. Fair conditon; yellow, scratching, finger mark in centre, creasing in four corner, creasing in bottom centre, marks from previous mounting, slight see full bleedthrough in corners, hole in bottom centre, condition loss of substrate in four corners of verso, ink 2016-06-24 record transfer in verso. Fair condition; yellow, surface abraisons, finger see full marks and residue in centre, creasing along right condition edge causing colour loss, creasing in four corners, 2016-06-24 record surface dirt, dirt and ink transfer on verso.

2012-01403.0730

63/319

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Who's Minding the Store?

1963 Tashlin, Frank

USA

Lobby Card

Who's Minding the Store?

Card 2 of 12. A man hangs on a rope in the middle of the appliance section of a store. Credits in black text 1963 at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-15

2012-01403.0731

63/319

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Who's Minding the Store?

1963 Tashlin, Frank

USA

Lobby Card

Who's Minding the Store?

Card 3 of 12. A man cowers against a wall as a woman 1963 gets close to him. Credits in black text at the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-15

2012-01403.0732

63/319

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Who's Minding the Store?

1963 Tashlin, Frank

USA

Lobby Card

Who's Minding the Store?

Card 4 of 12. A woman gives water to a man running a marathon and advertising a mattress sale. Credits in 1963 black text at the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-15

2012-01403.0733

63/319

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Who's Minding the Store?

1963 Tashlin, Frank

USA

Lobby Card

Who's Minding the Store?

Card 5 of 12. A man holds a shoebox while another man talks to him, a pile of boxes sit in the background. 1963 Credits in black text at the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Poor condition; severe surface damage and creases causing loss of image, smudging in bottom right, surface dirt, yellow, marks from previous see full mountings in corners, tear in top left corner, yellow condition adhesive damage in four corners of verso, hole in 2016-06-24 record top centre, ink transfer on verso. 2016-04-15

89

2012-01403.0734

63/319

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Who's Minding the Store?

1963 Tashlin, Frank

USA

Lobby Card

Who's Minding the Store?

Card 6 of 12. A half-dressed man stands in the remnants of a shoe department. Credits in black text 1963 at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

see full Good condition; crushed substrate in bottom left condition corner, slight surface abraisons concentrated in top 2016-06-24 record right corner, ink transfer on verso. 2016-04-15 Fair condition; smudges in centre, yellow, pin holes see full in four corners, bleedthrough in left corners, condition surface dirt, slight surface abraisons, creasing along 2016-06-24 record right, ink and dirt transfer on verso. 2016-04-15 Okay condition; yellow, red smudges and residue in bottom left and centre right edge, surface abraisons with blue layer in creases, surface see full scratches, loss of colour in bottom right corner, condition yellow adhesive damage in four corners of verso, 2016-06-24 record slight dirt transfer on verso. 2016-04-15 Okay condition; severe abraisons and scratching throughout, creasing along edges, loss of colour, see full surface dirt, marks in four corners from former condition mounting, yellow adhesive damage in four corners 2016-06-24 record of verso, slight dirt transfer in verso.

2012-01403.0735

63/319

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Who's Minding the Store?

1963 Tashlin, Frank

USA

Lobby Card

Who's Minding the Store?

Card 7 of 12. A nurse and young woman look concerned at a disheveled man in roller skates. Credits 1963 in black text at the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0736

63/319

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Who's Minding the Store?

1963 Tashlin, Frank

USA

Lobby Card

Who's Minding the Store?

Card 8 of 12. A man wags his finger at a young 1963 woman. Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0737

63/319

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Who's Minding the Store?

1963 Tashlin, Frank

USA

Lobby Card

Who's Minding the Store?

Card 9 of 12. A man sits on an overturned chair occupied by a woman. Credits in black text at the 1963 bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-15

2012-01403.0738

63/319

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Who's Minding the Store?

1963 Tashlin, Frank

USA

Lobby Card

Who's Minding the Store?

Card 10 of 12. A man helps another with his golf 1963 swing. Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

see full condition Good condition; yellow, surface dirt, ink transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso, creasing in top right corner. 2016-04-15 Okay condition; smudges and finger marks in centre right, abraisons and surface scratches throughout, blue residue in creases, yellow, marks from previous see full mounting in corners, creasing and scraped image in condition top right corner, yellow adhesive damage in four 2016-06-24 record corners of verso, slight ink transfer on verso. 2016-04-15 see full Fair condition; slight creasing in corners, yellow, condition surface scratches, surface dirt, stain in centre left, 2016-06-24 record yellow adhesive damage in four corners of verso. Fair condition; yellow, slight browning along edges, creasing in top left, small stain in bottom centre, creasing in four corners, separation of substrate in top right corner, small stain in centre left edge, see full residue in bottom right corner, slight loss of colour condition in credits, creasing in centre left edge, image on 2016-06-24 record verso.

2012-01403.0739

63/319

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Who's Minding the Store?

1963 Tashlin, Frank

USA

Lobby Card

Who's Minding the Store?

Card 11 of 12. A man sits on an overturned chair occupied by a woman. Credits in black text at the 1963 bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

Duplicate.

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0740

63/319

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Who's Minding the Store?

1963 Tashlin, Frank

USA

Lobby Card

Who's Minding the Store?

Card 12 of 12. A man helps another with his golf 1963 swing. Credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Mini Lobby Card (stills).

Duplicate.

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-15

2012-01403.0741

63/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

All the Way Home

1963 Segal, Alex

USA

Lobby Card

All the Way Home

Card 1 of 8. Still in top right of a man handing a tray to a woman, in the border along the left and bottom: tagline in blue text in top left corner, image of a man kissing a woman under tagline, five lines of credits in blue text and title in red text at the bottom. Tagline: 1963 "Love is not a thing that grows only in the dark." C Card 2 of 8. Still in top right of a man with his arm around a little boy staring at something out of frame, in the border along the left and bottom: tagline in blue text in top left corner, image of a man kissing a woman under tagline, five lines of credits in blue text and title in red text at the bottom. Tagline: "Love is 1963 not a thing that grows only in the dark."

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Based on the novel "A Death in the Family" by James Agee and the play by Tad Mosel.

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-15

2012-01403.0742

63/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

All the Way Home

1963 Segal, Alex

USA

Lobby Card

All the Way Home

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Based on the novel "A Death in the Family" by James Agee and the play by Tad Mosel.

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Good condition; yellow, slight browning along edge, see full pin holes in top corners and in centre right edge, condition slight creasing in centre left edge, creasing in 2016-06-24 record corners, smudge in left of credits, image on verso. 2016-04-15

2012-01403.0743

63/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

All the Way Home

1963 Segal, Alex

USA

Lobby Card

All the Way Home

Card 3 of 8. In top right three men and a woman drive in the countryside, in border on left and bottom: tagline in blue text in top left corner, image of a man kissing a woman under tagline, five lines of credits in blue text and title in red at the bottom. Tagline: "Love 1963 is not a thing that grows only in the dark." C Card 4 of 8. Still in top right of a woman begging for something from a man while an elderly couple looks on in background, in the border along the left and bottom: tagline in blue text in top left corner, image of a man kissing a woman under tagline, five lines of credits in blue text and title in red text at the bottom. Tagline: "Love is not a thing that grows only in the 1963 dark." C Card 5 of 8. Still in top right of a couple embracing, in the border along the left and bottom: tagline in blue text in top left corner, image of a man kissing a woman under tagline, five lines of credits in blue text and title in red text at the bottom. Tagline: "Love is 1963 not a thing that grows only in the dark." Card 6 of 8. Still in top right of a widow rubs a little boys head, in the border along the left and bottom: tagline in blue text in top left corner, image of a man kissing a woman under tagline, five lines of credits in blue text and title in red text at the bottom. Tagline: 1963 "Love is not a thing that grows only in the dark."

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Based on the novel "A Death in the Family" by James Agee and the play by Tad Mosel.

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Good condition; yellow, creasing in four corners, see full slight loss of colour in tafline and credits, very slight condition creasing in centre, image visible on verso, slight ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso. 2016-04-15

2012-01403.0744

63/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

All the Way Home

1963 Segal, Alex

USA

Lobby Card

All the Way Home

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Based on the novel "A Death in the Family" by James Agee and the play by Tad Mosel.

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, slight browning along edges, slight creasing throughout, pin holes in top corners, bottom centre, and centre right edge, colour loss, slight wear in bottom left corner, blue stain on the see full left of credits, very slight creasing concentrated condition along left edge, image visible on verso, slight ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso. 2016-04-15 Fair conditon; yellow, pin holes in top corners and centre right edge, top left pin hole stretch out, colour loss, browning along left edge, creasing in see full four corners, slight creasing, red ink stains in right condition edge of verso, image visible on verso, ink transfer at 2016-06-24 record the top of verso. 2016-04-15 Fair condition; yellow, browning along top edge, water damage along right edge, slight colour loss, browning in bottom right corner, pin holes in top see full corners, creasing in four corners, red stains in condition centre and centre right edge of verso, fold in 2016-06-24 record bottom right corner, sun damage in verso.

2012-01403.0745

63/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

All the Way Home

1963 Segal, Alex

USA

Lobby Card

All the Way Home

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Based on the novel "A Death in the Family" by James Agee and the play by Tad Mosel.

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0746

63/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

All the Way Home

1963 Segal, Alex

USA

Lobby Card

All the Way Home

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Based on the novel "A Death in the Family" by James Agee and the play by Tad Mosel.

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-15

2012-01403.0747

63/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

All the Way Home

1963 Segal, Alex

USA

Lobby Card

All the Way Home

Card 7 of 8. Still in top right of a family having a picnic, in the border along the left and bottom: tagline in blue text in top left corner, image of a man kissing a woman under tagline, five lines of credits in blue text and title in red text at the bottom. Tagline: "Love is 1963 not a thing that grows only in the dark." C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Based on the novel "A Death in the Family" by James Agee and the play by Tad Mosel.

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, browning along edges, red surface residue possibly from water damage, creasing in four corners, colour loss, tear in bottom right previously repaired with tape in verso, slight see full wear along top and right edges, sun damage in condition verso, yellow adhesive damage in bottom left of 2016-06-24 record verso, red stain in centre right edge of verso. 2016-04-15

2012-01403.0748

63/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

All the Way Home

1963 Segal, Alex

USA

Lobby Card

All the Way Home

Card 8 of 8. Still in top right of a man looking sternly at another, in the border along the left and bottom: tagline in blue text in top left corner, image of a man kissing a woman under tagline, five lines of credits in blue text and title in red text at the bottom. Tagline: 1963 "Love is not a thing that grows only in the dark."

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Based on the novel "A Death in the Family" by James Agee and the play by Tad Mosel.

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; severe yellowing and sun damaged, red surface film possibly from water damage, slight loss of colour concentrated in top left corner, crease in bottom right, stains in bottom centre, pin see full holes in four corners, creasing in four corners, hand condition and finger marks in bottom centre of verso, stains 2016-06-24 record in bottom right and bottom left of verso. 2016-04-15

2012-01403.0749

55/13

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Bad Day At Black Rock

1955 Sturges, John

USA

Lobby Card

Bad Day at Black Rock

Card 1 of 1. Image of a man standing on train tracks with the shadows of five men in bottom right corner, two lines of cast in yellow in top right next to the Cinemascope logo, title in black and red text under cast, five lines of credits in red under title, tagline line in white on a blue banner in centre. Tagline: "Just the 1955 way it happened!" C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-60324 (F-11-192). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Poor condition; yellow, red surface film, water damage, several holes throughout in centre and along edges, bottom left corner missing repaired see full with tape, tear and hole in bottom centre repaired condition with tape, staple holes in corners and edges, stamp 2016-06-24 record centre left of verso, seven tape repairs in verso. 2016-04-15

2012-01403.0750

64/284

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Blob; Dinosaurus!

1958;1960

Yeaworth, Jr., Irvin S.

USA

Lobby Card

The Blob; Dinosaurus

Card 1 of 1. Black and white still in top right of a cave man protecting a mother and child from a thug holding a gun, tagline in white text on a black background in top left, 'Steve McQueen' in black on a red background in centre left above a black and white image of McQueen and a screaming woman, titles in white block letters with black and red outlines in bottom centre, image of a dinosaur holding a woman 1964 in bottom right corner, one line of credits under title. O

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-60625 (F-22-545). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, slight browning along top and right edge, slight colour loss, staple holes in top centre, right and left edges, creasing in all four corners, red pen in bottom right corner, stain in bottom centre, wear and small tears along top see full edge, sun damage in top left of verso, slight condition creasing in centre, ink transfer on verso, image 2016-06-24 record slightly visible on verso. 2016-04-15 Poor condition; possible water damage, severe creasing in four corners, very yellow, red surface film, staple holes in four corners, one inch tear in see full top left, hole in top right of image, tear in centre condition right edge, loss of substrate in four corners of 2016-06-24 record verso, sun damage in verso, ink transfer in verso. see full Fair condition; yellow, fold in top left corner, condition creasing in four corners, slight colour loss, ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso, image slightly visible in verso. Fair condition; yellow, yellow surface residue see full possibly from water damage, creasing in top condition corners, image visible in verso, creasing 2016-06-24 record throughout, ink transfer on verso.

2012-01403.0751

66/165

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Birds Do It

Marton, 1966 Andrew

USA

Lobby Card

Birds Do It

Card 1 of 1. Still of a man in a suit speaking with another in pyjamas and officer's cap, four lines of credits in orange and blue text above title in blue, 1966 eight lines of credits under title on a yellow title card.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-15

2012-01403.0752

63/202

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Call Me Bwana

Douglas, 1963 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Call Me Bwana

Card 1 of 1. Large still of a man hugging a woman from behind in a forest, six lines of credits in blue and 1963 red above the title in yellow in the mouth of a hippo. C Card 1 of 1. Two men examine a document in an office space, title in black text on a ruled yellow title card in bottom left corner, two lines of credits in black text in 1962 bottom centre and right. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-15

2012-01403.0753

62/229

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Chapman Report

1963 Cukor, George USA

Lobby Card

The Chapman Report

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-15

90

2012-01403.0754

National Screen 790024 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Champ

Zeffirelli, 1979 Franco

USA

Lobby Card

The Champ

Card 1 of 7. Still in top right of a closeup of Jon Voight, border in pink colour from top left to bottom right, small black & white still of a man and child shadow boxing, title in burgandy in bottom centre, logos in 1979 bottom right corner. O

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-44244 (F-21-182). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Laminated. Fair condition; yellow, slight creasing see full throughout, creasing in centre with loss of colour, condition residue in top left border, stamp in centre right of 2016-06-24 record verso, smudges in verso.

2016-04-18

2012-01403.0755

National Screen 790024 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Champ

Zeffirelli, 1979 Franco

USA

Lobby Card

The Champ

2012-01403.0756

National Screen 790024 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Champ

Zeffirelli, 1979 Franco

USA

Lobby Card

The Champ

Card 2 of 7. Still in top right of a man pointing something out to a woman, border in pink colour from top left to bottom right, small black & white still of a man and child shadow boxing, title in burgandy in 1979 bottom centre, logos in bottom right corner. O Card 3 of 7. Still in top right of a boxing match, border in pink colour from top left to bottom right, small black & white still of a man and child shadow boxing, title in burgandy in bottom centre, logos in bottom 1979 right corner. O Card 4 of 7. Still in top right of a woman and small boy smiling, border in pink colour from top left to bottom right, small black & white still of a man and child shadow boxing, title in burgandy in bottom centre, 1979 logos in bottom right corner. O Card 5 of 7. Still in top right of a Jon Voight and boy getting excited at an event, border in pink colour from top left to bottom right, small black & white still of a man and child shadow boxing, title in burgandy in 1979 bottom centre, logos in bottom right corner. O Card 6 of 7. Still in top right of a boxer resting with a little boy, border in pink colour from top left to bottom right, small black & white still of a man and child shadow boxing, title in burgandy in bottom 1979 centre, logos in bottom right corner.

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-44244 (F-21-182). TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-44244 (F-21-182). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Laminated. Okay condition; very yellow, creasing throughout, yellow damage along all edges, staple holes in four corners, pin hole in bottom centre and see full right centre edge, slight loss of colour from condition creasing, rip in centre left edge, dirt smudges in top 2016-06-24 record of verso, residue in centre right of verso. 2016-04-18 Laminated. Fair condition; yellow, creasing, slight see full loss of colour from creasing, pin holes in bottom condition corners, residue in top right corners, stamp in top 2016-06-24 record centre of verso, smudges in verso.

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-18

2012-01403.0757

National Screen 790024 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Champ

Zeffirelli, 1979 Franco

USA

Lobby Card

The Champ

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-44244 (F-21-182). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Laminated. Okay condition; yellow, staple holes in four corners, hole in top right, residue in centre left see full and bottom centre, slight creasing throughout, condition creasing in corners, stamp in top centre of verso, 2016-06-24 record smudges in right and top of verso. 2016-04-18

2012-01403.0758

National Screen 790024 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Champ

Zeffirelli, 1979 Franco

USA

Lobby Card

The Champ

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-44244 (F-21-182). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Laminated. Okay condition; yellow, severe creasing see full in top left, crease in bottom centre, pin holes in condition bottom corners, stamp in top right corner of verso, 2016-06-24 record smudges in verso.

2016-04-18

2012-01403.0759

National Screen 790024 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Champ

Zeffirelli, 1979 Franco

USA

Lobby Card

The Champ

O

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-44244 (F-21-182). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Laminated. Fair condition; yellow, staple holes in see full four corners, slight creasing throughout, pin hole in condition bottom centre, slight loss of colour, stamp in top 2016-06-24 record centre of verso, smudging in bottom of verso. 2016-04-18 Laminated. Okay condition; heavy creasing in left, yellowing, staple holes in four corners, hole in see full centre left, tear in bottom left corner, creasing in condition four corners, three tape repairs in verso, stamp in 2016-06-24 record top centre, stains in bottom centre of verso.

2012-01403.0760

National Screen 790024 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Champ

Zeffirelli, 1979 Franco

USA

Lobby Card

The Champ

Card 7 of 7. Still in top right of three men laughing at a bar, border in pink colour from top left to bottom right, small black & white still of a man and child shadow boxing, title in burgandy in bottom centre, 1979 logos in bottom right corner. O Card 1 of 8. Title card. Various characters organized around tagline in black text in top centre and five lines of credits in centre, title in red rubbed out design, an arrow extends from the 'E' towards a blurry silhouette of a man in bottom right, four lines of credits in black text at the bottom. Tagline: "A breathless explosive 1966 story of today!" C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0761

66/56

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Chase

1966 Penn, Arthur

USA

Lobby Card

The Chase

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-44229 (F-02-091). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; very yellow, stains in bottom centre and top corners and centre right edge, wear along see full bottom edge, smudges along right edge, creasing in condition top corners, image visible on verso, stains in centre 2016-06-24 record of verso, slight creasing througout. 2016-04-18 Fair condition; browning along vertical edges, yellow, loss of substrate in top left, fold in top left corner, smudge in top right edge, creasing along see full bottom edge, image visible on verso, two tape condition pieces in vertical edges in verso, loss of substrate in 2016-06-24 record top left of verso. 2016-04-18 Fair condition; yellow, pin holes in four corners, see full wear along edges, loss of substrate in bottom right condition corner, image visible on verso, creasing in four 2016-06-24 record corners.

2012-01403.0762

66/56

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Chase

1966 Penn, Arthur

USA

Lobby Card

The Chase

Card 2 of 8. Still of a large party looking up out of frame, title card in bottom left corner: two lines of cast above title in red text and six lines of credits in 1966 blue text.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-44229 (F-02-091). TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-44229 (F-02-091). TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-44229 (F-02-091). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0763

66/56

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Chase

1966 Penn, Arthur

USA

Lobby Card

The Chase

Card 3 of 8. Still of a cowboy and a woman looking at something out of frame, title card in bottom left corner: two lines of cast above title in red text and six 1966 lines of credits in blue text. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-18

2012-01403.0764

66/56

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Chase

1966 Penn, Arthur

USA

Lobby Card

The Chase

Card 4 of 8. Still of a close-up of a couple hugging, title card in bottom left corner: two lines of cast above 1966 title in red text and six lines of credits in blue text. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, smudges in centre, creasing see full in four corners and bottom centre, loss of substrate condition in bottom right corner and top right, image visible 2016-06-24 record in verso, slight creasing throughout. 2016-04-18 Fair condition; yellow, loss of substrate in right corners, and top centre, tape pieces in top corners, see full creasing in four corners, slight creasing in four condition corners, tape pieces in top of verso, image visible 2016-06-24 record on verso,ink transfer on verso. 2016-04-18 Okay condition; yellow, slight loss of colour, stains in centre left, staple holes in four corner, creasing in four corners, wear along right edge, fold in top see full left corner, image visible on verso, ink transfer on condition verso, staple holes in centre, stain in bottom left of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-18 Fair condition; yellow, yellow stain in centre right, creasing in four corners, pin holes in four corners and top and bottom centre, smudges and finger see full marks in bottom right corner, image visible on condition verso, loss of substrate in top corners of verso, ink 2016-06-24 record transfer in verso. Fair condition; yellow, slight colour loss, creasing in see full four corners, sun damage in bottom right corner, condition possible water damage, image visible on verso, ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso.

2012-01403.0765

66/56

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Chase

1966 Penn, Arthur

USA

Lobby Card

The Chase

Card 5 of 8. Still of a woman smoking while leaning on a car with annoyed people in the background, title card in bottom left corner: two lines of cast above 1966 title in red text and six lines of credits in blue text. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-44229 (F-02-091). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0766

66/56

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Chase

1966 Penn, Arthur

USA

Lobby Card

The Chase

Card 6 of 8. Still of a man kissing a woman's neck, title card in bottom left corner: two lines of cast above 1966 title in red text and six lines of credits in blue text. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-44229 (F-02-091). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0767

66/56

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Chase

1966 Penn, Arthur

USA

Lobby Card

The Chase

2012-01403.0768

66/56

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Chase

1966 Penn, Arthur

USA

Lobby Card

The Chase

Card 7 of 8. Still of two men and a woman climbing a bank after crashing in water, title card in bottom left corner: two lines of cast above title in red text and six 1966 lines of credits in blue text. C Card 8 of 8. Still of a man holding a gun towards two men while another stands in the water in the background, title card in bottom left corner: two lines of cast above title in red text and six lines of credits in 1966 blue text. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-44229 (F-02-091). TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-44229 (F-02-091). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-18

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-18

2012-01403.0769

74/205

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Chinatown

Polanski, 1974 Roman

USA

Lobby Card

Chinatown

2012-01403.0770

74/205

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Chinatown

Polanski, 1974 Roman

USA

Lobby Card

Chinatown

Card 1 of 7. Still of Jack Nicholson with a broken nose standing in front of a sold sign for farmland, title card in bottom right corner: three lines of credits in black text above title in pink text and three lines of credits 1974 under title. C Card 2 of 7. Still of one man holding a knife to Jack Nicholson's nose while a third man restrains him, title card in bottom right corner: three lines of credits in black text above title in pink text and three lines of 1974 credits under title. C Card 3 of 7. Still of a group of men fight in front of a market, title card in bottom right corner: three lines of credits in black above title in pink text and three 1974 lines of credits under title. C Card 4 of 7. Still of two men fighting, title card in bottom right corner: three lines of credits in black text above title in pink text and three lines of credits under 1974 title. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Laminated. Fair condition; yellowing, staple holes in four corners and top/bottom centre, creasing throughout, seperation of substrate in bottom right corner, loss of colour in top and bottom centre, see full marker covering MPAA rating in bottom right, condition marks and smudges throughout verso, stain in 2016-06-24 record centre left of verso, ink transfer on verso. 2016-04-18

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

see full Laminated. Good condition; yellowing, pin holes in condition four corners, slight creasing in right, slight 2016-06-24 record scratching in bottom centre, smudges in verso. Laminated. Fair condition; yellow, pin hole in see full centre, pin holes in four corners, creasing in four condition corners, pen marks in bottom right corner, slight 2016-06-24 record creasing throughout, smudges in left of verso. Laminated. Fair condition; slight creasing see full throughout, yellow, staple holes in four corners, condition slight loss of colour, dirt transfer on verso, residue 2016-06-24 record in top centre of verso.

2016-04-18

2012-01403.0771

74/205

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Chinatown

Polanski, 1974 Roman

USA

Lobby Card

Chinatown

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-18

2012-01403.0772

74/205

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Chinatown

Polanski, 1974 Roman

USA

Lobby Card

Chinatown

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-18

2012-01403.0773

74/205

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Chinatown

Polanski, 1974 Roman

USA

Lobby Card

Chinatown

Card 5 of 7. Still closeup of a man with a broken nose, title card in bottom right corner: three lines of credits in black text above title in pink text and three lines of 1974 credits under title. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Laminated. Okay condition; loss of colour, yellow adhesive damage in top left corner, slight creasing on the right, loss of substrate in bottom left corner, see full staple holes in top corners, hairs in centre under condition lamination, adhesive damage in top corners of 2016-06-24 record verso, smuges in bottom right of verso. 2016-04-18 Laminated. Fair condition; stain in top left corner, yellow, marker on MPAA rating in bottom left, sun damange in bottom edge, tears in top centre, slight see full creasing throughout, tape repair in top centre of condition verso, ink transfer in verso, pen mark in centre left 2016-06-24 record of verso. 2016-04-18 Laminated. Good condition; yellow, creasing in four see full corners, marker on MPAA rating in bottom left condition corner, residue in top left, slight creasing 2016-06-24 record throughout, transfer on verso. 2016-04-18 Fair condition; slight creasing throughout, yellow, see full slight image loss, creasing in four corners, fold in condition bottom right corner, pin holes in four corners, wear 2016-06-24 record along right edge, ink transfer on verso. 2016-04-18

2012-01403.0774

74/205

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Chinatown

Polanski, 1974 Roman

USA

Lobby Card

Chinatown

Card 6 of 7. Stil of a cop looking suspiciously at a man with stitches in his nose, title card in bottom right corner: three lines of credits in black text above title in 1974 pink text and three lines of credits under title.. C Card 7 of 7. Still of Jack Nicholson preparing to look through binoculors, title card in bottom left corner: three lines of credits in black above title in pink text 1974 and three lines of credits under title.

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0775

74/205

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Chinatown

Polanski, 1974 Roman

USA

Lobby Card

Chinatown

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-44204 (F-02-105). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0776

69/339

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Comic

1969 Reiner, Carl

USA

Lobby Card

The Comic

Card 1 of 8. Still of a man driving a car for a newly married couple, title card in bottom right corner: five 1969 lines of credits in blue text and title in red text.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

91

2012-01403.0777

69/339

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Comic

1969 Reiner, Carl

USA

Lobby Card

The Comic

Card 2 of 8. Still of a man holding a teddy bear looking towards a woman, title card in bottom left corner: 1969 five lines of credits in blue text and title in red text. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-44204 (F-02-105). TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-44204 (F-02-105). TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-44204 (F-02-105). TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-44204 (F-02-105). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, pin holes in four corners, creasing in four corners, slight loss of colour in see full right, slight creasing in left edge, ink transfer on condition verso, yellow adhesive damage in top centre in 2016-06-24 record verso, loss of substrate in top centre of verso. Okay condition; yellow, staple holes in top corners see full and top centre, slight creasing throughout, residue condition in centre left, loss of colour, residue in centre, ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso.

2016-04-18

2012-01403.0778

69/339

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Comic

1969 Reiner, Carl

USA

Lobby Card

The Comic

Card 3 of 8. Still of a couple and other man dressed in evening wear, title card in bottom left corner: five 1969 lines of credits in blue text and title in red text. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-18

2012-01403.0779

69/339

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Comic

1969 Reiner, Carl

USA

Lobby Card

The Comic

Card 4 of 8. Still of an older Dick Van Dyke getting interviewed, title card in bottom right corner: five 1969 lines of credits in blue text and title in red text.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0780

69/339

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Comic

1969 Reiner, Carl

USA

Lobby Card

The Comic

Card 5 of 8. Still of a couple getting dressed, title card in bottom left corner: five lines of credits in blue text 1969 and title in red text. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; loss of colour, yellow, pin holes in see full four corners, stain in left corners, pen marks in condition bottom centre, scratches in centre left, stain in top 2016-06-24 record right, smudges in top of verso. 2016-04-18 Fair condition; yellow, slight creasing throughout, creasing in four corners, loss of substrates in see full bottom corners, tear in centre right edge, pin holes condition in four corners, smudging in centre, dirt transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-18 Okay condition; yellow, severe crease in centre, creasing throughout, loss of colour throughout, see full creasing in four corners, pin holes in four corners, condition stains in left of verso, smudges in top centre of 2016-06-24 record verso, ink transfer on verso. Fair condition; yellow, loss of substrate in top see full centre, surface scratches in centre, creasing in four condition corners, very slight colour loss, slight ink transfer in 2016-06-24 record verso.

2012-01403.0781

69/339

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Comic

1969 Reiner, Carl

USA

Lobby Card

The Comic

Card 6 of 8. Still of one man stuffing a pastry in a dinning patrons face, title card in bottom left corner: 1969 five lines of credits in blue text and title in red text.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-44204 (F-02-105). TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-44204 (F-02-105). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-18

2012-01403.0782

69/339

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Comic

1969 Reiner, Carl

USA

Lobby Card

The Comic

Card 7 of 8. Still of a man pointing something out to a woman, title card in bottom right corner: five lines of 1969 credits in blue text and title in red text. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-18

2012-01403.0783

69/339

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Comic

1969 Reiner, Carl

USA

Lobby Card

The Comic

Card 8 of 8. Still of a couple being woken in bed by a man in a suit, title card in bottom left corner: five lines 1969 of credits in blue text and title in red text. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-44204 (F-02-105). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, pin holes in four corners, severe dogeared in bottom right corner, loss of substrate in bottom left corner, creasing in four see full corners, creasing in centre, and bottom right, sligth condition loss of colour, ink transfer in verso, stain in bottom 2016-06-24 record left corner of verso. 2016-04-18 Poor condition; very yellow, staple holes in four corners, edges, centre, and bottom of image, loss of colour from scatches and surface abraisons, creasing in four corners, wear along edges, two see full tape pieces in top corners of verso, black finger condition marks in verso, residue in centre of verso, ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso. Poor condition; yellow, stains and liquid damage along edges, creasing in four corners, yellow adhesive damage in top right and bottom right and centre, dents in centre, slight wear along edges, see full loss of colour from creasing and abraisons, slight condition creasing throughout, smudge in centre of verso, 2016-06-24 record slight ink transfer in verso. Okay condition; yellow, creasing in four corners, folds in top left corner, staple holes in four corners and along right edge, severe holes in centre left, see full residue in centre, stains in bottom left corner of condition verso, ink transfer in verso, slight creasing 2016-06-24 record throughout.

2012-01403.0784

67/307

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Cool Hand Luke

Rosenberg, 1967 Stuart

USA

Lobby Card

Cool Hand Luke

Card 1 of 8. Inmates box in front of other prisoners, 'Paul Newman' and title in black text at the bottom, one line of credits in red at the bottom, small red 1967 drawing of a man holding two dogs.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-18

2012-01403.0785

67/307

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Cool Hand Luke

Rosenberg, 1967 Stuart

USA

Lobby Card

Cool Hand Luke

Card 2 of 8. Inmates play cards, 'Paul Newman' and title in black text at the bottom, one line of credits in red at the bottom, small red drawing of a man holding 1967 two dogs. C Card 3 of 8. A warden points a shot gun out of frame while inmates look on, 'Paul Newman' and title in black text at the bottom, one line of credits in red at the bottom, small red drawing of a man holding two 1967 dogs.

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-18

2012-01403.0786

67/307

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Cool Hand Luke

Rosenberg, 1967 Stuart

USA

Lobby Card

Cool Hand Luke

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-18

2012-01403.0787

67/307

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Cool Hand Luke

Rosenberg, 1967 Stuart

USA

Lobby Card

Cool Hand Luke

Card 4 of 8. A closeup of Paul Newman lying on a bed, 'Paul Newman' and title in black text at the bottom, one line of credits in red at the bottom, small red 1967 drawing of a man holding two dogs. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Poor condition; very yellow, severe colour loss from abraisons and creasing throughout, pin holes in four corners, centre, and bottom left of image, separation of substrate in top right corner, wear see full along edges, dogeared corners, smudges in bottom condition left edge, ink transfer on verso, stains in centre 2016-06-24 record right of verso, stain in top left corner of verso. 2016-04-18 Poor condition; yellow, colour loss from creasing and abraisons, creasing throughout, tape residue in centre left, loss of image in top left, pin holes in four corners, wear and small tears along top edge, stain in bottom centre, dents from pen marks in top see full left, black residue in right edge, black residue and condition loss of substrate in left, ink transfer on verso, 2016-06-24 record separation of substrate in bottom left corner. 2016-04-18 Okay condition; slight yellowing, stain in top right, stains in bottom centre, pin holes in four corners, smudges and stains in bottom right, scratches in top centre, smudges in centre, dent in centre, slight see full creasing throughout, browning in corners, stain in condition top right corner of verso, ink transfer on verso, red 2016-06-24 record ink marks in centre right of verso. 2016-04-18 Okay condition; yellow, severe crease and dent in centre right, staple holes in four corners, and in top see full of image, creasing in four corners, slight loss of condition colour, dents in bottom right, creasing throughout, 2016-06-24 record ink in verso. 2016-04-18 Okay condition; yellow, loss of colour from abraisons and creasing, pin hole in centre, corners, and in centre of horizontal edges, creasing along edges, residue in top right, tear in top right, separation of substrate in top right corner, fold in see full bottom corners, sun damage in verso, creasing condition throughout, separation of substrate in bottom right 2016-06-24 record corner. 2016-04-18 Fair condition; yellow, smudges and finger marks throughout, pin holes in four corners, tear in see full bottom right corner, smudges in corners, yellow condition adhesive damage in four corners of verso, 2016-06-24 record separation of substrate in four corners. Okay condition; yellow, pin holes in four corners, tear in bottom right corner, smudges in edges, slight creasing throughout, stain in top left, slight see full loss of colour, wear along bottom edge, yellow condition adhesive damage in four corners in verso, image 2016-06-24 record visible on verso.

2012-01403.0788

67/307

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Cool Hand Luke

Rosenberg, 1967 Stuart

USA

Lobby Card

Cool Hand Luke

Card 5 of 8. An injured man lies in bed surrounded by other inmates, 'Paul Newman' and title in black text at the bottom, one line of credits in red at the bottom, 1967 small red drawing of a man holding two dogs. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0789

67/307

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Cool Hand Luke

Rosenberg, 1967 Stuart

USA

Lobby Card

Cool Hand Luke

2012-01403.0790

67/307

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Cool Hand Luke

Rosenberg, 1967 Stuart

USA

Lobby Card

Cool Hand Luke

Card 6 of 8. An inmate runs along train tracks, 'Paul Newman' and title in black text at the bottom, one line of credits in red at the bottom, small red drawing 1967 of a man holding two dogs. C Card 7 of 8. Paul Newman wearing a towel on his head gets congratualted by others, 'Paul Newman' and title in black text at the bottom, one line of credits in red at the bottom, small red drawing of a man holding 1967 two dogs. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0791

67/307

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Cool Hand Luke

Rosenberg, 1967 Stuart

USA

Lobby Card

Cool Hand Luke

Card 8 of 8. Paul Newman stares at people peeling hardboiled eggs, 'Paul Newman' and title in black text at the bottom, one line of credits in red at the 1967 bottom, small red drawing of a man holding two dogs. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-44086 (F-01-994). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0792

63/7

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Days of Wine and Roses

1962 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

Days of Wine and Roses

Card 1 of 8. Red tinted image of a woman staring at a man, two lines of credits and title in yellow on a red 1963 banner at the bottom.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-44852 (F-02-532). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-18

2012-01403.0793

63/7

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Days of Wine and Roses

1962 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

Days of Wine and Roses

Card 2 of 8. Red tinted image of a man leading a frightened woman, two lines of credits and title in 1963 yellow on a red banner at the bottom.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-44852 (F-02-532). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-19

2012-01403.0794

63/7

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Days of Wine and Roses

1962 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

Days of Wine and Roses

Card 3 of 8. Red tinted image of an older man restraining a young woman while a child tries to stop him, two lines of credits and title in yellow on a red 1963 banner at the bottom.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-44852 (F-02-532). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; yellow, slight colour loss, creasing throughout, staple holes in four corners, pin hole in bottom centre, three rips and creasing in centre, creasing along the bottom edge, stain in top right, see full blue stain in centre, image visible in verso, slight condition dirt transfer on verso, smudges in bottom centre of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-19 Fair condition; slight colour loss from surface abraisons, yellow, wear along bottom edge, slight creasing throughout, crushed substrate in bottom right corner, pin holes in four corners, creasing in see full four corners, advertisement in verso for another condition film in red marker, smudges along right edge of 2016-06-24 record verso.

2012-01403.0795

63/7

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Days of Wine and Roses

1962 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

Days of Wine and Roses

Card 4 of 8. A woman leers from a bed as a man undresses in front of her, two lines of credits and title 1963 in yellow on a red banner at the bottom. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-44852 (F-02-532). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-19

2012-01403.0796

63/7

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Days of Wine and Roses

1962 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

Days of Wine and Roses

Card 5 of 8. Red tinted image of a woman holding a liquor bottle while a man tries to confort her, two lines of credits and title in yellow on a red banner at 1963 the bottom.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-44852 (F-02-532). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Poor condition; yellow, stains throughout with larger stains on top left, slight colour loss, abraisons in top right, separation of substrate in top left see full corner, creasing in four corners, wear along edges, condition pin holes in four corners, dirt transfer on verso, 2016-06-24 record stain in top right of verso. 2016-04-19

92

2012-01403.0797

63/7

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Days of Wine and Roses

1962 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

Days of Wine and Roses

Card 6 of 8. Red tinted image of a woman shushing a screaming man, two lines of credits and title in yellow 1963 on a red banner at the bottom. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-44852 (F-02-532). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; residue and stains in right, yellow, pin holes in four corners and in centre of edges, loss of colour from creases, creasing in four corners, see full fold in top right corner, slight creasing throughout, condition yellow adhesive residue in bottom right corner, 2016-06-24 record stain in bottom left of verso, ink stain in verso. 2016-04-19 Okay condition; yellow, slight colour loss, yellow adhesive damage in top edge and bottom right see full edge, staple holes in four corner and centre of condition edges, smudges in edges, slight creasing 2016-06-24 record throughout, finger marks in verso.

2012-01403.0798

63/7

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Days of Wine and Roses

1962 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

Days of Wine and Roses

Card 7 of 8. Red tinted image of a man listening at the door while two woman talk in the background, two lines of credits and title in yellow on a red banner at 1963 the bottom. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-44852 (F-02-532). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-19

2012-01403.0799

63/7

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Days of Wine and Roses

1962 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

Days of Wine and Roses

Card 8 of 8. Red tinted image of an angry man destroying plants, two lines of credits and title in 1963 yellow on a red banner at the bottom.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-44852 (F-02-532). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; colour loss, yellow, creasing in four corners, slight creasing throughout, red ink stain in left edge, separation in substrate in top left corner, see full black smudge in top right, wear along edges, yellow condition adhesive damage in top right of verso, smudges in 2016-06-24 record verso, sun damage in verso. 2016-04-19

2012-01403.0800

63/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Diamond Head

1962 Green, Guy

USA

Lobby Card

Diamond Head

Card 1 of 8. Title card. Four lines of cast in yellow text at the top, title in yellow text on the centre right, tagline in white text on the left of cast, in bottom centre images of various characters with a nightime image of Hawaii in the background, eight lines of credits in blue text in bottom right, blue octogon shaped border around image. Tagline: "The giant story 1963 of modern Hawaii!" C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-45053 (F-26-864). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; yellowing, finger marks in edges, staple holes in four corners and in centre of edges, yellow adhesive damage in top corners, stain in top right, small folds in top corners, slight creasing in see full bottom right, slight wear along edges, image visible condition on verso, ink transfer on verso, adhesive damage in 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-19 Fair condition; yellowing, staple holes in four corners, creasing in edges, slight loss of colour from abraisons, stain in centre left, stain in bottom right, smudges in right edge, loss of substrate in top right, see full creasing in corners, crushed substrate in top right, condition stains in verso, image visible on verso, pin hole in 2016-06-24 record centre, slight creasing throughout. 2016-04-19 Fair condition; yellowing, 'skyway' in pencil in top centre, brown stains in top centre and along right edge, slight creasing throughout, staple holes in four corners, stain in bottom centre, smudges in see full bottom section, slight colour loss from abraisons, condition black stain in centre of verso, black smudges in left 2016-06-24 record edge of verso. Fair condition; staple holes in four corners, yellowing, loss of substrate in top right, creasing in corners, stain in centre left edge, wear along right see full edge, stain in right centre edge, slight creasing condition throughout, image visble on verso, dirt transfer in 2016-06-24 record verso.

2012-01403.0801

63/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Diamond Head

1962 Green, Guy

USA

Lobby Card

Diamond Head

Card 2 of 8. Image in top right corner of a woman shining a man's shoes, along left border an image of a beach resort at night, five lines of credits in blue and red text in bottom centre, title in yellow text on a blue 1963 square in bottom right corner. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-45053 (F-26-864). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0802

63/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Diamond Head

1962 Green, Guy

USA

Lobby Card

Diamond Head

Card 3 of 8. Image in top right of a man tucking a woman in bed, along left border an image of a beach resort at night, five lines of credits in blue and red text in bottom centre, title in yellow text on a blue square 1963 in bottom right corner. C Card 4 of 8. Image in top right of a woman swimming, along left border an image of a beach resort at night, five lines of credits in blue and red text in bottom centre, title in yellow text on a blue square in bottom 1963 right corner. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-45053 (F-26-864). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-19

2012-01403.0803

63/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Diamond Head

1962 Green, Guy

USA

Lobby Card

Diamond Head

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-45053 (F-26-864). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-19

2012-01403.0804

63/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Diamond Head

1962 Green, Guy

USA

Lobby Card

Diamond Head

Card 5 of 8. Image in top right of a man and woman lying in bed, along left border an image of a beach resort at night, five lines of credits in blue and red text in bottom centre, title in yellow text on a blue square 1963 in bottom right corner. C Card 6 of 8. Image in top right of a woman looking concerned while a man smokes in the background, along left border an image of a beach resort at night, five lines of credits in blue and red text in bottom centre, title in yellow text on a blue square in bottom 1963 right corner.

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-45053 (F-26-864). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, slight colour loss, staple holes in top corners, top centre, and bottom left corner, finger marks in centre left edge, wear and see full creasing along right edge, slight creasing in corners, condition image visible in verso, blue transfer in left edge of 2016-06-24 record verso, smudges in centre right of verso. 2016-04-19

2012-01403.0805

63/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Diamond Head

1962 Green, Guy

USA

Lobby Card

Diamond Head

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-45053 (F-26-864). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0806

63/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Diamond Head

1962 Green, Guy

USA

Lobby Card

Diamond Head

2012-01403.0807

63/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Diamond Head

1962 Green, Guy

USA

Lobby Card

Diamond Head

Card 7 of 8. Image in top right of couple dancing with a crowd in the background, along left border an image of a beach resort at night, five lines of credits in blue and red text in bottom centre, title in yellow text on a 1963 blue square in bottom right corner. C Card 8 of 8. Image of four women wearing leis dancing, along left border an image of a beach resort at night, five lines of credits in blue and red text in bottom centre, title in yellow text on a blue square in 1963 bottom right corner. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-45053 (F-26-864). TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-45053 (F-26-864). TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-50713 (F-21-184). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellowing, slight colour loss, pin see full holes in four corners, surface scratches in centre, condition slight creasing throughout, stain in top left of verso, 2016-06-24 record image visible in verso. 2016-04-19 Fair condition; yellowing, smudges along edges, staple holes in four corners, stains in centre left edge, wear and small tears along bottom edge, wear in top edge, stain in top centre edge, creasing see full and separation of substrate of four corners, condition creasing in right and left edges, image visible on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-19 Good condition; yellowing, pin holes in four see full corners, smudges in centre right edge, slight colour condition loss, small tears in bottom right edge, slight 2016-06-24 record creasing throughout, image visible on verso. 2016-04-19 Good condition; creasing in four corners, staple see full holes in top corners, pin holes in bottom left condition corner, dent in centre right, slight yellowing, 2016-06-24 record smudging in centre left of verso.

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0808

72/37

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Doctor Zhivago

1965 Lean, David

USA

Lobby Card

Doctor Zhivago

Card 1 of 3. Still of a crowd of people running away from the cavalry in a snow covered street, title in 1972 black text at the bottom.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-19

2012-01403.0809

72/37

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Doctor Zhivago

1965 Lean, David

USA

Lobby Card

Doctor Zhivago

Card 2 of 3. Still of an officer trying to take a woman away as a well dressed crowd looks on, title in black 1972 text at the bottom.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-50713 (F-21-184). TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-50713 (F-21-184). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; severe creasing in top left, slight yellowing, creasing in four corners, scratches in left, see full black lines in centre left, loss of substrate in bottom condition right corner, tear in top centre, yellow adhesive 2016-06-24 record damage in bottom edge of verso. 2016-04-19 Fair condition; slight yellowing, hole and loss of see full colour in centre right, slight loss of colour, wear condition along right edge, crushed substrate in centre right 2016-06-24 record edge, staple holes in top corners.

2012-01403.0810

72/37

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Doctor Zhivago

1965 Lean, David

USA

Lobby Card

Doctor Zhivago

Card 3 of 3. Still of a soldier stitching someone with 1972 the aid of a woman, title in black text at the bottom.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-19

2012-01403.0811

56/146

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Eddy Duchin Story

1956 Sidney, George USA

Lobby Card

The Eddy Duchin Story

Card 1 of 8. Title card. Tagline at the top extending in the right centre on an orange background, central image of a man kissing a woman's hand, small image of a couple under an umbrella in top left corner, two lines of cast in white text in bottom left of image, title in black text in bottom centre above three lines of credits in blue text. Tagline: "You should see The Eddy Duchin Story because... It's a love story your heart will 1956 long remember." C Card 2 of 8. Image of a child playing the clarinet with an adult band and a group of men in the background, two lines of cast on a pink background above the title in white text on a black circle in bottom left corner, two lines of credits in blue on a yellow banner at the 1956 bottom. C Card 3 of 8. Image of a waiter pointing a man somewhere off screen while a woman prepares a table in background, two lines of cast on a pink background above the title in white text on a black circle in bottom left corner, two lines of credits in blue 1956 on a yellow banner at the bottom. C Card 4 of 8. Image of a man and woman looking out the doors of a balcony with the skyline in the background, two lines of cast on a pink background above the title in white text on a black circle in bottom left corner, two lines of credits in blue on a 1956 yellow banner at the bottom. Card 5 of 8. Image of a little boy coming to talk to his father who is conducting business with another man, a woman stands holding a baseball glove in the background, two lines of cast on a pink background above the title in white text on a black circle in bottom left corner, two lines of credits in blue on a 1956 yellow banner at the bottom.

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Possibly a reproduction. Previously located in film file FRL-47217 (F-03-359). TBLB Possibly a reproduction. Previously located in film file FRL-47217 (F-03-359). TBLB Possibly a reproduction. Previously located in film file FRL-47217 (F-03-359). TBLB Possibly a reproduction. Previously located in film file FRL-47217 (F-03-359). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; four holes in corners from a mounting with yellow adhesive damage on either side of hole, small tears in vertical edges, smudge in see full centre right edge, creasing along edges, slight condition yellowing, blue smudges in bottom left of verso, 2016-06-24 record hole in centre of image. 2016-04-19 Okay condition; four holes in corners from a mounting with yellow adhesive damage on either side of hole, creasing in top left and bottom right see full corners, blue stains in centre right edge, slight condition surface colour loss, bleedthrough of adhesive 2016-06-24 record damage in verso, ink transfer on verso.

2012-01403.0812

56/146

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Eddy Duchin Story

1956 Sidney, George USA

Lobby Card

The Eddy Duchin Story

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-19

2012-01403.0813

56/146

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Eddy Duchin Story

1956 Sidney, George USA

Lobby Card

The Eddy Duchin Story

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; four holes in corners from a see full mounting with yellow adhesive damage on either condition side of hole, creasing corners, bleedthrough of tape 2016-06-24 record in verso, smudging in bottom left of verso, 2016-04-19

2012-01403.0814

56/146

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Eddy Duchin Story

1956 Sidney, George USA

Lobby Card

The Eddy Duchin Story

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; four holes in corners from a mounting with yellow adhesive damage on either see full side of hole, creasing along edges, wear along top condition edge, bleedthrough of tape on verso, dent in 2016-06-24 record centre.

2016-04-19

2012-01403.0815

56/146

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Eddy Duchin Story

1956 Sidney, George USA

Lobby Card

The Eddy Duchin Story

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Possibly a reproduction. Previously located in film file FRL-47217 (F-03-359). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; four holes in corners from a mounting with yellow adhesive damage on either see full side of hole, wear along top edge, bleedthrough of condition tape in verso, smudges in verso, image visible on 2016-06-24 record verso.

2016-04-19

93

2012-01403.0816

56/146

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Eddy Duchin Story

1956 Sidney, George USA

Lobby Card

The Eddy Duchin Story

Card 6 of 8. Image of a sailor teaching a little boy to play piano while a crowd gathers in the background, two lines of cast on a pink background above the title in white text on a black circle in bottom left corner, two lines of credits in blue on a yellow banner at the 1956 bottom. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Possibly a reproduction. Previously located in film file FRL-47217 (F-03-359). TBLB Possibly a reproduction. Previously located in film file FRL-47217 (F-03-359). TBLB Possibly a reproduction. Previously located in film file FRL-47217 (F-03-359). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; four holes in corners from a mounting with yellow adhesive damage on either see full side of hole, staple holes in four corners, creasing in condition four corners, bleedthrough of tape in verso, 2016-06-24 record smudges in bottom left of verso. 2016-04-19

2012-01403.0817

56/146

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Eddy Duchin Story

1956 Sidney, George USA

Lobby Card

The Eddy Duchin Story

Card 7 of 8. Image of a couple dancing and smiling at the piano player, two lines of cast on a pink background above the title in white text on a black circle in bottom left corner, two lines of credits in blue 1956 on a yellow banner at the bottom. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; four holes in corners from a see full mounting with yellow adhesive damage on either condition side of hole, bleedthrough in verso, smudges in 2016-06-24 record edges of verso.

2016-04-19

2012-01403.0818

56/146

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Eddy Duchin Story

1956 Sidney, George USA

Lobby Card

The Eddy Duchin Story

Card 8 of 8. Image of a couple preparing for a party, two lines of cast on a pink background above the title in white text on a black circle in bottom left corner, two lines of credits in blue on a yellow banner at the 1956 bottom. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; four holes in corners from a mounting with yellow adhesive damage on either see full side of hole, hole in bottom left corner, creasing in condition corners, tear in bottom centre edge, slight creasing 2016-06-24 record throughout, dent in centre, bleedthrough in verso. 2016-04-19

2012-01403.0819

62/3

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Errand Boy

1962 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Errand Boy

Card 1 of 8. Still in top right of a man pretending to be a mannequin between two cowboy and soldier mannequins, bordering image: 'Jerry Lewis' in blue text above the title in red text, tagline under title, a man holding gifts falls in bottom left corners with flying gifts in centre being thrown towards three women next to a bike and camera light, one line of 1962 credits on a yellow background at the bottom. C Card 2 of 8. Still in top right of a man screaming at a desk, bordering image: 'Jerry Lewis' in blue text above the title in red text, tagline under title, a man holding gifts falls in bottom left corners with flying gifts in centre being thrown towards three women next to a bike and camera light, one line of credits on a yellow 1962 background at the bottom. C Card 3 of 8. Still in top of a crowd around a woman blowing a bubble, bordering image: 'Jerry Lewis' in blue text above the title in red text, tagline under title, a man holding gifts falls in bottom left corners with flying gifts in centre being thrown towards three women next to a bike and camera light, one line of 1962 credits on a yellow background at the bottom. C Card 4 of 8. Image in top right of seven women writing while a man looks flustered in background, bordering image: 'Jerry Lewis' in blue text above the title in red text, tagline under title, a man holding gifts falls in bottom left corners with flying gifts in centre being thrown towards three women next to a bike and camera light, one line of credits on a yellow 1962 background at the bottom. C Card 5 of 8. Image of a man looking shocked while two others look on, bordering image: 'Jerry Lewis' in blue text above the title in red text, tagline under title, a man holding gifts falls in bottom left corners with flying gifts in centre being thrown towards three women next to a bike and camera light, one line of 1962 credits on a yellow background at the bottom. C Card 6 of 8. Image of a man getting scolded by another, bordering image: 'Jerry Lewis' in blue text above the title in red text, tagline under title, a man holding gifts falls in bottom left corners with flying gifts in centre being thrown towards three women next to a bike and camera light, one line of credits on 1962 a yellow background at the bottom.

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-45514 (F-02-928). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, pin holes in left corners, yellow adhesive damage in centre, surface see full scratches, crease in top right, wear along top edge, condition stain in centre right edge, surface scratches, image 2016-06-24 record visible on verso, bleedthrough in verso. 2016-04-19

2012-01403.0820

62/3

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Errand Boy

1962 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Errand Boy

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-45514 (F-02-928). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; creasing in four corners, yellow, yellow adhesive damage in centre and centre right, see full pin holes in four corners, tears in top right, yellow condition stain in top left, stain in top left of verso, 2016-06-24 record bleedthough of tape in verso, image visible in verso. 2016-04-19

2012-01403.0821

62/3

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Errand Boy

1962 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Errand Boy

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-45514 (F-02-928). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; very yellow, creasing along edges, stains in bottom right corner, small tears in bottom left corner, pin holes in four corner, smudges in see full centre left, finger marks in verso, image visible on condition verso, dark finger mark in bottom right corner of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-19

2012-01403.0822

62/3

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Errand Boy

1962 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Errand Boy

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-45514 (F-02-928). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, creasing along edges, stain in bottom centre, creasing in bottom left corner, pin see full holes in four corners and centre of edges, image condition visible on verso, ink transfer on verso, stain in top 2016-06-24 record right corner of verso. 2016-04-19 Fair condition; yellow, yellow adhesive damage in centre of vertical edges and in centre, staple holes in four corners and pin holes in edges, smudges in top centre, red surface layer, creasing along edges see full and in corners, small folds in corners, image visible condition on verso, bleedthrough in verso, show dates in pen 2016-06-24 record in centre of verso.

2012-01403.0823

62/3

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Errand Boy

1962 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Errand Boy

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-45514 (F-02-928). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-20

2012-01403.0824

62/3

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Errand Boy

1962 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Errand Boy

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-45514 (F-02-928). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, staple holes in four corners and centre of edges, yellow adhesive damage in see full centre right edge, stain in bottom centre, smudges condition in centre, fading, creasing in corners, fold in top left 2016-06-24 record corner, image visible on verso, ink stains in verso. 2016-04-20

2012-01403.0825

62/3

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Errand Boy

1962 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Errand Boy

Card 7 of 8. Image of a man sitting at a table for lunch in front of a destroyed café, bordering image: 'Jerry Lewis' in blue text above the title in red text, tagline under title, a man holding gifts falls in bottom left corners with flying gifts in centre being thrown towards three women next to a bike and camera light, one line of credits on a yellow background at the 1962 bottom. C Card 8 of 8. Image of a worried woman looking at a man covered in glue, bordering image: 'Jerry Lewis' in blue text above the title in red text, tagline under title, a man holding gifts falls in bottom left corners with flying gifts in centre being thrown towards three women next to a bike and camera light, one line of 1962 credits on a yellow background at the bottom. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-45514 (F-02-928). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; slight creasing throughout, blue surface film possible from water damage, stain in see full top right corner, smudges in edges and centre left, condition wear along edges, creasing and folding in corners, 2016-06-24 record yellow, image visible on verso.

2016-04-20

2012-01403.0826

62/3

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Errand Boy

1962 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Errand Boy

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-45514 (F-02-928). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, blue film from possible water damage, slight loss of colour, stains in bottom see full centre, creasing in edges, staple holes in four condition corners, image visible in verso, ink transfer in verso. 2016-06-24 record Stains in bottom edge, stains in centre of verso. 2016-04-20 Okay condition; four holes in corners from a mounting with yellow adhesive damage on either side of hole, wear along edges, dogeared top left corner, fold in top right corner, tear in top centre, yellow, small tears in bottom centre and centre right edge, stain in top centre, sun damage in verso, see full tape repairs in verso, 'hysteria' in marker in bottom condition right corner of verso, staple holes in top, slight 2016-06-24 record creasing throughout. 2016-04-20 Okay condition; four holes in corners from a mounting with yellow adhesive damage on either side of hole, blue film from possible water damage, tear in top centre, wear along edges, stain in top centre, fading, creasing in corners, rippling in top see full edge,'hysteria' in marker in bottom centre of verso, condition tape repairs in verso, creasing along edges, 2016-06-24 record yellowing. 2016-04-20 Okay condition; four holes in corners from a mounting with yellow adhesive damage on either side of hole, blue film from possible water damage, see full rippling throughout, yellow, creasing along edges, condition fading, adhesive damage in verso, sun damage in 2016-06-24 record verso, smudges in verso.

2012-01403.0827

56/505

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Four Girls in Town

1956 Sher, Jack

USA

Lobby Card

4 Girls in Town

Card 1 of 8. Title card. Title in white text above four images of women standing in front of coloured rectangles, tagline in centre right, skyline and starry sky in background, three lines of credits in green text at the bottom on a yellow banner, small picture of a couple hugging in bottom right corner. Tagline: "A 1956 story that could be written inside any girl's heart!"

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-82883 (F-31-276). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0828

56/505

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Four Girls in Town

1956 Sher, Jack

USA

Lobby Card

Four Girls in Town

Card 2 of 8. Image in centre left of two women and two men talking, yellow banner in top and right: title in red text in top centre, cinemascope logo above line drawings of four women in right, nine lines of credits 1956 in green text under women. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-82883 (F-31-276). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0829

56/505

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Four Girls in Town

1956 Sher, Jack

USA

Lobby Card

Four Girls in Town

Card 3 of 8. Image in centre left of a man speaking to a group at a studio, yellow banner in top and right: title in red text in top centre, cinemascope logo above line drawings of four women in right, nine lines of 1956 credits in green text under women. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-82883 (F-31-276). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-20

2012-01403.0830

56/505

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Four Girls in Town

1956 Sher, Jack

USA

Lobby Card

Four Girls in Town

Card 4 of 8. Image in centre left of a woman offering two men coffee, yellow banner in top and right: title in red text in top centre, cinemascope logo above line drawings of four women in right, nine lines of credits 1956 in green under women. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-82883 (F-31-276). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; four holes in corners from a mounting with yellow adhesive damage on either side of hole, blue film from possible water damage, tear in top centre, adhesive damage in top centre, creasing in corners, dent in centre right edge, wear along edges, pin hole in bottom centre, blue see full smudges in bottom left centre, tape repair in verso, condition smudges in bottom of verso, 'hysteria' in marker in 2016-06-24 record bottom centre of verso. 2016-04-20 Okay condition; four holes in corners from a mounting with yellow adhesive damage on either side of hole, blue film from possible water damage, tear in top centre, rippling, creasing in four corners, see full dent in centre right edge, 'hysteria' and '65-76' in condition marker in bottom of verso, yellow, ink in bottom 2016-06-24 record left corner, smudges in top centre of verso. 2016-04-20

2012-01403.0831

56/505

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Four Girls in Town

1956 Sher, Jack

USA

Lobby Card

Four Girls in Town

Card 5 of 8. Image of a group of young people rehearsing, yellow banner in top and right: title in red text in top centre, cinemascope logo above line drawings of four women in right, nine lines of credits 1956 in green text under women. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-82883 (F-31-276). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

94

2012-01403.0832

56/505

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Four Girls in Town

1956 Sher, Jack

USA

Lobby Card

Four Girls in Town

Card 6 of 8. Image of two women and one man in swimsuits talking to a fully dressed man, yellow banner in top and right: title in red text in top centre, cinemascope logo above line drawings of four women in right, nine lines of credits in green text under 1956 women. C Card 7 of 8. Image of people at the beach, yellow banner in top and right: title in red text in top centre, cinemascope logo above line drawings of four women in right, nine lines of credits in green text under 1956 women. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-82883 (F-31-276). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; four holes in corners from a mounting with yellow adhesive damage on either side of hole, blue film from possible water damage, rippling, creasing in corners and along edges, tear see full in top centre repaired with tape in verso, smudges condition in verso, 'hysteria' in marker in bottom centre of 2016-06-24 record verso, creasing throughout, yellowing. Okay condition; four holes in corners from a mounting with yellow adhesive damage on either see full side of hole, blue film from possible water damage, condition creasing in four corners, stains in bottom left 2016-06-24 record corner, yellowing, wear along bottom edge.

2016-04-20

2012-01403.0833

56/505

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Four Girls in Town

1956 Sher, Jack

USA

Lobby Card

Four Girls in Town

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-82883 (F-31-276). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-20

2012-01403.0834

56/505

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Four Girls in Town

1956 Sher, Jack

USA

Lobby Card

Four Girls in Town

Card 8 of 8. A group of women get stopped outside US customs while media take pictures, yellow banner in top and right: title in red text in top centre, cinemascope logo above line drawings of four women in right, nine lines of credits in green text under 1956 women. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-82883 (F-31-276). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; four holes in corners from a mounting with yellow adhesive damage on either side of hole, blue film from possible water damage, tear in top centre repaired with tape in verso, adhesive damage in centre right edge, tear in centre right edge, creasing in corners, loss of substrate in top centre, wear along edges, creasing see full throughout, smudges in verso, stain in centre right condition of verso, 'hysteria' in marker in bottom centre of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-20 Fair condition; slight loss of colour from surface abraisons, slight creasing throughout, fold in top right corner, wear along edges, tear in top left, staple holes in four corners, tears in bottom left see full corner, stains in centre left, separation of substrate condition along top edge, ink transfer in verso, stain in 2016-06-24 record bottom let corner of verso. 2016-04-20

2012-01403.0835

72/367

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Getaway

Peckinpah, 1972 Sam

USA

Lobby Card

The Getaway

Card 1 of 1. Still in top right of a man shooting a gun from a balcony, two lines of cast in yellow text in top left corner, black & white image of a gun and bullets on passports, title in yellow under image, four lines of 1972 credits in white text at the bottom, black border. O Card 1 of 1. Still of a worried man holding a gramophone standing in front of an overturned fish table and crowd, title and 'Jackie Gleason' in red text in bottom left on a yellow background, one line of 1962 credits in green text at the bottom.

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0836

62/361

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Gigot

1962 Kelly, Gene

USA

Lobby Card

Gigot

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

see full Laminated. Good condition; yellowing, slight condition fading, tear in bottom centre edge, slight creasing 2016-06-24 record throughout, image visible on verso.

2016-04-20

2012-01403.0837

54/19

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Glenn Miller Story

Mann, 1954 Anthony

USA

Lobby Card

The Glenn Miller Story

Card 1 of 1. One line of credits at the top, in centre left an image of a family greeting a soldier, title in red in centre right, eleven lines of credits in centre right 1954 along edge, green border.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-49078 (F-22-691). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; severe wear in top left edge, hole in top left corner, staple holes in four corners, hole in top centre, staple holes in centre of horizontal edge and bottom right of image, separation of substrate in four corners, possible water damage, tears in see full centre right edge, '60-105' in pencil in top right condition corner of verso, '54-19' in pen in bottom left corner 2016-06-24 record of verso, slight creasing throughout, stains in verso. 2016-04-20 Okay condition; yellow, staple holes in top and bottom centre and bottom right corner, wear along edges, possible water damage, slight creasing throughout, separation of substrate in bottom left corner, small tear in bottom left, scratches in top see full right, blue lines in face, smudges in credits and to condition the left of credits, severe crease in top left, image 2016-06-24 record visible on verso, blue ink smudges in verso. 2016-04-20 Okay condition; yellow, possible water damage, wear along edges, creasing in corners, rippling in top edge, tear in bottom left corner, pin holes in bottom centre, smudges in bottom right, tear in top right, hole in bottom left, staple holes in title see full card, stains in right top and bottom, image very condition visible on verso, loss of substrate in bottom right of 2016-06-24 record verso, ink transfer on vero. 2016-04-20 Okay condition; severe wear in top left and bottom right, creasing throughout, stain in centre left, yellow, possible water damage, staple holes in four see full corners, fading, loss of substrate in top right, image condition visible on verso, ink transfer on verso, pen marks in 2016-06-24 record centre right of verso. 2016-04-20

2012-01403.0838

64/168

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Good Neighbor Sam

1964 Swift, David

USA

Lobby Card

Good Neighbor Sam

Card 1 of 8. Title card. One line of cast in blue text above title in orange text in top left corner, nine lines of credits in blue text extending from centre left to bottom right, large image of a head in centre right, four people stretch or fall in front of head, background image of a postman, milkman and town 1964 skyline.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-51211 (F-05-299). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0839

64/168

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Good Neighbor Sam

1964 Swift, David

USA

Lobby Card

Good Neighbor Sam

Card 2 of 8. Image of a couple bringing paint cans to deface a billboard about milk, title card in bottom right: two lines of cast in red text above title in red text on a yellow banner, seven lines of credits in red 1964 and black text at the bottom of card.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-51211 (F-05-299). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0840

64/168

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Good Neighbor Sam

1964 Swift, David

USA

Lobby Card

Good Neighbor Sam

Card 3 of 8. Image of a family trying to pack, title card in bottom right: two lines of cast in red text above title in red text on a yellow banner, seven lines of 1964 credits in red and black text at the bottom of card. C Card 4 of 8. Image of a group of well-dressed individuals listening to someone out of frame, title card in bottom left: two lines of cast in red text above titel in red on a yellow banner, seven lines of credits in 1964 red and black at the bottom of card. C Card 5 of 8. Image of a man leaning on a convertible to talk to a woman, title card in bottom right: two lines of cast in red text above title in red text on a yellow banner, seven lines of credits in red and black 1964 text at the bottom of card.

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-51211 (F-05-299). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0841

64/168

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Good Neighbor Sam

1964 Swift, David

USA

Lobby Card

Good Neighbor Sam

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-51211 (F-05-299). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, possible water damage, see full staple holes in four corners, creasing along edges condition and in corners, scratches in top left of image, image 2016-06-24 record visible on verso, ink transfer on verso. 2016-04-20

2012-01403.0842

64/168

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Good Neighbor Sam

1964 Swift, David

USA

Lobby Card

Good Neighbor Sam

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-51211 (F-05-299). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, possible water damage, see full staple holes in four corners and centre of edges, condition blue scratches in bottom centre, creasing along 2016-06-24 record edges, image visible on verso, ink transfer on verso. 2016-04-20 Fair condition; possible water damage, yellow, wear in corners causing crushed substrates, creasing, see full and folds, smudges in centre right and left, slight condition loss of colour, small tear in top centre, image visible 2016-06-24 record on verso, ink transfer on verso. 2016-04-20 Fair condition; yellow, possible water damage, wear along edges, crushed substrates in corners, fraying, fading, residue in top centre, pin holes in centre of see full edges and in top corners, creasing in edges, image condition visible on verso, ink transfer on verso, smudges in 2016-06-24 record centre right edge of verso. 2016-04-20 Okay condition; possible water damage, yellow, small tears along top edge, creasing along edges, separation of substrates in top right corner, yellow adhesive damage in top left corner, wear along bottom edge, pin holes in right edge, top corners, see full and centre, ink transfer on verso, image slightly condition visible on verso, finger marks in verso, yellow 2016-06-24 record adhesive damage in top left corner of verso. 2016-04-20 Poor condition; yellow, water damage, sticky residue throughout, blue surface film, staple holes in four corners of image, rippling, wear along edges, dent in top left, smudges in edges, loss of colour, see full scratches in centre, stain and loss of substrate in condition bottom right of verso, stain in bottom left corner of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-20 Okay condition; yellow, blue film from possible water damage, staple holes in four corners of see full image, creasing in corners, wear along top edge, condition stains in top right of verso, smudge in centre left of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-20 Okay condition; yellowing, sight creasing throughout with loss of colour, yellow adhesive damage in top centre and top left, staple holes in four corners, small stains throughtout, dents in centre left, separation of substrate and folds in top left corner, creasing in top right corner, scratches in see full centre, ink transfer on verso, stain in bottom left condition corner of verso, yellow adhesive damage in top 2016-06-24 record right and top centre of verso. 2016-04-21 Fair condition; yellow, slight creasing throughout, wear along edges, creasing in corners, separation of substrate in top right and bottom left corner, staple see full holes in four corners, surface scratches, severe condition yellow adhesive damage in verso, stains in top 2016-06-24 record centre of verso, ink transfer in verso. 2016-04-21

2012-01403.0843

64/168

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Good Neighbor Sam

1964 Swift, David

USA

Lobby Card

Good Neighbor Sam

Card 6 of 8. Image of a couple arguing, title card in bottom right: two lines of cast in red text above title in red text on a yellow banner, seven lines of credits in 1964 red and black text at the bottom of card. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-51211 (F-05-299). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

64/168 2012-014-03.0844

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Good Neighbor Sam

1964 Swift, David

USA

Lobby Card

Good Neighbor Sam

Card 7 of 8. Image of a man and two women having a conversation, title card in bottom right: two lines of cast in red text above title in red text on a yellow banner, seven lines of credits in red and black text at 1964 the bottom of card.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-51211 (F-05-299). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0845

64/168

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Good Neighbor Sam

1964 Swift, David

USA

Lobby Card

Good Neighbor Sam

Card 8 of 8. Image of two women removing a man from a restaurant, title card in bottom right: two lines of cast in red text above title in red text on a yellow banner, seven lines of credits in red and black text at 1964 the bottom of card. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-51211 (F-05-299). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0846

57/15

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Great Man

1956 Ferrer, José

USA

Lobby Card

The Great Man

2012-01403.0847

57/15

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Great Man

1956 Ferrer, José

USA

Lobby Card

The Great Man

Card 1 of 2. 'Jose Ferrer' in top left next to title in yellow, twelve lines of credits in black text along right edge with a small image of a book in centre right, image in centre left of a man kissing a woman on a 1957 couch. C Card 2 of 2. 'Jose Ferrer' in top left next to title in yellow, twelve lines of credits in black text along right edge with a small image of a book in centre right, image in centre left of a nervous woman talking with a 1957 seated man. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film Based on the novel by file FRL-52439 Al Morgan. (F-05-768). TBLB Previously located in film Based on the novel by file FRL-52439 Al Morgan. (F-05-768). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0848

67/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Kramer, 1967 Stanley

USA

Lobby Card

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Card 1 of 8. Still of an elder couple having a conversation with their daughter and her fiance, title card in bottom left corner: four lines of credits in blue text above title in red text and four lines of credits in 1967 blue text below. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Probable reproduction. TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0849

67/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Kramer, 1967 Stanley

USA

Lobby Card

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Card 2 of 8. Still of a family around a table where the older gentleman adjusts the tie of the young man, title card in bottom left corner: four lines of credits in blue text above title in red text and four lines of 1967 credits in blue text below. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Probable reproduction. TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

95

2012-01403.0850

67/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Kramer, 1967 Stanley

USA

Lobby Card

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Card 3 of 8. Still of a young man approaching the older couple, title card in bottom left corner: four lines of credits in blue text above title in red text and 1967 four lines of credits in blue text below.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Probable reproduction. TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; yellowing, creasing throughout causing loss of colour more severe in centre right, small tears in bottom left and right edges, rips in see full top right corner, staple in four corners, wear in condition corners, stain in bottom centre, pin hole in top 2016-06-24 record centre, ink transfer in verso. Okay condition; yellow, wear along edges, red finger marks in bottom right, stains in centre, creasing in centre, staple holes in four corners and centre of left edge, slight loss of colour, loss of paper in centre left edge, creasing in four corners, see full yellow adhesive damage in top left corner, ink condition transfer on verso, yellow adhesive damage in top 2016-06-24 record right corner of verso.

2016-04-21

2012-01403.0851

67/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Kramer, 1967 Stanley

USA

Lobby Card

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Card 4 of 8. Still of a woman flipping her hair at her maid, title card in bottom right corner: four lines of credits in blue text above title in red text and four 1967 lines of credits in blue text below.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Probable reproduction. TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-21

2012-01403.0852

67/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Kramer, 1967 Stanley

USA

Lobby Card

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Card 5 of 8. Still of an older couple driving a car, title card in bottom right corner: four lines of credits in blue text above title in red text and four lines of 1967 credits in blue text below.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Probable reproduction. TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; wear along edges with separation of substrate in corners, creasing in corners, staple holes in four corners, yellowing, slight creasing throughout severe in centre and centre right, loss see full of colour, yellow adhesive damage in centre of condition horizontal edges, ink transfer on verso, adhesive 2016-06-24 record damage in top and bottom centre of verso.

2016-04-21

2012-01403.0853

67/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Kramer, 1967 Stanley

USA

Lobby Card

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Card 6 of 8. Still of a young woman talking with her mother, title card in bottom left corner: four lines of credits in blue text above title in red text and four 1967 lines of credits in blue text below.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Probable reproduction. TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0854

67/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection Guy McKone Collection

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Kramer, 1967 Stanley

USA

Lobby Card

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

2012-01403.0855

67/304

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Kramer, 1967 Stanley

USA

Lobby Card

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner

Card 7 of 8. Still of a man accusing another of something, title card in bottom right corner: four lines of credits in blue text above title in red text and four 1967 lines of credits in blue text below. C Card 8 of 8. Still of a smiling couple, title card in bottom right corner: four lines of credits in blue text above title in red text and four lines of credits in blue 1967 text below. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Probable reproduction. TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellowing, creasing in four corners, fold in bottom left corner, stain in bottom centre, see full creasing throughout concentrated in centre, slight condition loss of colour, ink transfer in verso, yellow adhesive 2016-06-24 record damage in top and bottom centre of verso. 2016-04-21 Okay condition; yellowing, staple holes in four corners, slight creasing throughout, surface see full scratches, stain in bottom right, tear in bottom left condition corner, tear in top centre, loss of substrate in top 2016-06-24 record right, ink stains in verso. 2016-04-21 see full Fair condition; yellow, creasing in corners, yellow condition stain in top centre, slight creasing throughout, stain 2016-06-24 record in centre right, ink transfer in verso. 2016-04-21 Fair condition; blue film from possible water damage, yellowing, large crease from top left corner to bottom centre, surface scratches, slight see full colour fading, wear along right edge, pin holes in condition corners, smudging along the top, pen mark in 2016-06-24 record bottom left corner, image visible on verso.

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Probable reproduction. TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0856

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

Card 1 of 11. Image of a man trying to get a family to sign a contract, 'Carroll Baker' and title in red text in centre on image, one lines of credits in blue at the 1965 bottom.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-64536 (F-21-522). TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-64536 (F-21-522). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-21

2012-01403.0857

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

Card 2 of 11. Image of a man and Harlow acting out a scene in front of a camera, 'Carroll Baker' and title in red text in centre on image, one lines of credits in blue 1965 at the bottom. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; blue film from possible water see full damage, yellow, creasing in corners, wear along top condition edge, residue in centre of verso, slight creasing 2016-06-24 record throughout. 2016-04-21 Fair condition; blue film from possible water damage, yellow, stain along bottom edge, crease in see full top left, stains in bottom left, slight creasing condition throughout, creasing in top left corner, staple in 2016-06-24 record corners, image visible on verso. 2016-04-21 Fair condition; yellowing, staple holes in four corners, creasing in corners, fold in top right see full corner, pin holes in centre, adhesive damage in top condition left of verso, small tear in top right corner, image 2016-06-24 record visible in verso, hole in bottom left corner. 2016-04-21 Fair condition; blue film from possible water see full damage, yellow, blue streaks along left edge, condition creasing and warpage in left edge, slight creasing in 2016-06-24 record corners, ink transfer on verso. 2016-04-21 Fair condition; blue film from possible water damage, yellow, stains in bottom centre, smudges in bottom right, wear along top edge, creasing in see full corners, fold in bottom left corner, fading, surface condition scratches, stains in top centre of verso, red ink 2016-06-24 record stains in bottom of verso. Fair condition; blue film from possible water damage, yellow, stains in top left, stains in bottom see full right, pin holes in top left, and centre of horizontal condition edges, rippling along the top, residue in centre of 2016-06-24 record verso, image visible on verso.

2012-01403.0858

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

Card 3 of 11. Image of a man holding an upset Harlow on a large bed, 'Carroll Baker' and title in red text in centre on image, one lines of credits in blue at the 1965 bottom. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-64536 (F-21-522). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0859

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

Card 4 of 11. Image of a man and Harlow talking in a dressing room, 'Carroll Baker' and title in red text in centre on image, one lines of credits in blue at the 1965 bottom. Card 5 of 11. Image of a Harlow and a man talking while at dinner, 'Carroll Baker' and title in red text in centre on image, one lines of credits in blue at the 1965 bottom.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-64536 (F-21-522). TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-64536 (F-21-522). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0860

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0861

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

Card 6 of 11. Wide shot image of a crowd at the World Premiere of a film, Harlow can be scene exiting her vehicle. 'Carroll Baker' and title in red text in centre on image, one lines of credits in blue at the 1965 bottom. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-64536 (F-21-522). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-21

2012-01403.0862

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

Card 7 of 11. Harlow sits on monogrammed suitcases while she is being photographed, 'Carroll Baker' and title in red text in centre on image, one lines of credits 1965 in blue at the bottom. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-64536 (F-21-522). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-21

2012-01403.0863

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

Card 8 of 11. Image of a couple cutting a wedding cake, 'Carroll Baker' and title in red text in centre on 1965 image, one lines of credits in blue at the bottom.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-64536 (F-21-522). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; blue film from possible water damage, yellow, wear and creasing in corners, creasing in bottom centre, wear along top edge, see full stain in bottom centre, slight creasing throughout, condition stain in bottom right and centre left of verso, image 2016-06-24 record visible on verso. 2016-04-21

2012-01403.0864

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

Card 9 of 11. A man holds an upset woman on a large bed, 'Carroll Baker' and title in red text in centre on 1965 image, one lines of credits in blue at the bottom. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; yellow, tear in bottom centre and bottom right, creasing throughout, white residue in top right of image, dents and creasing in top right, sun damage in bottom, tear in top centre, smudges see full in top centre, image visible in verso, residue in condition bottom left, tape repair in top centre of verso, loss 2016-06-24 record of substrate in top centre. 2016-04-21 Fair condition; yellow, sun damage, wear along edges, residue in centre left edge, loss of substrate see full in top right, residue in centre right, image visible in condition verso, sun damage in verso, stain in top right centre 2016-06-24 record visible on recto, small tears along top edge. 2016-04-21 Fair condition; blue film from possible water see full damage, staple holes in four corners, wear along condition top edge, slight creasing throughout with large tear 2016-06-24 record in top right, ink transfer on verso. 2016-04-21

2012-01403.0865

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

Card 10 of 11. A man and woman talk in a dressing room, 'Carroll Baker' and title in red text in centre on 1965 image, one lines of credits in blue at the bottom.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0866

65/203

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Harlow

Douglas, 1965 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Harlow

Card 11 of 11. Image of a couple cutting a wedding cake, 'Carroll Baker' and title in red text in centre on 1965 image, one lines of credits in blue at the bottom.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0867

60-258

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

High Time

1960 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

High Time

Card 1 of 8. Title card. Tagline in red text on a yellow banner at the top, four characters with cast names on yellow boxes, title in red text on a yellow box in bottom centre, four lines of questions and answers in botttom left corner, two lines of credits in blue text at the bottom left. Tagline: "It's high time you had the 1960 high time of your lifetime!" C Card 2 of 8. Image of students learning how to dance in a dorm room, four boxes with cast names in blue text on the left, title in red text in box in bottom left corner, one line of credits in bottom centre, yellow 1960 banner.

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-93457 (F-16-886). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, pink film possibly from water damage, wear along edges, image blurred, stains in see full bottom centre, left edges and top right, creasing in condition corners, smudges in corners, creasing along top 2016-06-24 record edge, image slightly visible on verso. 2016-04-21 Fair condition; yellow, blue film possibly from water damage, creasing along edges, smudges in bottom see full left, staple holes in top corners, yellow adhesive condition damage in top and bottom of verso, image slightly 2016-06-24 record visible in verso, stains in bottom centre. 2016-04-21 Fair condition; yellow, blue film possibly from water damage, wear along edges, rippling along top edge, stain in bottom centre edge, pencil marks in centre see full right, yellow adhesive damage in verso, pin holes in condition centre from right to left edge, image visible on 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-21 Okay condition; yellow, blue film possibly from water damage, creasing in four corners, wear and tears along edges, pin hole in top centre, rip in see full bottom left corner, smudges in edges, smudges and condition stains in verso, sun damage in left edge of verso, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso. 2016-04-21

2012-01403.0868

60-258

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

High Time

1960 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

High Time

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-93457 (F-16-886). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0869

60-258

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

High Time

1960 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

High Time

Card 3 of 8. Image of a man looking confused in a classroom, four boxes with cast names in blue text on the left, title in red text in box in bottom left corner, 1960 one line of credits in bottom centre, yellow banner. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-93457 (F-16-886). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0870

60-258

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

High Time

1960 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

High Time

Card 4 of 8. Image of three people having a conversation on the street, four boxes with cast names in blue text on the left, title in red text in box in bottom left corner, one line of credits in bottom 1960 centre, yellow banner. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-93457 (F-16-886). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

96

2012-01403.0871

60-258

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

High Time

1960 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

High Time

Card 5 of 8. Image of a couple smiling in hay, four boxes with cast names in blue text on the left, title in red text in box in bottom left corner, one line of 1960 credits in bottom centre, yellow banner.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-93457 (F-16-886). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; browning, pin holes in four corners and centre of horizontal edges, severe wear and folding in top right corner, creasing in four corners, see full slight colour fading, image visible on verso, stain in condition bottom left corner of verso, ink stain in top left 2016-06-24 record corner of verso. 2016-04-21 Fair condition; yellow, blue film possibly from water damage, black finger marks in bottom centre creasing in corners, smudges along right edge, stain see full in bottom left corner, slight creasing throughout, condition image visible in verso, residue in bottom right 2016-06-24 record corner of verso. 2016-04-21 Fair condition; yellow, blue film possibly from water damage, staple holes in top corners, bottom right corner, and bottom centre, wear along top edge, see full creasing in top left corner, blue stain in bottom condition centre, stain in right centre edge of verso, smudges 2016-06-24 record in top right corner of verso, image visible on verso. 2016-04-21 Fair condition; yellow, blue film possibly from water damage, colour loss, blue stain along left edge, wear along top edge, creasing in bottom right edge, see full creasing in top corners, pin holes in top right condition corner, top left and centre right edge, stains in 2016-06-24 record verso, "60-258" in pencil in top right of verso. 2016-04-21 Poor condition; yellow, severe stains and residue throughout card, creasing in corners, staple holes see full in four corners, stain in top centre, surface condition scratches, creasing throughout, smudging in verso, 2016-06-24 record severe creasing in bottom edge. 2016-04-21

2012-01403.0872

60-258

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

High Time

1960 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

High Time

Card 6 of 8. Image of Bing Crosby being introduced to students, four boxes with cast names in blue text on the left, title in red text in box in bottom left corner, 1960 one line of credits in bottom centre, yellow banner. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-93457 (F-16-886). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0873

60-258

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

High Time

1960 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

High Time

Card 7 of 8. Image of Bing Crosby being accepted into a fraternity, four boxes with cast names in blue text on the left, title in red text in box in bottom left corner, one line of credits in bottom centre, yellow 1960 banner. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-93457 (F-16-886). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0874

60-258

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

High Time

1960 Edwards, Blake USA

Lobby Card

High Time

Card 8 of 8. Image of students trying to pull a girl through a window, four boxes with cast names in blue text on the left, title in red text in box in bottom left corner, one line of credits in bottom centre, yellow 1960 banner. C Card 1 of 3. Image of a man and woman looking out of frame, pink background, three lines of credits in blue text above an image of a woman screaming in bottom right, four lines of credits in blue text at the bottom, 1965 image of a gun with a bouquet silencer in bottom left. C Card 2 of 3. Image of a man looking down at a woman lying in bed, pink background, three lines of credits in blue text above an image of a woman screaming in bottom right, four lines of credits in blue text at the bottom, image of a gun with a bouquet silencer in 1965 bottom left. C Card 3 of 3. Image of a woman looking frightened while visiting a grave, pink background, three lines of credits in blue text above an image of a woman screaming in bottom right, four lines of credits in blue text at the bottom, image of a gun with a bouquet 1965 silencer in bottom left. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-93457 (F-16-886). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0875

65/68

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

1965 Aldrich, Robert USA

Lobby Card

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0876

65/68

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

1965 Aldrich, Robert USA

Lobby Card

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Poor condition; yellow, browning along edges, see full severe creasing and water damage, tears in condition horizontal edges, wear along edges, showtime for 2016-06-24 record children's show in verso, pin hole in top left.

2016-04-21

2012-01403.0877

65/68

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

1965 Aldrich, Robert USA

Lobby Card

Hush... Hush, Sweet Charlotte

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0878

67/70

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

In Like Flint

Douglas, 1967 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

In Like Flint

Card 1 of 1. Flint sits on a chair relaxing in the middle of a crowd of women, title in orange in bottom left, 1967 two lines of credits in black in bottom left.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; yellow, loss of substrate in left, see full creasing in corners, tears along right edge, pin condition holes in four corners, tape repair in verso, ink 2016-06-24 record transfer in verso, pin holes in top centre. 2016-04-21 Fair condition; adhesive damage in four corners, pin holes in four corners and centre of horizontal edges, stain in bottom centre, yellow, adhesive see full damage in corners of verso, smudges in top left and condition centre right of verso, residue in bottom right of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-21 Fair condition; yellowing, pin holes in four corners and centre of edges, wear along top and right edges, creasing in four corners, crushed substrate see full in right corners, creasing in centre, smudges in condition centre right of verso, yellow adhesive damage in 2016-06-24 record bottom centre, stain in top left corner of verso.

2012-01403.0879

66/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inside Daisy Clover

Mulligan, 1966 Robert

USA

Lobby Card

Inside Daisy Clover

Card 1 of 10. Image of Natalie Wood at the window in a sheet, two lines of cast in orange text and title in red 1966 text at the bottom on a yellow banner. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-21

2012-01403.0880

66/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inside Daisy Clover

Mulligan, 1966 Robert

USA

Lobby Card

Inside Daisy Clover

Card 2 of 10. Image of a couple kissing at brunch, two lines of cast in orange text and title in red text at the 1966 bottom on a yellow banner. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-53644 (F-06-478). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; creasing in four corners, wear along right edge, pin holes in four corners and centre of edges, smudges in edges, stain in bottom centre, see full image visible on verso, smudges in top centre and condition left of verso, yellow adhesive damage in top corners 2016-06-24 record of verso. 2016-04-21 Fair condition; yellow, severe creasing along right edge, pin holes in centre of edges, bottom right corner, and centre of image, creasing in centre, wear along bottom edge, separation of substrate in see full right corners, stains in top centre, yellow adhesive condition damage in top centre of verso, stains in top centre 2016-06-24 record of verso, image visible on verso. 2016-04-21 Fair condition; yellowing, smudges in bottom corner, staple holes in four corners, yellow adhesive damage in top corners, crushed and separated see full substrate in bottom corners, folds in right corners, condition image visible on verso, smudges in bottom left of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-21 Fair condition; staple holes in four corners, yellowing, pin holes in vertical edges and in top see full centre, creasing in corners, wear in top edge, condition crushed substrate in bottom right corner, colour 2016-06-24 record fading, image visible on verso, ink transfer on verso. 2016-04-21 Fair condition; yellow, possible water damage, yellow adhesive damage in top centre, pin holes in four corners and along edges, faded image, severe see full crease along right edge, slight creasing throughout, condition yellow adhesive damage in top centre of verso, 2016-06-24 record image visible in verso. 2016-04-21 Fair condition; yellow, fold in top left and right see full corners, separation of substrate in right corners, condition pin holes in vertical holes, colour loss, red stain in 2016-06-24 record bottom centre, image slightly visible in verso. Fair condition; yellowing, loss of colour, slight creasing, creasing in corners, tear in top and see full bottom centre, wear along the top, pin holes in condition four corners and centre in vertical edges, smudges 2016-06-24 record along bottom edge of verso. Laminated. Okay condition; stains and residue in see full centre, surface scratches, creasing in corners, condition smudges in verso, creases in verso, stains in top 2016-06-24 record right of verso, small tears in edges. Laminated. Poor condition; blurred image, tears in centre left edge, bottom left, and top left corner see full with loss of paper, tear in top centre, smudges condition along edges, tape repairs in verso, smudges in 2016-06-24 record centre left of verso.

2012-01403.0881

66/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inside Daisy Clover

Mulligan, 1966 Robert

USA

Lobby Card

Inside Daisy Clover

Card 3 of 10. Image of a man holding up a woman's chin, two lines of cast in orange text and title in red 1966 text at the bottom on a yellow banner.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0882

66/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inside Daisy Clover

Mulligan, 1966 Robert

USA

Lobby Card

Inside Daisy Clover

Card 4 of 10. Image of woman acting in the centre of soldiers holding flags, two lines of cast in orange text 1966 and title in red text at the bottom on a yellow banner. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0883

66/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inside Daisy Clover

Mulligan, 1966 Robert

USA

Lobby Card

Inside Daisy Clover

Card 5 of 10. Image of Natalie Wood walking away from an explosion, two lines of cast in orange text and 1966 title in red text at the bottom on a yellow banner. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0884

66/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inside Daisy Clover

Mulligan, 1966 Robert

USA

Lobby Card

Inside Daisy Clover

Card 6 of 10. Image of Christopher Plummer restraining a histerical Natalie Wood, two lines of cast in orange text and title in red text at the bottom on a 1966 yellow banner. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0885

66/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inside Daisy Clover

Mulligan, 1966 Robert

USA

Lobby Card

Inside Daisy Clover

Card 7 of 10. Image of an indoor picnic, two lines of cast in orange text and title in red text at the bottom 1966 on a yellow banner.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-21

2012-01403.0886

66/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inside Daisy Clover

Mulligan, 1966 Robert

USA

Lobby Card

Inside Daisy Clover

Card 8 of 10. Image of two women playing on the beach, two lines of cast in orange text and title in red 1966 text at the bottom on a yellow banner.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-21

2012-01403.0887

66/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inside Daisy Clover

Mulligan, 1966 Robert

USA

Lobby Card

Inside Daisy Clover

Card 9 of 10. Image of a couple kissing at brunch, two lines of cast in orange text and title in red text at the 1966 bottom on a yellow banner. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-21

2012-01403.0888

66/48

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Inside Daisy Clover

Mulligan, 1966 Robert

USA

Lobby Card

Inside Daisy Clover

Card 10 of 10. Image of an indoor picnic, two lines of cast in orange text and title in red text at the bottom 1966 on a yellow banner. C Card 1 of 1. Black and white still in top right of a couple embracing, red border from top left to bottom right corner, caption in white text in top left corner, black and white image of a woman in centre left, outline of a man with the silhouette of a man in his glasses in bottom left, title in white text in bottom centre, three lines of credits in black text in bottom 1964 right above line drawing of a race track. O

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-21

2012-01403.0889

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Killers

1964 Siegal, Donald USA

Lobby Card

The Killers

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Based on the story by Ernest Hemingway.

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, smudges along edges, wear along outer edges, creasing in four corners, horizontal creases in centre and one inch from the see full bottom, slight creasing throughout causing slight condition loss of colour, dirt transfer in verso, image slightly 2016-06-24 record visible in verso, stain in top right of verso. Okay condition; yellow, wear along right edge, creasing in corners, stain in bottom right corner, water damage in bottom right, dogeared top left see full corner, sun damage in verso, slight creasing in top, condition stains in bottom left of verso, image slightly visible 2016-06-24 record on verso, ink transfer on verso.

2016-05-25

2012-01403.0890

65/4

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Kiss Me, Stupid

1964 Wilder, Billy

USA

Lobby Card

Kiss Me, Stupid

Card 1 of 8. Still of two men teasing a waitress, two lines of cast and credits in purple and red text at the bottom left, title in white text on a purple image of lips, purple credits in bottom right corner, pink border 1965 around credits. O

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-54657 (F-06-849). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-25

97

2012-01403.0891

65/4

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Kiss Me, Stupid

1964 Wilder, Billy

USA

Lobby Card

Kiss Me, Stupid

Card 2 of 8. Still of two men talking with a mechanic, two lines of cast and credits in purple and red text at the bottom left, title in white text on a purple image of lips, purple credits in bottom right corner, pink 1965 border around credits.

O

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-54657 (F-06-849). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; yellow, slight creasing throughout, hole and crushed substrate in bottom centre repaired in verso, tape along top edge covering showtimes, pin holes in four corners, colour loss, creasing and crushed substrate in top left and see full bottom right corner, wear along bottom edge, tape condition repairs in verso, image visible on verso, ink transfer 2016-06-24 record on verso. 2016-04-25

2012-01403.0892

65/4

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Kiss Me, Stupid

1964 Wilder, Billy

USA

Lobby Card

Kiss Me, Stupid

Card 3 of 8. Still of two men and a woman in a sitting room, two lines of cast and credits in purple and red text at the bottom left, title in white text on a purple image of lips, purple credits in bottom right corner, 1965 pink border around credits. Card 4 of 8. Still of a couple talking, two lines of cast and credits in purple and red text at the bottom left, title in white text on a purple image of lips, purple credits in bottom right corner, pink border around 1965 credits.

O

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-54657 (F-06-849). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; yellow, pin holes in top right corner, smudges along bottom edge, blue stain in centre left edge, slight loss of colour, 'Restricted adult' in pen in top centre, marker in bottom right corner, stains and smudges along right edge, wear along right edge, stain in top left, yellow adhesive damage in four corners of verso, stains in verso, see full bleedthrough in bottom left of verso, blue stains in condition bottom right, image visible on verso, vertical 2016-06-24 record creases, slight ink transfer in verso. Okay condition; yellow, yellow adhesive damge in top corners, loss of substrate in bottom left edge, see full marker in bottom right, bleedthrough in bottom condition left of verso, image visible on verso, ink transfer on 2016-06-24 record verso, slight creasing in verso. Poor condition; yellow, blue film from water damage, rippling, stains in bottom right, colour loss, slight creasing throughout, stain in centre, ink see full transfer in verso, image slightly visible in verso, condition creasing in corners, separation of substrate along 2016-06-24 record bottom edge.

2016-04-25

2012-01403.0893

65/4

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Kiss Me, Stupid

1964 Wilder, Billy

USA

Lobby Card

Kiss Me, Stupid

O

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-54657 (F-06-849). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-25

2012-01403.0894

65/4

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Kiss Me, Stupid

1964 Wilder, Billy

USA

Lobby Card

Kiss Me, Stupid

Card 5 of 8. Still of a candle-lit dinner, two lines of cast and credits in purple and red text at the bottom left, title in white text on a purple image of lips, purple credits in bottom right corner, pink border around 1965 credits. O

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-54657 (F-06-849). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-25

2012-01403.0895

65/4

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Kiss Me, Stupid

1964 Wilder, Billy

USA

Lobby Card

Kiss Me, Stupid

Card 6 of 8. Still of a a woman leaning on a man while another looks over their shoulders, two lines of cast and credits in purple and red text at the bottom left, title in white text on a purple image of lips, purple credits in bottom right corner, pink border around 1965 credits. O

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-54657 (F-06-849). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, blue film from possible water damage, marker in bottom right, wear along top edge, creasing in corners, folding and separation of substrate in left corners, stains in bottom right, see full slight creasing throughout, finger marks in verso, condition image visible on verso, bleedthrough in bottom left 2016-06-24 record of verso, ink transfer in verso. 2016-04-25 Fair condition; yellow, blue film from possible water damage, pin holes in four corners and centre right edge, slight colour loss, marker in bottom right, creasing in corners, slight creasing throughout, ink see full transfer in verso, bleedthrough in bottom left, condition image slightly visible in verso, loss of substrate in 2016-06-24 record top right of verso. 2016-04-25 Fair condition; yellow, blue film from possible water damage, slight loss of colour, creasing in corners, see full wear along right and bottom edge, pin holes in top condition corners, stains in centre right of verso, ink transfer 2016-06-24 record in verso, image slightly visible in verso. 2016-04-25

2012-01403.0896

65/4

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Kiss Me, Stupid

1964 Wilder, Billy

USA

Lobby Card

Kiss Me, Stupid

Card 7 of 8. Still of a man and a chorus line, two lines of cast and credits in purple and red text at the bottom left, title in white text on a purple image of lips, purple credits in bottom right corner, pink border 1965 around credits. O Card 8 of 8. Still of a couple caught in the act, two lines of cast and credits in purple and red text at the bottom left, title in white text on a purple image of lips, purple credits in bottom right corner, pink border 1965 around credits. O

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-54657 (F-06-849). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0897

65/4

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Kiss Me, Stupid

1964 Wilder, Billy

USA

Lobby Card

Kiss Me, Stupid

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-54657 (F-06-849). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0898

64/82

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Lady in a Cage

Grauman, 1964 Walter

USA

Lobby Card

Lady in a Cage

Card 1 of 1. Image in top right of an injured woman crawling towards a phone, on the top left an image of Olivia de Havilland and a warning about the film in blue and red text, tagline in white text in bottom left, in background an image of someone falling out of a suspended cage, cast in black above the title in red text on a yellow background, one line of cast under title. Tagline: "What happens in this elevator is not for 1964 the weak - it is, perhaps, not even for the strong!" C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-89513 (F-21-527). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, blue film from possible water damage, pin holes in four corners, creasing in four see full corners, slight loss of colour, slight creasing condition throughout, tear in centre right repaired with tape 2016-06-24 record in verso, ink transfer in verso. 2016-04-25 Poor condition; browning, water damage, image loss, wear along edges, creasing throughout, smudges in right edge, stains in top edge, '1229' in pencil in top right, blue stain in top left corner, see full stains in verso, 'Esclavo del Deber' in china pencil in condition top left of verso, pencil marks in verso, markers in 2016-06-24 record bottom right of verso, residue in verso. 2016-04-25 Okay condition; yellowing, creasing throughout causing loss of colour, wear along edges, tear in see full bottom right edge, crushed substrate along right condition edge, creasing in top corner, stain in bottom left 2016-06-24 record corner, sun damage in verso. Okay condition; very yellow, colour loss, possible water damage, creasing in four corners, fold in bottom left corner, smudges and stains along right see full edge, stain in centre left edge, wear along edges, condition creasing along bottom edge, slight creasing 2016-06-24 record throughout, stains in bottom left of verso.

2012-01403.0899

59/198

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Last Angry Man

1959 Mann, Daniel

USA

Lobby Card

The Last Angry Man

Card 1 of 1. Image of four men around a dead man, in bottom left corner a yellow title card, line drawing of a man above a woman on the left of title in red text, two lines of cast in black text above title, three lines of 1959 credits in green text under title. C Card 1 of 1. Image of a man leading a dancing group of children with a body of water in the background, blue title card in bottom left corner, title in white text in title card, six lines of credits in black text in title 1972 card. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0900

72/435

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Lost Horizon

1974 Jarrott, Charles USA

Lobby Card

Lost Horizon

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Based on the novel by James Hilton.

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-25

2012-01403.0901

64/15

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Man's Favorite Sport?

Hawks, 1964 Howard

USA

Lobby Card

Man's Favorite Sport?

Card 1 of 8. Image in bottom left of a group talking, cast in black text with small portraits of couples in two positions, title in red text in top right, twelve lines of 1964 credits in black text along right edge, yellow border. C Card 2 of 8. Image of a woman walking away from a man who's tie is stuck in her dress, cast in black text with small portraits of couples in two positions, title in red text in top right, twelve lines of credits in black 1964 text along right edge, yellow border. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-93454 (F-21-819). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-25

2012-01403.0902

64/15

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Man's Favorite Sport?

Hawks, 1964 Howard

USA

Lobby Card

Man's Favorite Sport?

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-93454 (F-21-819). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; very yellow, pin holes in four see full corners, loss of colour, possible water damage, condition creasing in edges, slight creasing in four corners, 2016-06-24 record image visible in verso. Okay condition; very yellow, possible water damage, loss of substrate in bottom corners, smudges in edges, yellow stain in top centre, wear see full along edges, fold in top left corner, creasing in condition corners, slight creasing throughout, image slightly 2016-06-24 record visible on verso, slight sun damage in verso. Okay condition; very yellow, possible water damage, wear along edges, yellow stain in bottom left corner, pin holes in top corners, slight loss of see full colour, stain in top left, stains along bottom edges, condition sun damage in right edge, stains in top left, slight 2016-06-24 record creasing throughout, image visible in verso.

2016-04-25

2012-01403.0903

64/15

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Man's Favorite Sport?

Hawks, 1964 Howard

USA

Lobby Card

Man's Favorite Sport?

Card 3 of 8. Image of a couple chatting at dinner, cast in black text with small portraits of couples in two positions, title in red text in top right, twelve lines of 1964 credits in black text along right edge, yellow border. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-93454 (F-21-819). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-25

2012-01403.0904

64/15

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Man's Favorite Sport?

Hawks, 1964 Howard

USA

Lobby Card

Man's Favorite Sport?

Card 4 of 8. Image of a man trying to wake a woman, cast in black text with small portraits of couples in two positions, title in red text in top right, twelve lines of 1964 credits in black text along right edge, yellow border. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-93454 (F-21-819). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-25

2012-01403.0905

64/15

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Man's Favorite Sport?

Hawks, 1964 Howard

USA

Lobby Card

Man's Favorite Sport?

Card 5 of 8. Image of two woman looking at a man in an arm cast, cast in black text with small portraits of couples in two positions, title in red text in top right, twelve lines of credits in black text along right edge, 1964 yellow border.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-93454 (F-21-819). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Poor condition; yellow, blue film from water damage, wear along edges, rip in top left corner, pin holes in top corners, colour loss, tear in bottom right, crushed substrate in bottom right corner, creasing in corners, stains along bottom and top edges, scratches in surface, stains in top and bottom centre of verso, yellow adhesive damage in see full four corners of verso, loss of substrate in top condition corners and bottom right corner of verso, image 2016-06-24 record slightly visible in verso, bleedthrough in corners. 2016-04-25 Poor condition; very yellow, blue film from water damage, loss of substrate in bottom corners and top left corner, staple holes in four corners and vertical edges, slight loss of colour, stain in top see full centre, creasing along edges, slight creasing in condition verso, creasing in corners causing separation of 2016-06-24 record substrate, image visible in verso.

2012-01403.0906

64/15

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Man's Favorite Sport?

Hawks, 1964 Howard

USA

Lobby Card

Man's Favorite Sport?

Card 6 of 8. Image of a shy woman at the door of a man's cottage, cast in black text with small portraits of couples in two positions, title in red text in top right, twelve lines of credits in black text along right 1964 edge, yellow border.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-93454 (F-21-819). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-25

2012-01403.0907

64/15

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Man's Favorite Sport?

Hawks, 1964 Howard

USA

Lobby Card

Man's Favorite Sport?

Card 7 of 8. Image of a woman talking to a man drinking, cast in black text with small portraits of couples in two positions, title in red text in top right, twelve lines of credits in black text along right edge, 1964 yellow border.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-93454 (F-21-819). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Poor condition; very yellow, blue film from water damage, moderate loss of colour, loss of substrate in bottom left corner, stains in bottom left, pen sum in bottom left, staple holes in four corners, see full creasing in corners, wear along edges, image visible condition in verso, yellow adhesive damage in top left corner 2016-06-24 record of verso. 2016-04-25

98

2012-01403.0908

64/15

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Man's Favorite Sport?

Hawks, 1964 Howard

USA

Lobby Card

Man's Favorite Sport?

Card 8 of 8. Image of a man and woman lying on a floating mattress, cast in black text with small portraits of couples in two positions, title in red text in top right, twelve lines of credits in black text along 1964 right edge, yellow border. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-93454 (F-21-819). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; yellow, blue film from water damage, loss of colour, staple holes in four corners, creasing in corners, wear along edges, stain in see full bottom right corner, crushed substrate in corners, condition image visible in verso, stains in centre opf vertical 2016-06-24 record edges in verso, ink transfer on verso. 2016-04-25 Okay condition; yellow, stains in bottom right corner, creasing in corners, residue in bottom right, '3.00' in pencil in top right corner, yellow adhesive damage in top corners, wear along right edge, staple holes in corners of image, slight loss of see full colour, surface scratches, slight creasing condition throughout, smudges in top left of verso, ink stains 2016-06-24 record in centre of verso. 2016-04-25

2012-01403.0909

60/21

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Man on a String

1960 de Toth, Andre USA

Lobby Card

Man on a String

Card 1 of 1. Image of a woman in a silk dress walking away from a man, in the bottom left corner a shocked man's face, title in orange text on the right of face, six 1960 lines of credits in blue text under title. C Card 1 of 1. Tagline in black and blue text at the top, five images of scenes from the film in various colours, title in red text in bottom right, image of doctors and nurses running to an emergency on the left of title, two lines of credits in black text at the bottom. 1964 Tagline: "New story! New loves! New stars!" C Card 1 of 1. Image in bottom left of a woman walking in on a couple kissing, two lines of cast in black text in top left, title in red text in top centre, ten lines of credits in black and green text along right edge, small line drawing of a man and woman and the Brooklyn Bridge in bottom right, yellow border in top and right 1964 edges. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Also known as 'Confessions of a Counterspy.' Based on the novel by "Ten Years a Counterspy" by Boris Morros.

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

64/201 2012-014-03.0910

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The New Interns

1964 Rich, John

USA

Lobby Card

The New Interns

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Based on characters from the novel 'The Interns' by Richard Frede.

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, creasing in four corners, wear along edges, crushed substrate in corners, see full stain in bottom centre, finger mark in bottom right, condition stains in top centre, creasing in top section, ink 2016-06-24 record transfer on verso, image visible on verso. 2016-04-25

2012-01403.0911

59/74

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Never Steal Anything Small

Lederer, 1959 Charles

USA

Lobby Card

Never Steal Anything Small

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, staple holes in four corners, see full see through in centre right, wear along top edges, condition finger marks in top left, stains in bottom right 2016-06-24 record corner, stamp in centre left of verso.

2016-04-25

2012-01403.0912

National Screen 790017 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Norma Rae

1979 Ritt, Martin

USA

Lobby Card

Norma Rae

Card 1 of 1. Still of a young couple talking, title in bottom centre and NSS information in bottom 1979 corners.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; wear along edges, slight yellowing, one inch tear in bottom centre, creasing in corners, pin holes in four corners, surface scratches, creasing in four corners, pin hole and tear in top centre, large diagonal creases from top left to bottom centre, stain in left of verso, sun damage in see full verso, separation of substrate in top right and condition bottom corners, fading stamp in top centre of 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-25

2012-01403.0913

National Screen 810156 Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

On Golden Pond

1981 Rydell, Mark

USA

Lobby Card

On Golden Pond

Card 1 of 1. Still in top right of a man fishing with his grandson, central image of an old man, two women, and a young boy in top left, title in burgundy text in bottom left with a small image of a boat on the water, tagline in black text under image, seven lines of credits in black text in bottom ceentre. Tagline: 1981 "When life is at its finest... when love is at its fullest..." C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; slight yellowing, creasing in corners, see full stain in top right, slight creasing throughout with condition loss of colour, finger marks in centre left edge, 2016-06-24 record stamp in top centre of verso. 2016-04-25 Fair condition; yellow, stains in top left, stains in bottom left, creasing in corners, creasing throughout, staple holes in four corners, residue in see full bottom right and top left, severe creasing and tears condition in top centre, wear in centre right edge, slight 2016-06-24 record surface scratches, slight ink transfer in verso. 2016-04-25

2012-01403.0914

70/9

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

On Her Majesty's Secret Service

1969 Hunt, Peter

USA

Lobby Card

On Her Majesty's Secret Service

Card 1 of 1. Still in top right of four men on a mountain top, yellow border around image, two lines of credits in black text above 'James Bond 007' in red text in centre left, image of Bond and a woman on 1970 skis, title in red text in bottom centre.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film Based on the novel by file FRL-60369 Ian Fleming. (F-42-106). TBLB Possibly a reproduction. Previously located in film Based on the novel by file FRL-93467 Richard Sale. (F-23-960). TBLB Possibly a reproduction. Previously located in film Based on the novel by file FRL-93467 Richard Sale. (F-23-960). TBLB Possibly a reproduction. Previously located in film Based on the novel by file FRL-93467 Richard Sale. (F-23-960). TBLB Possibly a reproduction. Previously located in film Based on the novel by file FRL-93467 Richard Sale. (F-23-960). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0915

66/58

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Oscar

1966 Rouse, Russell USA

Lobby Card

The Oscar

Card 1 of 8. Image of three men and a woman discussing business, line drawings of characters and scenes along bottom edge of image, title in gold text in bottom left, two lines of credits in black text at the 1966 bottom.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, colour fading, creasing in see full corners, wear along top edge, surface scratches, condition fold in top left corner, slight creasing throughout, 2016-06-24 record image visible on verso, slight ink transfer in verso.

2016-04-25

2012-01403.0916

66/58

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Oscar

1966 Rouse, Russell USA

Lobby Card

The Oscar

Card 2 of 8. Image of a man and woman staring at each other, line drawings of characters and scenes along bottom edge of image, title in gold text in bottom left, two lines of credits in black text at the 1966 bottom.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

see full Fair condition; yellowing, creasing in edges, wear condition along edges, creasing in top corners, surface 2016-06-24 record scratches, tear in top centre, image visible on verso. 2016-04-25

2012-01403.0917

66/58

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Oscar

1966 Rouse, Russell USA

Lobby Card

The Oscar

Card 3 of 8. Image of a couple walking into a party while two men take notes, line drawings of characters and scenes along bottom edge of image, title in gold text in bottom left, two lines of credits in black text at 1966 the bottom. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Good condition; pin holes in corners, slight see full yellowing, creasing in top left corner, separation of condition substrate in corners, image visible in verso, creasing 2016-06-24 record in right. 2016-04-25

2012-01403.0918

66/58

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Oscar

1966 Rouse, Russell USA

Lobby Card

The Oscar

Card 4 of 8. Image of a woman dancing on a table in front of a crowd of men, line drawings of characters and scenes along bottom edge of image, title in gold text in bottom left, two lines of credits in black text at 1966 the bottom. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; yellowing, fading, creasing in corners, smudges in bottom left, possible water see full damage, smudges in top right corner, stains in condition bottom elft of verso, black pen in centre left of 2016-06-24 record verso, image visible on verso.

2016-04-25

2012-01403.0919

66/58

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Oscar

1966 Rouse, Russell USA

Lobby Card

The Oscar

Card 5 of 8. Image of a man standing over another fallen man while a woman looks at them, line drawings of characters and scenes along bottom edge of image, title in gold text in bottom left, two lines of 1966 credits in black text at the bottom. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Possibly a reproduction. Previously located in film Based on the novel by file FRL-93467 Richard Sale. (F-23-960). TBLB Possibly a reproduction. Previously located in film Based on the novel by file FRL-93467 Richard Sale. (F-23-960). TBLB Possibly a reproduction. Previously located in film Based on the novel by file FRL-93467 Richard Sale. (F-23-960). TBLB Possibly a reproduction. Previously located in film Based on the novel by file FRL-93467 Richard Sale. (F-23-960). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; yellowing, creasing in corners, wear in right edge, creasing in top right, fading, smudges in bottom right, rippling in bottom left corner, see full surface scratches, large stain in bottom right of condition verso, image visible on verso, stain in centre right of 2016-06-24 record verso, smudges in bottom left corner. 2016-04-25 Fair condition; yellowing, creasing along edges, wear along bottom edge, stain in centre left edge, fading, possible water damage, creasing in corners, see full slight creasing throughout, residue in centre left of condition verso, image visible in verso, pencil mark in centre 2016-06-24 record left of verso. 2016-04-25

2012-01403.0920

66/58

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Oscar

1966 Rouse, Russell USA

Lobby Card

The Oscar

Card 6 of 8. Image of two men and a woman talking while having drinks, line drawings of characters and scenes along bottom edge of image, title in gold text in bottom left, two lines of credits in black text at the 1966 bottom.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0921

66/58

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Oscar

1966 Rouse, Russell USA

Lobby Card

The Oscar

Card 7 of 8. Image of men fighting, line drawings of characters and scenes along bottom edge of image, title in gold text in bottom left, two lines of credits in 1966 black text at the bottom.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellowing, possible water damage in see full right, wear along bottom edge, creasing in four condition corners, smudge in bottom right corner, slight 2016-06-24 record creasing throughout, image visible in verso. 2016-04-25

2012-01403.0922

66/58

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Oscar

1966 Rouse, Russell USA

Lobby Card

The Oscar

Card 8 of 8. Image of a man about to sign a contract in front of a small audience, line drawings of characters and scenes along bottom edge of image, title in gold text in bottom left, two lines of credits in 1966 black text at the bottom.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Good condition; wear along edges, stain in centre see full right edge, surface scratches, creasing along condition bottom and right edge, sun damage in left of verso, 2016-06-24 record image visible in verso. 2016-04-25 Poor condition; very yellow, multiple staple holes in corners, centre of edges into image, slight colour fading, smudges in staple holes, surface scratches, see full wear along edges, creasing in corners, smudges condition along right edge of verso, image visible in verso, 2016-06-24 record staples holes in centre, large crease in bottom left. 2016-04-25 Fair condition; creasing and wear in four corners, yellow, slight creasing throughout, colour fading, creasing and fading in top edge, smudges along top see full edge, browning along right edge, stains along left of condition verso, image visible on verso, residue in top centre 2016-06-24 record of verso. 2016-04-26 Okay condition; yellow, creasing and separation of substrate in corners, pin holes in four corners, surface scratches, fold in right corners, stains in bottom left corner, small stains in centre left, slight see full creasing along edges, blue smudges in bottom left condition of verso, image slightly visible in verso, sun damage 2016-06-24 record in left of verso. 2016-04-26

2012-01403.0923

63/316

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Palm Springs Weekend

Taurog, 1963 Norman

USA

Lobby Card

Palm Springs Weekend

Card 1 of 1. Image of a man leaning close to a female worker at a record store, title in red text in bottom left, blue car full of teens on the right of title, two 1963 lines of credits in blue and red text at the bottom. Card 1 of 8. Image of a man fully-clothed in a pool, yellow border on the left of image, 'Jerry Lewis' and title in green and blue in top left corner, a man gets controlled like a puppet in centre left, definition of patsy in bottom left, two lines of credits in white text 1964 on a green banner in bottom right.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0924

64/227

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Patsy

1964 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Patsy

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-63638 (F-15-007). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0925

64/227

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Patsy

1964 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Patsy

Card 2 of 8. Image of a man in the centre of a group of men scrutinizing him, yellow border on the left of image, 'Jerry Lewis' and title in green and blue in top left corner, a man gets controlled like a puppet in centre left, definition of patsy in bottom left, two lines of credits in white text on a green banner in bottom 1964 right. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-63638 (F-15-007). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

99

2012-01403.0926

64/227

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Patsy

1964 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Patsy

Card 3 of 8. Image of a man dancing alone at a party, yellow border on the left of image, 'Jerry Lewis' and title in green and blue in top left corner, a man gets controlled like a puppet in centre left, definition of patsy in bottom left, two lines of credits in white text 1964 on a green banner in bottom right. Card 4 of 8. Image of a group discussing business, yellow border on the left of image, 'Jerry Lewis' and title in green and blue in top left corner, a man gets controlled like a puppet in centre left, definition of patsy in bottom left, two lines of credits in white text 1964 on a green banner in bottom right. Card 5 of 8. Image of a couple enjoying dinner with a string musicians group in background, yellow border on the left of image, 'Jerry Lewis' and title in green and blue in top left corner, a man gets controlled like a puppet in centre left, definition of patsy in bottom left, two lines of credits in white text on a green 1964 banner in bottom right.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-63638 (F-15-007). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; yellow, creasing in corners, wear along right edge, crushed substrate in top right corner, pin holes in four corners, severe surface see full scratching, smudges in top left, slight creasing condition along bottom edge, sun damage in left edge of 2016-06-24 record verso, blue smudges in bottom left of verso.

2016-04-26

2012-01403.0927

64/227

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Patsy

1964 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Patsy

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-63638 (F-15-007). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, slight loss of colour, pin see full holes in four corners, wear along edges, smudge in condition centre left edge, creasing along right edge, image 2016-06-24 record visible in verso, slight ink transfer in verso.

2016-04-26

2012-01403.0928

64/227

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Patsy

1964 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Patsy

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-63638 (F-15-007). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; yellow, pin holes in four corners, slight colour fading, stains in bottom centre, and centre left, possible water damage, creasing in corners, fold in bottom right corner, browning see full along right edge, stain in centre right edge, creasing condition throughout, loss of substrate in bottom right 2016-06-24 record corner of verso, ink transfer in verso. 2016-04-26

2012-01403.0929

64/227

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Patsy

1964 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Patsy

Card 6 of 8. Image of a pianist with his hand stuck in a piano while another man yelling on the right of him, yellow border on the left of image, 'Jerry Lewis' and title in green and blue in top left corner, a man gets controlled like a puppet in centre left, definition of patsy in bottom left, two lines of credits in white text 1964 on a green banner in bottom right. C Card 7 of 8. Image of a man getting a makeover, yellow border on the left of image, 'Jerry Lewis' and title in green and blue in top left corner, a man gets controlled like a puppet in centre left, definition of patsy in bottom left, two lines of credits in white text 1964 on a green banner in bottom right. Card 8 of 8. Image of a soaked server with patrons laughing at him in background, yellow border on the left of image, 'Jerry Lewis' and title in green and blue in top left corner, a man gets controlled like a puppet in centre left, definition of patsy in bottom left, two lines of credits in white text on a green banner in 1964 bottom right.

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-63638 (F-15-007). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, slight surface scratching, wear along edges, separation of substrate in see full corners, pin holes in four corners and top centre, condition slight creasing throughout, image visible in verso, 2016-06-24 record stains along vertical edges in verso.

2016-04-26

2012-01403.0930

64/227

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Patsy

1964 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Patsy

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-63638 (F-15-007). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, severe creasing along top edge, creasing in corners, pin holes in four corners, see full smudges along edges, slight creasing throughout, condition surface scratching, ink transfer in verso, image 2016-06-24 record visible on verso, residue in centre left edge of verso. 2016-04-26

2012-01403.0931

64/227

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Patsy

1964 Lewis, Jerry

USA

Lobby Card

The Patsy

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-63638 (F-15-007). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, wear along edges, crushed substrate in corners, pin holes in four corners, see full slight loss of colour, yellow adhesive damage in top condition corners of verso, ink transfer in verso, sun damage 2016-06-24 record in verso. 2016-04-26 Poor condition; brown, water damage, faded image, stains in bottom centre, centre left, and bottom right, pin holes in four corners, wear along top edge, loss of colour, creasing in corners, see full adhesive damage in centre of vertical edges in condition verso, ink transfer in verso, stains throughout 2016-06-24 record verso, black smudge along left edge of verso.

2012-01403.0932

56/191

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Patterns

1956 Cook, Fielder

USA

Lobby Card

Patterns of Power

Card 1 of 1. Still of a man standing in a hallway, title in white shattered pattern in bottom left, two lines of credits in green text on a yellow banner in bottom 1956 right. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-26

2012-01403.0933

55/320

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Pete Kelly's Blues

1955 Webb, Jack

USA

Lobby Card

Pete Kelly's Blues

Card 1 of 1. Still of a man playing the buggle next to a man lying on the floor, two lines of credits and title in 1955 orange text under image, black border. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-63814 (F-09-946). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; yellowing, 2 inch tear in top centre left, several tears along right edge, seethrough in centre left edge, pin holes in four corners, folds in bottom corners, separation of substrate in bottom right corner, creasing in corners, slight creasing see full throughout, yellow adhesive damage in centre of condition vertical edges of verso, stamp in bottom left corner 2016-06-24 record of verso, image visible in verso, ink transfer in verso. 2016-04-26 Poor condition; brown, water damage, creasing throughout with concentration in corners, image blurring, loss of colour, wear along edges, folding in bottom corners, surface scratches, pin holes in see full centre, in corners, and centre of edges, stains in condition top left, purple stamps in verso, stains throughout 2016-06-24 record verso. 2016-04-26 Okay condition; severe yellowing and browning, loss of colour, severe staple holes in corners of image and bottom centre, pin holes in corners of card, smudges and stains along edges, wear along see full edges, slight creasing in corners, image visible in condition verso, adhesive damage in four corners of verso, ink 2016-06-24 record transfer in verso. 2016-04-26

2012-01403.0934

59/261

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Rebel Set

Fowler Jr., 1959 Gene

USA

Lobby Card

The Rebel Set

Card 1 of 1. Image of two couples, tagline in top left above an image of a woman dancing in centre left, portrait of a man smoking in bottom left, portrait of a man with a knife in bottom right corner, title in orange text in bottom centre, three lines of credits in 1959 blue text under title. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0935

57/269

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Ride Back

1957 Miner, Allen H. USA

Lobby Card

The Ride Back!

Card 1 of 1. Still of two cowboys looking out of their cabin, red border, seven lines of cast and caption in bottom left corner, title in yellow and black block design with a small image of three people and a horse in bottom centre, six lines of credits in black text in 1957 bottom right corner. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0936

64/170

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Robin and the 7 Hoods

Douglas, 1964 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Robin and the 7 Hoods

Card 1 of 3. Image of a group of men playing pool in centre, one line of cast in red text and title in brown text above image, two lines of credits in blue and red 1964 text at the bottom.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-59252 (F-27-900). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Poor condition; yellow, large rip in bottom left corner, wear along edges, creasing throughout, slight colour loss, pin holes in four corners and centre of horizontal edges, stains in bottom centre, slight creasing throughout, large tears in top right repaired in verso, crushed substrate in corners, tear in centre right of image, ink transfer in verso, yellow see full adhesive damage in top corners of verso, image condition slightly visible in verso, blue smudges in bottom 2016-06-24 record centre of verso, finger marks in top right of verso. 2016-04-26 Okay condition; yellow, staple holes in four corners and centre of edges, loss of colour, pen mustach drawn on right figure, yellow adhesive damage in top corners, smudges along edges, slight creasing throughout, surface scratches, yellow stains in top see full centre, yellow adhesive damage in four corners of condition verso, smudges in ventre of verso, residue in centre 2016-06-24 record of verso, bottom horizontal edge cut. 2016-04-26 Poor condition; yellow, three inch tear in top centre previously repaired with tape causing adhesive damage, severe staple holes in four corners, staple holes in image, stain in bottom left corner, wear along edges, slight creasing throughout with concentration in edges, tear in bottom right repaired with tape in verso, yellow adhesive see full damage in corners and in top centre of verso, condition possible water damage, smudges in verso, stains in 2016-06-24 record top right of verso, image visible in verso. 2016-04-26 Poor condition; browning, water damage, colour loss, surface scratching, creasing in corners, wear along edges, rip in top right corner, staples holes in corners and pin holes throughout image, smudges in top left, severe wear and smudges in top edge, slight creasing throughout, stamp in centre left of see full verso, tape repairs in verso, several words crossed condition out in pencil, stains in top right verso, smudges 2016-06-24 record throughout verso. 2016-04-26

2012-01403.0937

64/170

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Robin and the 7 Hoods

Douglas, 1964 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Robin and the 7 Hoods

Card 2 of 3. Image of a man on the phone in a destroyed bar while another man looks at him, one line of cast in red text and title in brown text above image, two lines of credits in blue and red text at the 1964 bottom.

C

11 x 14 inches

10.75 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-59252 (F-27-900). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0938

64/170

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Robin and the 7 Hoods

Douglas, 1964 Gordon

USA

Lobby Card

Robin and the 7 Hoods

Card 3 of 3. Image of a man trying to reason with a couple, one line of cast in red text and title in brown text above image, two lines of credits in blue and red 1964 text at the bottom.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-59252 (F-27-900). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0939

59/40

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Stranger in My Arms

Kautner, 1959 Helmut

USA

Lobby Card

Stranger in My Arms

Card 1 of 1. Image in bottom left of two couples discussing something in the foyer, yellow border, two lines of cast in black text in top left, title in red text in top centre right, five lines of credits in black text in centre right above a line drawing of a couple in front of a manor, four lines of credits in green text in 1959 bottom right. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0940

60/193

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Strangers When We Meet

1960 Quine, Richard USA

Lobby Card

Strangers When We Meet

Card 1 of 9. Title card. Two lines of cast in blue text at the top, central image of a couple kissing, tagline in blue text on the left of couple, four small portaits in top right above title in red text, small black & white drawing of a woman and man sitting on a chair under 1960 title, three lines of credits in blue text at the bottom. O Card 2 of 9. Still of a couple lying on the floor, title card in bottom right: four lines of cast in red text above title in blue text, four lines of credits in light 1960 blue text under title.

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film Based on the novel by file FRL-40139 Evan Hunter. (F-46-427). TBLB Previously located in film Based on the novel by file FRL-40139 Evan Hunter. (F-46-427). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; yellow, several stains and smudges along right edge, stains in bottom left, wear along edges, dent in bottom centre, loss of substrate in see full top centre, stamp in centre right of verso, ink condition transfer in verso, sun damage in verso, stains in 2016-06-24 record bottom centre of verso.

2016-04-26

2012-01403.0941

60/193

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Strangers When We Meet

1960 Quine, Richard USA

Lobby Card

Strangers When We Meet

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; wear along edges, yellow, stain in see full top left, stain in bottom centre, creasing in top left, condition stamp in centre right of verso, tape supports in left 2016-06-24 record and bottom edges of verso. 2016-04-26

10 0

2012-01403.0942

60/193

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Strangers When We Meet

1960 Quine, Richard USA

Lobby Card

Strangers When We Meet

Card 3 of 9. Still of a woman getting ready while a man waits for her, title card in bottom right: four lines of cast in red text above title in blue text, four lines of 1960 credits in light blue text under title. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film Based on the novel by file FRL-40139 Evan Hunter. (F-46-427). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0943

60/193

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Strangers When We Meet

1960 Quine, Richard USA

Lobby Card

Strangers When We Meet

Card 4 of 9. Still of a man looking at a woman leaning on his car, title card in bottom right: four lines of cast in red text above title in blue text, four lines of credits 1960 in light blue text under title. C Card 5 of 9. Still of a man trying to calm an angry man, title card in bottom right: four lines of cast in red text above title in blue text, four lines of credits in light 1960 blue text under title. C Card 6 of 9. Still of a man standing his ground in front of a man and woman, title card in bottom right: four lines of cast in red text above title in blue text, four 1960 lines of credits in light blue text under title. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film Based on the novel by file FRL-40139 Evan Hunter. (F-46-427). TBLB Previously located in film Based on the novel by file FRL-40139 Evan Hunter. (F-46-427). TBLB Previously located in film Based on the novel by file FRL-40139 Evan Hunter. (F-46-427). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellow, surface scratches, red stains in centre right, wear along top edge, creasing in top corners, separation of substrate in top right, small tears along top edge, red stain in top left of verso, see full red stamp in bottom left of verso, stain in top and condition bottom right, image visible on verso, ink stains in 2016-06-24 record centre of verso. 2016-04-26 Fair condition; yellow, slight colour loss in bottom right, creasing in bottom right corner, creasing in top corners, small adhesive stains in top right, see full yellow adhesive damage in centre of vertical edges condition in verso, image slightly visible in verso, ink transfer 2016-06-24 record in verso. 2016-04-26 Fair condition; yellow, loss of colour, slight creasing see full throughout, smudges in bottom right corner, condition creasing in corners, browning in left edge, image 2016-06-24 record visible in verso, stains in centre in verso. 2016-04-26 Fair condition; slight creasing in centre, slight loss see full of colour, yellow, slight creasing in corners, condition smudges in top right, finger marks in left of verso, 2016-06-24 record stain in top left of verso, image visible in verso. Okay condition; yellow, stain in bottom centre, wear along horizontal edges, slight creasing throughout, slight colour loss, residue (paint?) see full throughout verso, stain in bottom centre of verso, condition stamp in top right of verso, image visible in verso, 2016-06-24 record loss of substrate in top centre of verso. Okay condition; yellow, surface scratches, creasing in corners, smudges in top left, browning along the top, wear along edges, tape supports in top and see full right edges of verso, stain in centre right of verso, condition '60-193' in china pencil in top left of verso, image 2016-06-24 record visible in verso. Fair condition; yellow, blurred image from possible water damage, creasing in corners, surface see full scratches, yellow adhesive damage in four corners condition of verso, image visible in verso, browning along 2016-06-24 record edges.

2012-01403.0944

60/193

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Strangers When We Meet

1960 Quine, Richard USA

Lobby Card

Strangers When We Meet

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0945

60/193

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Strangers When We Meet

1960 Quine, Richard USA

Lobby Card

Strangers When We Meet

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-26

2012-01403.0946

60/193

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Strangers When We Meet

1960 Quine, Richard USA

Lobby Card

Strangers When We Meet

Card 7 of 9. Still of a man and woman arguing, title card in bottom right: four lines of cast in red text above title in blue text, four lines of credits in light 1960 blue text under title.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film Based on the novel by file FRL-40139 Evan Hunter. (F-46-427). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-26

2012-01403.0947

60/193

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Strangers When We Meet

1960 Quine, Richard USA

Lobby Card

Strangers When We Meet

Card 8 of 9. Still of a man in a robe trying to get away from another man, title card in bottom right: four lines of cast in red text above title in blue text, four 1960 lines of credits in light blue text under title.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film Based on the novel by file FRL-40139 Evan Hunter. (F-46-427). TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-40139 (F-46-427). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0948

60/193

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Strangers When We Meet

1960 Quine, Richard USA

Lobby Card

Strangers When We Meet

2012-01403.0949

54/440

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Suddenly

1954 Allen, Lewis

USA

Lobby Card

Suddenly

Card 9 of 9. Still of a man standing his ground in front of a man and woman, title card in bottom right: four lines of cast in red text above title in blue text, four 1960 lines of credits in light blue text under title. C Card 1 of 1. Image of a man accusing another man while a mother and child sit on a couch, blue border, Academy Award and caption in bottom left corner, five lines of credits in blue and red text in bottom centre, title in red text on a yellow banner in bottom 1954 right. C Card 1 of 1. Image of an operating room with an observation deck, yellow title card in bottom left: two lines of cast in red text above title in blue text, black bird in title, sixteen lines of credits in red and blue text 1960 under title. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-26

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-80812 (F-29-021). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

see full Fair condition; slight yellowing, slight colour loss, condition rip in top centre, creasing along top edge, image 2016-06-24 record visible in verso, slight creasing throughout.

2016-04-26

2012-01403.0950

60/4

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Suddenly Last Summer

Mankiewicz, 1960 Joseph L.

USA

Lobby Card

Suddenly Last Summer

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Based on the play by Tennessee Williams.

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; possible water damage, yellow, wear along edges, creasing in corners, stain in bottom see full left corner, slight creasing throughout, stamp and condition pen marks in bottom right corner of verso, image 2016-06-24 record slightly visible in verso. 2016-04-26 Okay condition; yellow, staple holes in four corners, creasing along right edge, yellow adhesive damage in top centre, slight loss of colour, wear along top edge, slight creasing in corners, wear along right see full edge, loss of substrate throughout verso, adhesive condition damage in top and bottom of verso, stains in 2016-06-24 record corners of verso, sun damage in verso. 2016-04-26 Okay condition; yellow, browning along right edge, creasing in corners, colour fading, 'windsor' in pencil in top left, wear along top edge, slight see full creasing throughout, stain in centre left edge, condition dents in centre, sun damage in left of verso, image 2016-06-24 record slightly visible in verso. Okay condition; yellow, loss of colour, pin holes in four corners and in centre of image, loss of colour, see full slight creasing throughout, wear along edge, sun condition damage in top right, creasing in corners, ink 2016-06-24 record transfer in verso. Okay condition; pin holes in top corners and bottom left corner, smudges in top left corner, see full slight loss of colour, slight creasing throughout, condition smudges in bottom right, finger marks in centre of 2016-06-24 record verso, image slightly visible in verso. Fair condition; yellow, creasing in corners, see full separation of substrate in top right corner, pin condition holes in four corners, image visible on verso, stain 2016-06-24 record in bottom left of verso.

2012-01403.0951

68/76

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Sweet November

Miller, Robert 1968 Ellis

USA

Lobby Card

Sweet November

Card 1 of 1. Sepia still of a woman feeding the birds and offering something to the man sitting to her left, green border, title card in bottom right corner: title in purple text, four lines of credits in green text under 1968 title. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0952

63/228

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Thrill of It All

Jewison, 1963 Norman

USA

Lobby Card

The Thrill of It All!

Card 1 of 8. Image of a woman looking upset while a man stands worriedly next to her, blue border, two lines of cast in black text and portraits in top, title in red text in centre right, eleven lines of credits in black 1963 text under title. C Card 2 of 8. Image of a woman in her robe comforting a man, blue border, two lines of cast in black text and portraits in top, title in red text in centre right, eleven 1963 lines of credits in black text under title. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-26

2012-01403.0953

63/228

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Thrill of It All

Jewison, 1963 Norman

USA

Lobby Card

The Thrill of It All!

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-26

2012-01403.0954

63/228

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Thrill of It All

Jewison, 1963 Norman

USA

Lobby Card

The Thrill of It All!

2012-01403.0955

63/228

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Thrill of It All

Jewison, 1963 Norman

USA

Lobby Card

The Thrill of It All!

Card 3 of 8. Image of a cocktail party, blue border, two lines of cast in black text and portraits in top, title in red text in centre right, eleven lines of credits in 1963 black text under title. C Card 4 of 8. Image of four people looking concerned at the man who fell to the floor, blue border, two lines of cast in black text and portraits in top, title in red text in centre right, eleven lines of credits in black text 1963 under title. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-26

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-26

2012-01403.0956

63/228

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Thrill of It All

Jewison, 1963 Norman

USA

Lobby Card

The Thrill of It All!

Card 5 of 8. Image of a man kissing his wife's cheek in the bedroom, blue border, two lines of cast in black text and portraits in top, title in red text in centre 1963 right, eleven lines of credits in black text under title.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; fading, yellow, blue film from possible water damage, creasing in corners, wear see full along top edge, slight creasing throughout, wear condition along bottom edge, smudges in bottom right, finger 2016-06-24 record marks in centre right of verso. 2016-04-26 Okay condition; yellow, fading, stain in top left corner, creasing in corners, fold in top left corner, see full pen mark in centre right edge, slight creasing condition throughout, blue film from possible water damage, 2016-06-24 record ink transfer in verso, stain in top right of verso. 2016-04-26 Okay condition; yellow, fading, blue film from possible water damage, staple holes in bottom see full corner of image, wear along edges, slight creasing condition in corners, colour loss, residue in centre left of 2016-06-24 record verso, sun damage in left of verso.

2012-01403.0957

63/228

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Thrill of It All

Jewison, 1963 Norman

USA

Lobby Card

The Thrill of It All!

Card 6 of 8. Image of a man talking to a woman in bed, blue border, two lines of cast in black text and portraits in top, title in red text in centre right, eleven 1963 lines of credits in black text under title. C Card 7 of 8. Image of a man helping a woman stand up while a man and child look at her, blue border, two lines of cast in black text and portraits in top, title in red text in centre right, eleven lines of credits in black 1963 text under title. C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0958

63/228

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Thrill of It All

Jewison, 1963 Norman

USA

Lobby Card

The Thrill of It All!

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-26

2012-01403.0959

63/228

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

The Thrill of It All

Jewison, 1963 Norman

USA

Lobby Card

The Thrill of It All!

Card 8 of 8. Image of a doctor taking a phone call at a nurses' station, blue border, two lines of cast in black text and portraits in top, title in red text in centre 1963 right, eleven lines of credits in black text under title. C Card 1 of 2. Still of a couple dancing in the middle of a dance floor, title card in bottom right corner: six lines of cast in orange text, title in blue text, and two lines 1967 of credits in black text. C Card 2 of 2. Blue toned still in top right of a man and two women, caption in black text in top left, three lines of cast in blue text in centre left, three dancing women under cast, title in red text in bottom centre above, four lines of credits in black text, a chorus line 1972 in bottom right corner, yellow border.

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Okay condition; yellow, fading, slight colour loss, creasing in corners, wear along edges, red stain in top left corner, residue in top right, slight creasing throughout, tear in centre right edge, pin holes in see full four corners, yellow adhesive damage in centre left condition of verso, image visible in verso, ink transfer in verso, 2016-06-24 record sun damage in left of verso. 2016-04-26

2012-01403.0960

67/99

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Thoroughly Modern Millie

Hill, George 1967 Roy

USA

Lobby Card

Thoroughly Modern Millie

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

see full Good condition; creasing in corners, yellowing, condition smudges in centre right, slight creasing throughout, 2016-06-24 record light staining in verso. 2016-04-27

2012-01403.0961

R72/358

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Thoroughly Modern Millie

Hill, George 1967 Roy

USA

Lobby Card

Thoroughly Modern Millie

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-36524 (F-16-349). TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-36524 (F-16-349). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Laminated. Good condition; slight creasing throughout concentrated at edges, yellowing, see full creasing in corners, wear along edges, loss of colour condition in top centre, smudges in bottom right of verso, 2016-06-24 record marker marks and pen in top centre of verso. 2016-04-27 Fair condition; yellowing, smudges along bottom see full edge, creasing in corners, crease in centre right condition edge, stain in centre left edge, slight creasing 2016-06-24 record throughout, marker in bottom right.

2012-01403.0962

67/158

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Two for the Road

1967 Donen, Stanley USA

Lobby Card

Two for the Road

Card 1 of 3. Still of a car on fire while a couple look on, two lines of cast in red text and title in red text on a yellow banner under image, two lines of credits in 1967 black text in bottom centre. C Card 2 of 3. Still of a couple embracing with a river in the background, two lines of cast in red text and title in red text on a yellow banner under image, two lines 1967 of credits in black text in bottom centre.

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-27

2012-01403.0963

67/158

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Two for the Road

1967 Donen, Stanley USA

Lobby Card

Two for the Road

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Good condition; wear and creasing along edges, see full yellowing, stain in bottom left, slight creasing along condition vertical edges, marker in bottom right, ink transfer 2016-06-24 record in verso. 2016-04-27

10 1

2012-01403.0964

67/158

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

Two for the Road

1967 Donen, Stanley USA

Lobby Card

Two for the Road

Card 3 of 3. Still of a couple laughing together in bed, two lines of cast in red text and title in red text on a yellow banner under image, two lines of credits in 1967 black text in bottom centre.

C

11 x 14 inches

11 in

14 in

Previously located in film file FRL-36524 (F-16-349). TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-52795 (F-05-873). TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-52795 (F-05-873). TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-52795 (F-05-873). TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-52795 (F-05-873). TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-52795 (F-05-873). TBLB Previously located in film file FRL-52795 (F-05-873). TBLB

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

Fair condition; yellowing, 'Adult Entertainment' sticker in bottom of image, bleedthrough of sticker in verso, creasing in corners, dents and scratches in cetntre right, smudges and stains in sticker, wear see full along edges, image slightly visible in verso, sun condition damage in verso, separation of substrate in corners 2016-06-24 record of verso. 2016-04-27

2012-01403.0965

67/160

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

A Guide for the Married Man

1967 Kelly, Gene

USA

Lobby Card

A Guide for the Married Man

Card 1 of 6. Still of a woman serving drinks to a man in her bedroom, eight lines of credits in black text at the 1967 bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

see full Good condition; creasing in top right corner, condition yellowing, slight wear along edges, surface 2016-06-24 record scratches, smudges in verso.

2016-04-27

2012-01403.0966

67/160

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

A Guide for the Married Man

1967 Kelly, Gene

USA

Lobby Card

A Guide for the Married Man

Card 2 of 6. Still of individuals enjoying a fair, eight 1967 lines of credits in black text at the bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

see full Fair condition; yellow, staple holes in four corners, condition surface scratches, slight creasing in centre, stains in 2016-06-24 record bottom right, ink transfer in verso. 2016-04-27 Fair condition; staple holes in four corners, yellow, see full wear along bottom edges, slight creasing in four condition corners, blue scratches throughout, slight loss of 2016-06-24 record colour, ink transfer in verso. Fair condition; yellow, staple holes in four corners, see full creasing in corners, blue stains in centre left edge, condition smudges in bottom corners, wear along bottom 2016-06-24 record edge, slight ink transfer in verso.

2012-01403.0967

67/160

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

A Guide for the Married Man

1967 Kelly, Gene

USA

Lobby Card

A Guide for the Married Man

Card 3 of 6. Still of a woman trying to talk to her husband who is reading in bed, eight lines of credits in 1967 black text at the bottom. C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-27

2012-01403.0968

67/160

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

A Guide for the Married Man

1967 Kelly, Gene

USA

Lobby Card

A Guide for the Married Man

Card 4 of 6. Still of a man looking at a woman sitting in bed in her lingerie, eight lines of credits in black text 1967 at the bottom. C Card 5 of 6. Still of two men drinking beer on patio lounge chairs while a bikini clad woman stands in the background, eight lines of credits in black text at the 1967 bottom.

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2016-04-27

2012-01403.0969

67/160

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

A Guide for the Married Man

1967 Kelly, Gene

USA

Lobby Card

A Guide for the Married Man

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

2012-01403.0970

67/160

National Screen Service Number

poster

A

N

Guy McKone Collection

A Guide for the Married Man

1967 Kelly, Gene

USA

Lobby Card

A Guide for the Married Man

Card 6 of 6. Still of a woman standing in her nightgown, eight lines of credits in black text at the 1967 bottom.

C

8 x 10 inches

8 in

10 in

Stack 36

Bay C

Shelf 4

see full Good condition; yellow, wear along bottom edge, condition staple holes in centre of vertical edges, slight 2016-06-24 record creasing throughout, ink transfer in verso. Fair condition; yellow, wear along bottom edge, severe staple holes in centre of vertical edges, see full surface scratches and loss of colour in bottom condition right, abraisons in verso, ink transfer in verso, stain 2016-06-24 record in centre left of verso.

2016-04-27

2016-04-27

10 2

