MOVABLE POSSESSIONS
Alternative Housing Through Adaptable Design Master of Architecture, 2016 Lisa Marshall

M O V A B L E P O S S E S S I O N S:
Alternative Housing Through Adaptable Design   by Lisa Marshall
Master of Architecture, Ryerson University, 2016

A Design Thesis Project Presented to Ryerson University in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Degree of Master of Architecture Program. Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2016 © Lisa Marshall, 2016

A U T H O R `S D E C L A R A T I O N
I Hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. This is a true copy of the thesis, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my thesis may be made electronically available to the public.

M O V A B L E P O S S E S S I O N S:
Alternative Housing Through Adaptable Design MArch 2016 | Master of Architecture, Ryerson University Lisa Marshall

ABSTRACT
Poor communities around the world have developed architecture without architects. Subsidized low-income housing has been built as if to provide only a shortterm solution. Poverty and lack of affordable housing is not a short-term problem but an ongoing issue that demands creative adaptable solutions for a changing world. Adaptable architecture is essential for the redesign of affordable housing that is environmentally, economically, and socially sustainable. In order to mend the broken bond between lower-incomes and the architectural quality of space, this design research strives to both defend and produce affordable architectural alternatives to housing through the use of adaptable design principles and strategies found within Barbados' Vernacular Architecture, the Chattel House.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This thesis would not have been possible without the continuous support and guidance from my Supervisor, Professor Arthur Wrigglesworth. His belief in both my abilities as a designer and the chosen research topic, truly inspired me every step of the way. `If you are not enjoying what you are doing, you are doing something wrong', a statement he made one day, a motto that I now live by. I would also like to thank the other memebers of my thesis committee, June Komisar, Paul Floerke and John Cirka. Their guidance, critique and passion for the topic made this work even more enjoyable. Finally, I would like to thank my close friends and family. Their never-ending encouragement and support has allowed and encouraged me to pursue my passion.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
List of Figures i List of Appendices 0.0 Introduction 0.1 Affordable Housing 0.2 To Be Adaptable 0.3 Thesis Statement 1.0 The Vernacular 1.1 Barbadian Influences in Architecture 1.2 Slave Hut to the Chattel House 1.3 Conclusion 2.0 Our Chattels 2.1 Emancipation: The Chattel House 2.2 Construction of the Chattel House 2.3 Aftermath of Slavery 2.4 Chattel House Principles 2.5 The Chattel House Today 2.6 Conclusion 3.0 Affordable Housing 3.1 Barbados Government Housing 3.2 Government Housing Construction 3.3 Conclusion 4.0 You Live You Learn 4.1 Contemporary Affordable Housing designs from Around the World 4.1.1 Case Study 1: Ekyaha xi 4.1.2 Case Study 2: Bamboo Home 4.1.3 Case Study 3: Primitive Hut 4.1.4 Case Study 4: Glass House 4.1.5 Case Study 5: Tiny House 4.1.6 Case Study 6: Verde Housing 4.2 Conclusion 5.0 Strategies and Limitations 5.1 Local Resources: Materiality 5.2 Deployment: Module and Site 5.3 Growth: DIY Strategy 5.4 Transformability 5.5 Conclusions 6.0 Design Proposal 6.1 [Re]envisioning the chattel house 6.1.1 The module 6.1.2 Constructing the Module 6.1.3 The Growing Module 6.1.4 Module Transformation 7.0 Conclusion 8.0 Appendix 8.1 Appendix A 8.2 Appendix B 8.3 Appendix C 8.4 Appendix D References

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 01: Houses in perspective  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 02: The Traditional Chattel House Source: Watson, M., & Potter, R. (2001).   Low-cost housing in Barbados: Evolution or   social revolution? Barbados: University of   the West Indies Press. Figure 03: Chattel House Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 04: Slave Hut | Chattel Hosue Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 05: The Vernacular Source: https://www.flickr.com/photos/ba   jansun/5120400375 Figure 06: Prior Park Plantation House Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 07: Lancaster Plantation Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 08: Chattel House: Georgian Influence  Source: Watson, M., & Potter, R. (2001).   Low-cost housing in Barbados: Evolution or   social revolution? Barbados: University of   the West Indies Press. Figure 09: Barbados Suburbs  Source: https://www.flickr.com/photos/ba   jansun/5120400375 Figure 10: Suburban Home: Sketch Source: Fraser, H., & Hughes, R. (1986).   Historic Houses of Barbados (2nd Ed.)   Bridgetown: Barbados National Trust. Figure 11: Old Slave Hut Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 12: Slave Hut Axonometric Assembly Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 13: Chattel House | Chattel House Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 14: Movable Possessions Source: https://www.flickr.com/photos/ba   jansun/5120400375 Figure 15: Moving Chattel House on a Mule Cart Source: http://islandman48.blogspot.com/ Figure 16: Dismantling the Chattel House Source: http://islandman48.blogspot.com/ Figure 17: Constructing the Chattel Village Source: https://www.flickr.com/photos/ba   jansun/5120400375 Figure 18: Chattel House Axonometric Assembly  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 19: Construction of the Chattel House  Source: http://historyforumcavehillcam blogspot.com/2012/11/the-evolution-of-  social-policy-self.html Figure 20: Old Chattel House  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 21: Systematic Modular Growth  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 22: Abandoned Chattel House  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 23: Interior Decay  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 24: Exposed Connections  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 25: What's your Story?  Source: Lisa Marshall

Figure 26: Weathered Roof  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 27: Chattel House | Government House  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 28: Starter Home Unit Diagram  Source: Watson, M., & Potter, R. (2001).   Low-cost housing in Barbados: Evolution or   social revolution? Barbados: University of   the West Indies Press. Figure 29: Lancaster Government Housing  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 30: Government Housing Additions  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 31: Government Housing Axonometric  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 32: NHC Starter Home Construction  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 33: NHC "Cattle Sheds"  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 34: Chattel House | NHC | Worldy Examples  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 35: Affordable Housing: Worldy Examples  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 36: Ekhaya House  Source: https://www.youtube.com/  watch?v=75LfMlG-NQk Figure 37: Ekhaya House: Growth and Construction  Source: https://www.youtube.com/   watch?v=75LfMlG-NQk Figure 38: Ekhaya House: Community Involvement  Source: https://www.you   tube.com/watch?v=75LfMlG-NQk

Figure 39: Vietnamese Affordable Housing  Source: http://www.designboom.com/archi  tecture/low-cost-house-for-middle-vietnam/ Figure 40: Axonometric  Source: http://www.designboom.  com/arch tecture/low-cost-   house-for-middle-vietnam/ Figure 41: Vietnamese Affordable Housing  Source: http://www.de   signboom. com/arch tecture/low-cost-  house-for-middle-vietnam/ Figure 42: Kengo Kuma's Contemporary Hut Source: http://www.dezeen.  com/2013/01/11/ shimogamo-jinja-ho   joan-by-kengo-kuma-and-associates/ Figure 43: Assembly  Source: http://www.dezeen.  com/2013/01/11/ shimogamo-jinja-  hojoan-by-kengo-kuma-and-associates/ Figure 44: Interior View Source: http://www.de   zeen. com/2013/01/11/ shimoga  mo-jinjahojoan-by-kengo-kuma-and-associ  ates/ Figure 45: Glass Cabin  Source: http://tinyhouseblog.com/tiny-  house-concept/nick-and-lilahs-glass-cabin/ Figure 46: Construction by Owner  Source: http://tinyhouseblog.com/  tinyhouse-concept/nick-and-lilahs-glass-  cabin/

Figure 47: Interior View  Source: http://tinyhouseblog.com/  tiny-house-concept/nick-and- li  lahs-glass-cabin/ Figure 48: Tiny House  Source: http://thetinylife.com/what-is-the-  tiny-house-movement/ Figure 49: Tiny House Assembly  Source: http://thetinylife.com/what-is-the-  tiny-house-movement/ Figure 50: Interior View  Source: http://thetinylife.com/what-is-the- tiny-house-movement/ Figure 51: Villa Verde Housing  Source: http://www.archdaily.com/447381/  villa-verde-housing-elemental Figure 52: Assembly  Source: http://www.archdaily.com/447381/  villa-verde-housing-elemental Figure 53: Perspective  Source: http://www.archdaily.com/447381/ villa-verde-housing-elemental Figure 54: Chattel Hosue | NHC | Strategies  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 55: Strategies and Limitations  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 56: World Map - Barbados  Source: https://networklimited.files.word  press.com/2012/07/barbados_map.gif Figure 57: Barbados Parishes  Source: http://www.rootsweb.ancestry.  com/~brbwgw/ParishMap.gif Figure 58: East Coast  Source: http://static.panoramio.com/pho  tos/original/25771297.jpg

Figure 59: North Coast - Saint Lucy  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 60: South East - Saint Phillip  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 61: Saint George  Source: http://static2.mydestination.com/  library/images/538154_638_300.jpg Figure 62: The Capital - Bridgetown  Source: http://www.cruisetimetables.com/  pictures/bridgetownbarbados.jpg Figure 63: West Coast - Saint James  Source: http://assets.westcoastvillas.  com/1410/1410_lrg_Old_Trees_301_010.  jpg Figure 64: The Island of Barbados  Source: http://www.weather-forecast.com/  weatherobjects/map/H/Holetown.jpg Figure 65: Wood, Metal and Plastic Imports  Source: http://atlas.media.mit.edu/en/pro  file/country/brb/ Figure 66: Proposed Material Pallet  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 67: Adaptable Methods of Deployment  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 68: Adaptable Spatial Arrangements  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 69: Adaptable Through Transformability  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 70: Jalousie Window  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 71: Chattel House | NHC | Design Proposal  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 72: Design Strategies  Source: Lisa Marshall

Figure 73: New Material Pallet  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 74: Barbados' Cement Plant  Source: https://16f6e5e6d2.site.internap  cdn.net/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/time  toclosearawak.jpg Figure 75: Concrete  Source: http://texturezine.com/wp-content/ uploads/2012/11/IMG_9068.jpg Figure 76: Plastic  Source: http://www.imageafter.com/dbase/  images/scripts/b5scripts035.jpg Figure 77: Sugar Cane Rubbish - Bagasse  Source: http://sr.photos3.fotosearch.com/  bthumb/CSP/CSP990/k11420179.jpg Figure 78: Old Sugar Cane Production  Source: http://gd5kk1t2twi2foy6a4c7srb  nqg.wpengine.netdna-cdn.com/wp-content/  uploads/2014/01/image.jpg Figure 79: Bamboo  Source: http://bgfons.com/upload/bam  boo_texture1597.jpg Figure 80: Creating the Module  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 81: Prototypes Brought to Site  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 82: The Module and Relocation System  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 83: Structural System One: Precast Frames  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 84: Structural System Two: Precast Posts Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 85: Relocating Prototypes  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 86: Prototype One Axonometric Assembly  Source: Lisa Marshall

Figure 87: Prototype One - On Site  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 88: Prototype Two Axonometric Assembly  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 89: Prototype Two - On Site  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 90: Prototype Three Axonometric Assembly  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 91: Prototype Three - On Site  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 92: All Prototypes on Site  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 93: Prototypes - Left Isonometric View  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 94: Modular Growth  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 95: Prototype One Growth - Front Elevation  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 96: Prototype One Growth - Side Elevation  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 97: Prototype Two Growth  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 98: Prototype Three Growth  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 99: Conceptual Render of Growth on Site  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 100: Section A-A  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 101: Section B-B  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 102: Sun and Wind Path Diagrams  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 103: Section A-A - Closed  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 104: Section A-A - Opened  Source: Lisa Marshall

Figure 105: Section B-B - Closed  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 106: Section B-B - Opened  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 107: The Importance of the Patio - Open  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 108: The Patio - Partly Open  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 109: Inside Outside  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 110: Engaging with the Surroundings  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 111: The Quality of Light - Open  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 112: The Quality of Diffused Light - Closed  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 113: View From Above - Closed  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 114: View From Above - Opened  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 115: Allowing Privacy and Ventilation  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 116: Engaging with the Public  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 117: Site Plan of Traditional Chattel House  Source: http://www.gillespieandsteel.com/ Figure 118: Original Chattel House: Elevations  Source: http://www.gillespieandsteel.com/ Figure 119: Original Chattel House: Plan  Source: http://www.gillespieandsteel.com/ Figure 120: Original Chattel House in Poor Condition  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 121: Chattel House Variation: Elevations  Source: http://www.gillespieandsteel.com/ Figure 122: Chattel House Variation: Plans  Source: http://www.gillespieandsteel.com/

Figure 123: Chattel House Variation - Covered Patio  Source: http://www.gillespieandsteel.com/ Figure 124: Decorated Chattel House - Elevations  Source: http://www.gillespieandsteel.com/ Figure 125: Decorated Chattel House - Plans  Source: http://www.gillespieandsteel.com/ Figure 126: Decorated Chattel House - Pediment  Source: http://www.nhc.gov.bb/ Figure 127: NHC Starter Home Site Plan  Source: http://www.nhc.gov.bb/ Figure 128: NHC Contessa - Plan  Source: http://www.nhc.gov.bb/ Figure 131: NHC Contessa - 3D Render  Source: http://www.nhc.gov.bb/ Figure 132: NHC Orchid - Plan  Source: http://www.nhc.gov.bb/ Figure 133: NHC Orchid - 3D Render  Source: http://www.nhc.gov.bb/ Figure 134: NHC Pearl - Plan  Source: http://www.nhc.gov.bb/ Figure 135: NHC Pearl - 3D Render  Source: http://www.nhc.gov.bb/ Figure 136: Socializing in the Patio - Open  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 137: Preparing Food in the Patio - Closed  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 138: The Backyard  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 139: Preparing Laundry  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 140: Model Massing  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 141: Model Massing  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 142: Prototype One Model - Stage 1  Source: Lisa Marshall

Figure 143: Transformable Building Skin  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 144: Prototype Two Model - Stage 1  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 145: Transformable Building Skin  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 146: Prototype Three Model - Stage 1  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 147: Transformable Building Skin  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 148: All Prototypes Collaged  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 149: Prototype One - Stage 2  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 150: Modular Growth  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 151: Prototype Two - Stage 2  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 152: Modular Growth  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 153: Prototype Three - Stage 2  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 154: Modular Growth  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 155: Prototype One - Stage 3  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 156: Prototype Two - Stage 3  Source: Lisa Marshall Figure 157: Prototype Three - Stage 3  Source: Lisa Marshall

INTRODUCTION
[Re]envisioning the Way We Choose to Exist

In the years following the first World War, the design of the modern house was treated very much as a laboratory, a testing model for exploring new ideas about living patterns and the implementation of innovative technology. (Kronenburg, 2007) In an era of new political, social and economic theories and movements, the design of the home served as a 1:1 symbolic representation of a vast range of concepts, ideas, and expirements ranging from the practical to the incomprehensible. The conceptual relationships between housing and seeking to achieve individual happiness now possess a somewhat old-fashioned stamp, and it is at this crossroad that the question of supply and demand is intertwined with the cultural challenge of artistic creation. (Peripheriques, 1997) Architects, as well as the general public, have described these anonymous single-family entities as eyesores of negative social implications. (Peripheriques, 1997) Many architects recognize the mediocrity of their works. They blame their lack of design innovation on inappropriately limited resources and the resulting need to adopt the most economical solutions, no matter how inappropriate. The issue of resources should not be blamed for the tasteless designs of the home, but rather the ways in which the selected resources have been used, as well as the refusal to question existing solutions. (Peripheriques, 1997) Physical design and architecture are offensive words to those battling against poverty. (Kronenburg, 1998) While the architectural press praises the fine design

of a number of housing projects as creating a better urban environment (usually for the upper-middle class), most social planners have seen "renewal" create only worse conditions for lower-income people. (Kronenburg, 1998) There is a disconnect between the architectural quality of space and a low budget, two elements that should be inextricably linked. (Peripheriques, 1997) The occupant, often referred to as the consumer, is deprived of choice. As seen in many social housing projects, the "house" has turned into a commodity of never-ending maintenance investments with a lack of uniqueness and variation in supply. As architects, conceptual, even unrealistic ideas of housing must be experimented with, with the aim to bring it back to a more realistic study for introducing new and innovative alternatives to the common place house of little identity. (Peripheriques, 1997) Poverty, unemployment and homelessness have developed new attitudes to permanent residency. More and more people are no longer living in stable environments. Instead, these powerless people are moving from home to home, place to place, in search for a better life. There is a need for a new type of low cost singlefamily house, whose limited construction budget challenges the designer to produce quality through innovative use of small spaces, strategic methods of deployment, growth over time, and the efficient

1

Figure 01: Houses in Perspective A comparitive study of Housing Typologies in Barbados

2

use of existing available resources. This thesis (re) introduces concepts of simplified living patterns, with smaller floor areas and by using locally sourced and novel construction materials. Throughout this project, many challenges and contradictions with the concept of the innovative and still affordable small house come into play. Have we designed compact solutions for low-cost living or luxurious second homes? (Ruth Slavid, 2007) It is argued that once a building becomes very small, the level of interior variation decreases, often ending up with only a single way of living comfortably inside ­ All the furniture and fittings are preplanned and the level of personal possessions is limited to the bare minimum. (Ruth Slavid, 2007) If this is a personal choice, it can be viewed in a rather appealing light, but for others, who do not have choices due their economic limitations, a structured and minimal living environment may have a more negative result. However, the most intriguing part of this research and design is that it has opened the doors to new visions of tomorrow's affordable housing for both the architect, who must continue to focus their creative attention on this critical aspect of the built environment, as well as the general public who, through the presented design strategies and implementation schemes, will see that a low cost, small size (affordable) house does not necessarily translate into an impoverished space without the valuable influence of architectural expression. (Peripheriques, 1997) "The physical design of our homes, neighborhoods, and communities shapes every aspect of our lives, yet too often Architects are desperately needed in places where they can least be afforded." (Abrams, 2012)

In relation to the number of people per hectare, Barbados is the 4th most densely populated country in the Americas and the 18th globally with a population in 2013 of 284,644 inhabitants and a growth rate set at 0.35%. (Barbados Today, 2014) Poverty has affected 13.9% (39,565 people) of the population and tends to be concentrated around the Urban areas such as Bridgetown, the island's capital city. (Barbados Today, 2014) The poverty line in Barbados was BDS $5,503.00 per capita per year and approximately 7000 households existed on income below this threshold. (Barbados Today, 2014) By using Barbados, as the primary focus for this design proposal, this research will explore the concept of adaptable living by re-examining the type of built environment that can help those low-income persons live a more dignified lifestyle. This thesis will primarily examine the genesis of adaptable design in traditional and historic building patterns such as the morphology of Barbados' vernacular chattel house, a housing typology that uses a `kit of parts' approach to adaptability. (See Chapters One and Two) that came about through the emancipation of slavery, followed by more recent architectural influences on the island such as the borrowed patterns of Government Housing.(See Chapter Three) This thesis also examines several international examples of novel approaches to affordability in places such as Vietnam. While environmental and economic sustainability have been the main driving factors in the movement towards a more resilient built environment in Barbados, social sustainability is a factor that has received significantly less attention over the years. (Adaptability, 2012) The

3

support for the historically proven self-help housing solution, explained in greater detail in Chapter One, has fallen drastically, which has resulted in a continuous decline in adequate, affordable homes. The intention for the design component of this design is to propose, through design schemes of strategies and limitations, the possible benefits of an alternative housing solution through the creation of a new adaptable housing modular system, heavily influenced by the chattel house's kit of parts approach for the low-income housing sector of the island; thus illustrating that architects can design innovative houses at a low cost. Ideally, this thesis will return the sense of purpose, pride and place that has arguably been ignored within these affordable design sectors of hidden gestures and under-designed solutions.

Figure 02: The Traditional Chattel House - Front Elevation, Floor Plan, Back Elevation and Side Elevation.

4

Figure 03: The Chattel House - a Vernacular Solution for Low-income housing in Barbados

6

THESIS STATEMENT
Adaptable Architecture consists of buildings designed to have the capacity to respond to economic, environmental, and/or social changes through physical transformation and is viewed by many as being less permanent and therefore less valuable than `fixed' building typologies. This thesis will explore the opportunities for deploying Adaptable Architecture within the low-income sector of the built environment by challenging its perceived limitations and conventional responses in contemporary Barbadian society.

7

CHAPTER ONE
The Vernacular

10

THE VERNACULAR
Historic Houses of Barbados

"The story of house is, indeed, the story of the people who build them (Acworth, 1949) It is also the story of people who, blind to the beauty of the familiar, tear them down, or abandon them to the forces of time and the elements. The values of the "throw-away" age threaten, literally, the fabric of our society ­ in particular our immediate built environment. We lose in two ways when a basically sound old house is left to rot or replaced in the current style ­ economically, aesthetically and culturally; and ironically, now that we are almost dependent on tourism for survival, we are destroying daily one of our most appealing attractions and valuable assets ­ a unique vernacular architecture." -Fraser, 2008 Among the many historic buildings of Barbados, (colonized by Europeans in the early 17th Century) are quaint churches and stone cathedrals, hundreds of estate buildings, and civic buildings of power such as the Parliament building towers, numerous plantation houses between 100 and 350 years old, and with that, thousands of Chattel Houses and Suburban Homes, all characterizing the unique features of Barbados' vernacular architecture. (Fraser, 2008) Barbados' original Chattel House is an icon from the mid-19th through to the early 20th century. These clapboard clad wood framed homes, also known as movable possessions, are transportable, versatile and designed for coolness, privacy and pride by the owner, all within financial means.

Dr. Henry Fraser, a Barbadian Architectural Historian, stresses the cultural importance of the Chattel House in Barbados' architectural heritage and advocates the many reasons for preserving it. Today, due to the "house for slaves" stigma attached to these houses, as well as the high cost for importing and ongoing maintenance required for the structure's wood cladding and framework, these Chattel Houses are rapidly disappearing. Many have been demolished and replaced by pragmatic modern concrete structures, often of less aesthetic appeal and others left abandoned to decay. His many books, with a combination of photography and sketches, aim to represent Barbados' rich heritage in the hope of engaging the aesthetic and nostalgic senses of the people for what exists and to encourage reasons for and the need to save it. When scoping the island for its historical gems of traditional Barbadian architecture, from the great plantation houses to the humble chattels that have been left to decay, and the unnerving number that have been demolished since Barbados' Independence in 1966, the island loses its capabilities of self advancement. (Fraser, 2008) Barbadian Influences: Material & Climate Barbados has maintained a significant portion of its architectural legacy and is recognized for making the greatest effort amongst the Caribbean islands to preserve and adapt its existing buildings for reuse

11

Figure 05: The Vernacular Chattel House.

12

12

purposes, through the Natural Trust Foundation, established in 1961. (Fraser, 2008) These Barbadian entities of Late Georgian and Victorian styles, although highly influenced by European settlement from 1627, possesses their own Barbadian, or as locals call it, Bajan architectural style. Driving through the countryside or the narrow roads of the Island's capital Bridgetown, one can see the Georgian style populating the landscape with its principles of balance, symmetry and harmonic design of the 18th and 19th Century. This style has also been referred to as `Caribbean Georgian'. (Fraser, 2008) Other major influences in the growth of the island's vernacular architecture was of course, through the use of local materials in addition to materials imported from other colonies, its climate of tropical warmth 365 days of the year and its financial limitations. The island Barbados of 166 square miles, lies mainly on coral limestone, making this a material that was historically relatively inexpensive to access through quarrying (initially slave, later cheap labour), making the distinctive coral limestone the most used building material for prominent buildings (public and private), especially once the forests were cleared for sugar cane plantations. (Fraser, 2008) Thus, the use of stone dominated the island's landscape compared to other neighboring islands whose lands were more of volcanic rock and/or were heavily forested. The only places where wood was used extensively in Barbados was for the wooden Chattel Houses. In the 19th Century, the period after the abolition of slavery, cheap pine from North America became an increasingly important building material but was rarely

used for larger homes, as was the case in Jamaica. The use of wood was largely limited to the Chattel House, creating a social stigma of wooden houses being houses for the lower class only. (Fraser, 2008) The hot climate of the island and its heavy rains between June and October resulted in innovative designs to counteract with its environment. The tropical climate resulted in the creation and adoption of several design features such as wide, covered verandahs for sheltered social activites protected from the blistering sun as well as the rain while giving access to cooling breezes; jalousied and Demerara windows (borrowed from Guyana) performed a similar function for interior spaces. (Fraser, 2008) High ventilated gable roofs and tray ceilings also came into use for the cooling down of the otherwise sweltering interior spaces. The risk of hurricanes hitting the island inspired more squat buildings, with a shortened depth than its horizontal face and height. These hurricanes inspired the creation of a unique `Barbadian Parapet' made of coral stone to protect the gabled or hipped roofs overhangs from the high winds. (Fraser, 2008) These design principles, the need for strength to resist high winds and the easily accessible coral limestone coral, highly influenced the design of many of the treasured old plantation houses of Barbados. The importance lay in its construction and rigidity, not in its decoration or grace. (Fraser, 2008)

Figure 06: Prior Park Plantation House.

13

14

Caribbean Georgian
The Georgian architectural style reigns in the prominent buildings of the Caribbean islands, especially in Barbados, which was Governed by Great Britain and had significant growth in the18th and 19th centuries. The Georgian lines of these Buildings, such as the Lancaster Plantation Great House, demonstrate the scale and proportion of this architectural style. (Fraser, 2008) This style of building had a strong influence on domestic architecture with their striking arcades, pediments and grand Palladian staircases. This style also influenced the architecture of the island, seen in the Chattel Houses with their simplified wooden versions of the pediment portico, locally carved.

"..it inspires designs even today, with an increasing fondness for the vernacular, including this classic plantation style, with all the embellishments of pediment porches and bell pelmets (window hoods)." - Fraser, 2008

Figure 07: Lancaster Plantation House. Figure 08: Decorated Chattel House - Georgian Influence

15

16

Suburban Housing
In the 19th Century, the capital of the island, Bridgetown, expanded massively in every direction into the old suburbs. (Fraser, 2008) The architecture that populated these areas were suburban `Bajan' homes, compact in size and vertical in length with a shop on the ground floor and accommodation above. In most homes of this type, the upstairs portion had attached to it a somewhat covered, if not completely sheltered, balcony overlooking the street for viewing below and conversing with neighbours. This suburban style, again highly Palladian with its central, sometimes pedimented entrance portico and extravagant double staircase guiding visitors to the first floor, introduced a new form of Caribbean architecture. (Fraser, 2008)

Figure 09: Barbados 20th Century Suburbs Figure 10: Typical Barbadian Suburban Home - Sketch by Henry Fraser

17

Slave Hut to Chattel House
The third house form of the island, the conceptual driver and personal cultural inspiration of this thesis topic, is that of the Chattel House, the Barbadian's movable possession. Why the need for the movable Chattel House? As mentioned by Walker and Trew (2011), these Chattel Houses came about through the emancipation from slavery in 1834. Although the slaves were freed, plantation owners still needed people to work their lands and the freed slaves themselves still required work to live for themselves. The freed slaves effectively became indentured servants. At the time of slavery they lived in slave huts, but now, with extremely modest means, sought a different mode of accommodation that allowed them to free themselves from the harsh memories of their chains; The Chattel House was owned by its occupant, which related to a new form of independence, and possessed the characteristic of being temporary (the house could be moved because the land was rented), relating to a new sense of freedom, hence the introduction of a new form of architecture, the vernacular Chattel House. In order to better understand the Chattel House origins and evolution from the slave hut, one must first delve into the past of the housing of slaves during the slave period. With that said, it is important to note that, "as with so many areas of the social, cultural and material life of the enslaved people in Barbados, information in documentary sources is often very superficial, highly limited, fragmented and ethnocentric." (Handler & Bergman, 2009) In Handler & Bergman's paper (2009), they describe the houses and household furnishings of the Barbadian slaves who worked on the sugar plantations, as well as the transformation of the architectural forms seen throughout the history of slavery on the island. The Barbadian slave huts, often constructed by the slaves themselves, were simple structures of wattle and daub with thatched roofs usually made from cane field `rubbish' known as bagasse. These slave huts were usually built in clusters of roughly 25-30 `homes', creating slave villages, also known as `Negro Yards'. (Fraser, 2011) The villages were on an average of about five acres of land and were in close proximity to that of the planter's house and plantation yard, which contained the sugar mill and factory, the stables and various outbuildings. (Handler & Bergman, 2009) These villages varied in size from roughly 50 inhabitants (smaller plantations) to 100 to 200 people (medium and large plantations). In the 18th Century and until roughly 1820, these shelters were treated as "the slave's own problem..[and he] was left to build, repair, and furnish his hut with such materials as he could find himself." (Handler & Bergman, 2009) Most of these slaves were expected to find and/or construct housing for themselves with their own set of building materials ­ occasionally planters would help out with sourcing materials. Very little detail on the actual architectural quality of the spaces were found within the documented research. What is made clear however, is the most common formation of these slave huts, being rectangular, one level, wattle and daub structure with rammed earth floors and a pitched roof of varied thatch material and overhangs, all constructed by local materials of the area. These huts were highly influenced by the West African style

18

Figure 11: Old Slave Hut

19

1. Field Waste/Bagassee Roof 2. Found Timber Rafters 3.Wattle and Daub Walls 4. Dirt Floor Figure 12: Slave Hut Axonometric Assembly.

20

of architecture. (Handler & Bergman, 2009) These slave huts of wattle and daub were originally formed with a framework of four wooden posts, which were secured into the ground. Interlaced amongst this framework were twigs or slim tree branches from the surrounding area, which acted as the formwork for the walls of the hut. (Handler & Bergman, 2009) This formwork was then plastered over with mud or clay daub on the interior and exterior faces of the wall. In later years, Handler and Bergman (2009) believe, these same walls may have received an extra layer of lime plaster. Large branches and/or boards were then set in place on top as roof rafters, which were then covered with thatch material, allowing shelter from the rain and the sun's heat. The research gathered does not indicate whether the huts were decorated and it appears unlikely that exterior conveniences such as porches or verandahs were used to add comfort to these shelters. It was noted that the door was typically so low that the building could only be entered by bending down, which again related back to the precedent African architectural forms. (Handler & Bergman, 2009) "Planters were sometimes advised to keep a portion of their land in `wood for Negro-Houses', and some plantations advertised the sale of `rafters and other sticks for building Negro-Houses." - Handler & Bergman, 2009 The slave huts' interior were divided by rough wooden partitions, resulting in roughly one to three separate interior spaces for living. These partitioned spaces of little furnishings were documented as being six foot square. (Handler & Bergman, 2009) One room

was used by the adult[s] for sleeping, while the other was used for more general purposes such as cooking and/or sleeping quarters for the children. This room division, and with wooden partitions, found its way into the typical Chattel House layout and still informs Barbadian house design today. s were Amelioration The amelioration period of the 18th century, a time when the movement for the abolition of slavery was intensifying, brought about a change in the level of care given to the living conditions of slaves by the planters. (Fraser, 2011) The planters were now more interested in the survival of their previously cheaply replicable slaves; Their physical health and procreation became imporant for maintaining the labour force. With that came an increased interest in their well-being and living conditions. Handler and Bergman (2009) made reference to a report from this period, which noted that slave huts were now being built of both stone, (a local material easily accessible with little expense but requiring increased labour) and wood, while others were built of strong reed or cane of the guinea corn. (Fraser, 2011) The stone houses were more durable and thus more likely to survive the regular violence of the hurricanes. With the abolition of slavery in 1834, plantation owners were required to provide tenantry land at a modest rent to the freed slaves employed on the plantation to permit the construction of their individual homes. (Walker & Trew 2011) As a result, maintaining the slave hut was no longer required or desired, hence the need for a new form of Architecture, the Chattel House.

21

Conclusion
The story of houses is indeed the story of the people who build them. Barbados's vernacular architecture, ranging from its civic buildings, plantations, villas and suburban homes to the Chattel House, were all heavily influenced by the Georgian style and by each other. As stated, these Chattel Houses initially came about through the emancipation from slavery in 1834. This new legislated reality meant that the freed slaves were given a means to access a significant degree of self determination (choosing who to work for, the ability to acquire and maintain material wealth) and the planters maintained some confidence of relatively secure access to a work force through a free market and working contracts. As a result of this new relationship, maintaining the slave hut was immediately undesirable and over time unnecessary, as plantation labourers found the means to build independent and superior accomodation in the form of the Chattel House.

22

CHAPTER TWO Our Chattels

25

OUR CHATTELS
Principles of the Chattel House

It was necessary for the freed slaves to have mobility if they changed their choice of place to work or if dismissed by the plantation owner and forced to leave the rented lot of land. Their home was their movable possession, hence the term Chattel House. Their independence became their social strength. With the Chattel House, the owner was able to move simply by dismantling their home into several components, (wall sections, roof, fixtures) load them onto an ox or mule cart - advancing today to the tray of a pick-up truck ­ and reassemble it the same day elsewhere. (Fraser, 2011) This mode of transport and versatility in design highly influenced the dimensioning of walls and choice in materials of the Chattel House. "A landless worker needed a house that could move."Henry Fraser, 2011

26

Figure 14: Possessions.

Movable

27

Figure 15: Moving the Chattel House on a mule cart. Figure 16: Dismantling the Chattel House and loading it onto the back of a pick-up truck.

28

29

Construction of the Chattel House
The walls were framed with 2"x4" lumber studs and wood plank cladding; the partitions were framed with planks, then boarded; the roof was framed of lumber rafters, then boarded and shingled (galvanized sheeting is more commonly used today); the floor was of joists and boards. "They are as simple as a house a child draws on slate.. it is placed on a cart flat-wise, like a puzzle taken to pieces, the four walls laid one above the other.." (Fraser, 2011) Although designed to allow such freedom of movement and relocation, the size of the island didn't provide many places for the freed slaves to venture to and although they were `free', they still had no rights to own their own land and more often than not, held up to 12 year labour contracts. As a result, these freed slaves were often in debt to their plantation owner, which was viewed as this `debt bondage', further limiting their freedom to move. Emancipation was said to produce a `landless freedom', a legal system of entrapment. (Fraser, 2011)

30

Figure 17: Constructing a Chattel House Village.

31

1. Corrugated Metal Roof 2. Lumber Rafters 3.Wood Stud and Plank Clad Walls 4. Wood Joists and Plank Floor 5. Stone Footing Blocks

Figure 18: Chattel House Axonometric Assembly. Figure 19: Owner involvement in the constructin of the Chattel House.

32

33

34

With time, the freed slaves were able to purchase the land they had been renting for many years. Existing Chattel Houses were expanded with attention to detail, décor and with basic principles of unit by unit modular construction. The purchase of land meant that the foundations no longer had to be loose stones. As time passed, coral blocks were plastered over to allow a solid, static foundation compared to that of the loose, movable stones. This change in foundation allowed the owner of the Chattel House to communicate to their community the importance concepts of ownership and permanence of their residence.

"A unique building system ­ beginning small, solving problems of ventilation and space allocation, then adding rooms as time and money permitted." ­ Folk Architecture at its best.
Figure 20: Old Cozy Cottage-like Chattel House. Note - The stair case leads to nothing. The foundation of the Chattel House must have been for a previous house that was either demolished or relocated. This foundation has been reused as a base for this Chattel House. Figure 21: Systematic Modular Growth of the Chattel House.
35

36

Chattel House Principles
1. Versatility - ability to adapt to other functions and uses. 2. Mobility - ability to be dismantled on site and relocated elsewhere. 3. Ventilation - designed for coolness through the strategic placement of openings (Jalousie window) and high ceiling heights. 4. Privacy - designed for privacy through the strategic placement of openings (Jalousie window). 5. Modularity- a modular bsis for its design and construction. 6. Simplicity - the condition of living minimally. 7. Framed Construction - the method of designing lightweight structures with lumber stud frames and wood plank cladding. 8. Systematic Deployment - designed to allow the built walls to be taken apart and relocated by sides. 9. Systematic Growth - designed to allow modular expansion laterally when time and money permitted. 10. Affordability - designed within the financial limitation of the owner. The Chattel House, born of necessity in a difficult social circumstance, illustrated the ingenuity, the pragmatism and the skill of the Barbadian builder. With time, the desire to own the land on which Barbadians built their Chattel Houses, over-powered the benefits Figure 22: An Abandoned Chattel House on the South Coast of the Island. of having a movable home, hence the diminishing need for a chattel house. (Totally Barbados Real Estate, 2009) Although many have been maintained with pride by their owners to serve their original purpose as a low cost cottage-like home, (some even treasured and valued by the Barbados National Trust), others have been transformed to adapt commercial uses, demolished and replaced by modern concrete and stone structures of less aesthetic appeal, or have been left to decay, slowly allowing the island's rich heritage to disappear through ignorance and neglect. In order to better understand the structural system behind this `kit of parts' notion for the movable chattel house, a photographic analysis of a derelict chattel house found on the south coast of the island was carried out.

37

Figure 23: Interior Decay - standard spacing of timber studs was 2'-0". Figure 24: Exposed Connections.

38

39

Figure 25: What's your story? Timber members spaced in accordance to the window and door openings. Figure 26: Weathered Roofing. Exposed wood rafters below galvanized roof sheeting.

40

41

Conclusion
These Chattel Houses are simple and compact in design and allow changes in the number of modular additions through systematic growth and methods of deployment. The interior partitions that allow room allocations and separations of public and private spaces are also fitted out with jalousied windows and lattice work for cross ventilation. The interior spaces are often more private. As observed, the socializing within these homes takes place on the verandah or through an opened window with the neighbor next door. The genius of the Chattel House is the versatility and mobility in its most economical adaptation of space, combined with good craftsmanship and pride in appearance, all within the financial limitations of the owner.

42

CHAPTER THREE
Affordable Housing

45

AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Barbados Government Housing

The value and potential of the Barbadian vernacular dwelling (the Chattel House) appears to have been recognized only in so far as low-income groups have historically been left to their own devices to provide homes for themselves. This they have achieved at a remarkably low expense, but the Government has not generally taken the process a stage further, and incorporated the popular dwelling into formal, proactive strategies for the general upgrading of housing within the region. (Watson & Potter, 2001) The year 1973 marked the creation of the Government of Barbados' new housing executive body, the NHC. (Watson & Potter, 2001) All New units were to be of permanent wall construction. The initial project formulation included proposals for two expandable house types, both of which would afford the house owner the opportunity to occupy a basic, `no frills' house and to complete the finishes and extensions in the future, as and when money was available. The housing types were called, `National Housing Corporation (NHC) starter home' (Seen in Figure 28) and the `twin core starter home'. (Watson & Potter, 2001) The construction of the NHC starter home type marked the beginning of a new phase for the state's involvement in lowincome housing, and for the NHC in particular. NHC Vision: To be the best provider of quality and affordable housing solutions for every Barbadian. NHC Mission: To be the leading provider of affordable housing solutions through highly skilled, competent and customer focused employees, in collaboration with our stakeholders.
46

Figure 28: (Left) NHC Starter Home Unit Diagram. Figure 29: Lancaster Government Housing Project.

47

48

Current Direction of the Corporation
The focus of the National Housing Corporation has changed over the years in order to respond to the increasing demands by Barbadians for housing solutions at affordable prices. There was further diversification of its activities when in 1998 the Housing Act was amended to allow the engagement in nonhousing commercial activities. In keeping with the new direction, the Corporation re-branded the H.E.A.R.T Programme (Housing Everyone An Affordable Realistic Target) to the H.E.L.P Programme (Housing Every Last Person) so that the acronym reflects the more caring stance being taken. (NHC, 2011) (NHC) Starter Home The proposed starter homes catered to those lowincome citizens who dreamt of having their own home within their own level of affordability. Each starter home was designed to be expandable by the owner as much as their needs demanded and finances allowed. These starter homes, which measured 800 square feet in dimension within a 3,000 square foot housing plot, consisted of two to three bedrooms. (Watson & Potter, 2001) Although all of these starter homes are of little aesthetic appeal, many stand today with new extensions to the original module such as additional spaces for patios, garages and even bedrooms, allowing the home itself to grow with the owners ability and need. 1. Corrugated Metal Roof 2. Lumber Rafters 3.CMU Walls with Reinforced Concrete Beams; Plaster or Vinyl Siding. 4. Reinforced Concrete Figure 30: NHC Housing Additions. Raised Slab. 5. Reinforced Concrete Figure 31: NHC Axonometric Assembly Footings and Beams

49

(NHC) Starter Home Construction
The timeline given for the construction of many of these earlier Government housing projects was roughly two years. Some however, took over ten years to be completed, with many houses on site still left incomplete. Many problems were encountered such as the delay in materials arriving on site and their unnecessary importation, problems with the site itself, the construction equipment needed and the weather in general. (Watson & Potter, 2001) The structural walls supporting the wooden rafters and roof were of plastered concrete masonry units (CMU) and prefabricated beams and slabs supported the floors. Throughout the world, the use of prefabricated systems of housing solutions has often proven to be futile, based on the continuously changing needs and conditions of the people, such as the climate for example. This need to continuously adapt to the changing world calls for a wider variety of solutions, which is something that one fixed system can't solely offer. (Watson & Potter, 2001) In Barbados, the CMU walls produced, from their exterior appearance to method by which they are erected, are basically the opposite of those housing units provided by the island's vernacular housing system. As mentioned earlier, the vernacular Barbadian Chattel House is highly innovative, flexible, and appropriate, all within the financial limitations of its owner. These homes take the self-help housing and incremental construction approach, a strategy that has proven to be of success. To ignore the suggestions by the public to incorporate the proven success of the vernacular housing system within main stream housing programmes at a national scale is nothing but detrimental to the future of the lowincome sector of the island and the island's heritage as a whole. Although many of those earlier Government housing projects are now complete, and others still only now beginning, the projects tend to fall short of their original intentions. (Watson & Potter, 2001) These starter homes, constructed from the cheapest local material resources (in order to minimize costs for the Government), soon after completion require a great deal of maintenance and constant repair; arguably because of the low quality of the chosen materials and/or the methods used to construct the house cheaply. Although the Government houses were made cheaply, they didn't benefit the owner. Instead, it placed the owners within a viscous cycle between paying for a cheaply made house to eventually having to apply to the same NHC department for funds to help with the predetermined repairs, which is in itself a time consuming process and a rather unnecessary burden for the poor citizen, which these homes are supposedly catering to. (Watson & Potter, 2001) The Tenant Versus The State Although designed and built cheaply in order to be classified as `affordable', upon completion, many of these homes remain unoccupied due to the low-

50

Figure 30: Starter Home Construction

NHC under

51

52

income stigma and high cost of living; a politically charged issue in itself. (Watson & Potter, 2001)

For the public, these homes were, "built like cattle sheds" and were "aesthetically unpleasing." (Barbados Advocate, 1992)
As argued in the Barbados' Daily Nation Newspaper (1985), for many, the creation of these starter homes did nothing but create `worse ghettos' by introducing more social problems than it resolved. (Watson & Potter, 2001) Common social problems found within these developments ranged from overcrowding issues, the lack of privacy, the absence of basic social amenities, inadequate recreational facilities, dislocation with its tenants and overall low community spirit amongst the residents. If this existing attitude continues among planners and politicians, then the potential future of such developments can only be described as unpromising for those low-income earners who are expected to live in such areas. In 1984, Peter Olsen suggested that in the case of Barbados, "Government programs should

.

.

build on the longstanding tradition of self-help construction over time." (Watson & Potter, 2001)

.
Figure 32: NHC Housing.

53

Conclusion
As this analysis of the NHC Plan for Barbados has shown, the richness of its design and means of execution of such shelters present both technical and political complications, hindering the view in many cases towards its success. Since the start of the NHC, town houses, apartments and freestanding dwellings for rent to eligible low-income families have been built. These Government funded houses however, are perceived by Barbadian Citizens as stigmatized housing alternatives that lack cultural identity, social engagement and are still too high in price. As a result, many of these undesirable spaces are left unoccupied. It is evident that those in charge have overlooked the importance of Barbados's vernacular architectural system, seen in its chattel house, resulting in numerous situations of missed opportunities. The Government of Barbados should promote and strive to upgrade its vernacular architecture rather than waste time and energy on imported patterns of inadequate functional designs. (Watson & Potter, 2001) The introduction of the basic starter concrete home, which began in the 1980's, continues a rejecting trend to this day towards the vernacular chattel house system of parts and owner involvement.

54

CHAPTER FOUR
You Live, You Learn

57

ONE

TWO

THREE

FOUR

FIVE

SIX

58

Y O U L I V E, Y O U L E A R N
Living Simply, Living Small

Specific opportunities of impact seen through the selected innovative projects from around the world, demonstrate the power of design to improve lives through alternative means of housing. Although ranging from humanitarian, refugee designs to more contemporary versions of an adaptable hut, these projects hold similar riches of architecture - for the people, by the people (DIY). These selected case study projects highlight global political, economic and social issues in housing as well as possible solutions, with their unique interventions of what they consider to be the most appropriate answer to the problems they are faced with, ranging from choices in: materials and construction; size and spatial quality; temporal relationship to context; natural ventilation and light throughout the day; future growth; and affordability. Overall, these case studies demonstrate the ability for Architecture to overcome the original general assumption that low budget construction is disconnected from architectural quality of space.

Figure 35: Worldy Examples of Affordable Housing.

59

60

ONE
Name: Ekhaya: An Affordable Informal Housing Solution Designer: Johnny Aderton Place: Cape Town, South Africa When: 2013 A Doctor from Cape Town, South Africa by the name of Johnny Aderton lived comfortably just a few kilometers from one of the many South African Slums. Aderton and his family, his wife and two kids, spent a lot of their time exploring the world by living on a sailboat. Aderton realized two things from this experience, the first being how to live comfortably in small spaces and secondly, what it means to live practically. (Ekhaya, 2013) After returning home to Cape Town from life at sea, he was surprised to see the same neighboring slums in the same condition, if not worse. This bothered him greatly; Aderton felt that the whole approach to low cost housing in Cape Town was completely wrong. Like many, when he first viewed the slums he saw cramped dark spaces where everyone was basically living uncomfortable lives on top of one another. But after his journey at sea, this view changed for Aderton, he no longer saw cramped living but instead, places of opportunity, resources, acres and acres of space made by the roofs. (Ekhaya, 2013) This realization led him to leave his medical career and to focus his time and energy on developing the Ekhaya, which in Afrikaans meant `home living in small spaces'. (Ekhaya, 2013) Houses were built by first erecting a temporary wooden frame to support the stacking of locally-filled sand bags, which were then tied together. Once the sand bags were in place, the wooden frame was removed and reused to act as a supporting structure for the construction of another neighboring Ekhaya. The sand bags were insulated, bullet proof, fire proof and flood proof. The polystyrene foam roof was then added. This roof was arched, (inspired by a simple arched bridge he'd seen in Venice), self-supporting, extremely simple and cost effective. (Ekhaya, 2013) This simple arch allowed for the placement of solar panels and thus transformed the simple home into an electric box with light and technology. The roof could also be leveled if future extensions were needed or desired. The ability for the small house to grow created different opportunities for the owner from places for gardening, added space to raise chickens, or rentable space, thus transforming the simple small home into an owner financed income generator.

Figure 36: The Ekhaya House - Cape Town.

61

"The most exciting thing was the tangible amount of energy and excitement when the community realized they can actually build a house." - Aderton (Ekhaya, 2013)

Figure 37: Ekhaya - Growth and Construction. Roof Occupation Changes Over Time: Solar Panels, Levelled out for Extension Above for Work Space/Rentable Accomodation. Figure 38: Ekhaya - Community involvement in its construction.

62

63

64

TWO
Name: Low Cost Vietnamese Housing Designer: HP Architects Place: Vietnam When: 2015
These are homes made of wild grass called bamboo. Bamboo is one of the most durable materials in the world, with a growing rate up to one meter a day. Although it can be cut young to be woven into mats and panels, if used for construction purposes it is fully grown in just three years (up to eighteen metres of usable length, tensile strength of steel, and compressive strength of concrete) (Hardy, 2015) Due to its hollow make up, this material is also lightweight, easily handled and transported. One of the biggest issues in terms of housing in South East Asia is flooding. Not only is it prone to severe temperatures year round, it also takes on a lot of water. How do you design an affordable home in a hot, humid, and flood-stricken country? With the basic understanding of the residential needs and desires found within a dwelling, HP Architects designed a lightweight housing module that can float in times of flooding. (Floating Bamboo House, 2013) The key designed components of this house were its means of assembly, the sizing of the bamboo module, and the use of local materials, making the design not only resourceful and practical but also affordable. In terms of construction, the bamboo modules were secured with local building techniques such as anchors, ties and solid connections. Traditional architectural characteristics were explored further with the access to local building materials such as bamboo, leaves and recycled oil containers. Access to local materials and mass production techniques implemented by the local community, allowed the homes to be built for the people, by the people (DIY) - producing a stronger social network within a community. (Floating Bamboo House, 2013)

Figure 39: Vietnamese Affordable Housing by HP Architects.

65

Figure 40: Vietnamese Affordable Housing Axonometric Assembly. Figure 41: Vietnamese Affordable Housing by HP Architects - Night Shot.

66

67

68

THREE
Name: Shimogamo Jinja Hojoan Designer: Kengo Kuma and Associates Place: Kyoto When: 2013
800 years ago, a Japanese author by the name Kamono Chomei wrote a book titled, `An Account of My Hut'. In this book, Chomei gave a detailed account of his life experiences living alone in a three meter by three meter hut. (Shimogamo Jinja Hojoan, 2013) To pay tribute to this fact, Kengo Kuma and Associates built a temporary hut using Cedar, ETFE, plastic and magnets on the same site where Chomei's humble dwelling was originally built. To emphasize the transportation, assembly, disassembly and lightweight qualities of Chomei's hut, the designers made a combination of ETFE sheets that could be rolled up and transported. The magnets, which were fixed onto the lattice framework of cedar posts, held the portable ETFE plastic sheets in place in a sandwiched fashion. (Shimogamo Jinja Hojoan, 2013) Although this project doesn't target low income housing, it stood as an example of a contemporary interpretation of one's past, bringing the principles of their cultural history into the present through the use of contemporary building materials and construction techniques.

Figure 42: Kengo Kuma's Contemporary Hut in Kyoto.

69

Figure 43: Contemporary Methods of Construction - wood, plastic and magnets. Figure 44: Interior View showing the architectural quality of space.

70

71

72

FOUR
Name: Glass Cabin Designer: Nick Olson and Lilah Horwitz Place: West Virginia When: 2012-2013

Designed and built by two young artists, Nick Olson and Lilah Horwitz, this glass home started as a simple idea discussed in one of their first conversations as a couple, to a realized dream a year later. These two artists imaged a space whose walls would be fully exposed to the different natural light experiences throughout the day. The designed wall would never hide the natural light. (Jobson, 2013) The realization of their dream house began in the Summer of 2012 when the two artists agreed to leave their jobs and relocate to the open road in search for new, old and abandoned windows. They collected dozens from garage sales, antique dealers and bought a few new ones, but not many. (Jobson, 2013) Each window told its own unique story. With regards to construction, the two artists built the house entirely by themselves. The front wall was 16 feet in height with a base 4 feet off of the ground. (Jobson, 2013) The estimated costs of the project as a whole was $500 US. They had to be resourceful in order to complete the project cheaply. "It was just the two of us trying to put up these gigantic posts. It was scary and hard. Looking at it now, it is just totally insane. It is huge. I realize now that's what makes it so amazing. ­ Horwitz (Jobson, 2013)

Although there wasn't any plumbing or electricity, the two artists enjoy the space as a means of an escape from their daily lives. Horwitz's favourite time of day in the Glass Cabin is dusk, when everything inside is on fire. (Jobson, 2013) For Olson, his fascination was with the fireflies at night that started at the ground and ascended into the open sky amalgamating with the stars above. (Jobson, 2013) Not only was it an inexpensive project that made use of recyclable materials and methods of construction, it was also built by the artists themselves and focused on the overall expression and spatial quality of the interior space; thus allowing the designed space to be both innovative and affordable.

Figure 45: Glass Cabin Designed and Constructed by two Artists.

73

"Light is so different in the morning, at noon and at dusk. We wanted to somehow build a house so that change happened in our living space. It was about being closer to livingwith the elements." ­ Olson (Jobson, 2013)

Figure 46: Owner involvement in construction and design. Figure 47: View showing the architectural quality of space at Night.

74

75

76

FIVE
Name: Tiny House Designer: Tiny House Movement (Self Built) Place: Anywhere
The Tiny House Movement is a group of people creating housing solutions to issues ranging from environmental and financial concerns, and the desire for more time and freedom. (The Tiny Life, 2015) The aim is to downsize the space, which they live in. The typical American home is around 2,600 square feet. The tiny house on the other hand, ranges between 100 and 400 square feet. (The Tiny Life, 2015) With a variation in form and size, these tiny homes encourage simple living in small spaces, anywhere. Although living in such spaces may not be the answer for everyone, they function today as 1:1 successful examples of a different means of living. It encourages house dwellers, builders and designers to rethink the meaning of self-sufficiency, simple living and permanence.

Figure 48: The Tiny House Movement - simple living anywhere.

77

Figure 49: Owner involvement in construction and design. Figure 50: Interior View showing the architectural quality of space.

78

79

SIX
Name: Villa Verde Housing Designer: 2016 Pritzker Prize Winner, Alejandro Aravena Place: Chile When: 2013|2016
Alejandro Aravena's designs are well known for their socially engaging architectural qualities. The goal as an architect is to improve the world through designed space, an attribute Aravena posses in his works. This design characteristic enabled him to win the 2016 Pritzker Prize. His pioneering work is a continuous dialogue of how architecture can improve people's lives, whether through the creation of economic opportunities to the less privileged, mitigating the effects of natural disasters, reducing energy consumption or providing welcoming public space. (Pritzker Prize, 2016) With regards to this thesis, the project, `Villa Verde Housing', was investigated further. Villa Verde Housing was a social housing project that aimed to give access to home ownership through this idea of a starter home. This concept created a partially completed house within a framework, allowing the owner the freedom for future growth within a given scenario. (Villa Verde Housing, 2013) Aravena referred to this idea as `incremental housing'. Instead of providing a completely finished home at a greater cost, Aravena applied this `incremental housing' strategy to his design where the owner would basically receive half of a house with allocated space for future growth within provided boundaries and limitations. (Villa Verde Housing, 2013) These houses began with a 57 square meter floor plan, and grew up to 85 square meters. (Villa Verde Housing, 2013) These homes could have been given to the owners as completed entities with the provided void that families were expected to use for future growth, already filled. However, Aravena believed in the principles of owner involvement, incremental construction and prioritization, allowing the creation of a higher standard social housing network for both the initial and final scenarios. (Villa Verde Housing, 2013)

Figure 51: Villa Verde Housing by Alejandro Aravena.

80

81

Figure 52: Owner involvement and incremental construction. Figure 53: View showing the architectural quality of space.

82

83

Conclusion
The common denominators throughout this exploration of the selected case studies were the following: 1. Modularity: simple, systematic compact living. 2. The notion of a DIY strategy in terms of the varios methods of deployment. 3. A DIY strategy supporting various systematized methods of growth in size over time. 4. Resourceful use of materials whether from the immediate surrounding context or recycled materials collected elswhere. 5. And finally, the transformable qualities of these spaces at different times throughout the day. These innovative projects, specifically chosen from different locations around the world, show the power and ability design has to enhance peoples lives. They are examples of socially conscious architecture through the use of socially conscious contemporary solutions.

84

CHAPTER FIVE
Strategies & Limitations

87

ONE

TWO

THREE

FOUR

88

STRATEGIES AND LIMITATIONS
How to be Adaptable

Following the principles taken from the island's verncular Chattel House (See Chapter Two) and the chosen case studies from around the World (See Chapter Four), such as: the innovative designs of the modules in terms of their sizing and function; the methods by which the modules were deployed on site; the careful selection and implementation of local resources; accomodating for the future growth of the modules and their spatial qualities, this thesis investigated the following adaptable design strategies:

ONE. Adaptable Use of Local Material
Resources

TWO. Adaptable Construction Methods
of Deployment: The Module and Site

THREE. Adaptable Spatial Volumes: The
Grow Home

FOUR. Adaptable Through Transformability:
Environmental Factors Figure 55: Design Strategies and Limitations.

89

90

ONE

Adaptable Use of Local Material Resources
Barbados, the small mass of land floating further East on the chain of the Caribbean islands, is divided into eleven parishes. Each parish has their own unique qualities and characteristics. In order to get a better understanding of the island's context and accessibility to local resources, the unique qualities of these parishes have been further explained. (See Figure 57) The Parish of Saint James, the West Coast parish of the island, or referred to by some as the `Platinum Coast', is known for its expensive hotels and mansions, the majority of which are holiday homes owned by internationals. (Barbados Tourism, 2016) However, when driving down this coast one will still find these elegant homes neighbouring small lots of land occupied with Chattel Houses and rum shops. In this Parish, away from the coastline, one will also find the Portvale Sugar Factory. Saint George, Saint Thomas, Saint Peter and Saint Lucy are known for their valleys and relatively flat fields of agriculture with a variety of crops ranging from the coconut tree, the cultivated Sugar Cane to the ignored bamboo. (Barbados Tourism, 2016) In these parishes one will find the local Arawak Cement Plant, Barbados' Recycling Centre and the Black Bess Quarry. Saint Andrew, known as the `Scotland District' with its mountainous hills of clay, shares the East Coast of the island with Saint Joseph and Saint John. In these parishes, one will find Saint Andrew's Sugar Cane Factory and similar gullies and fields of agriculture to those found in Saint Thomas. Saint Phillip on the south-east houses the island's airport, beautiful coves, hotels, and the Coral Quarry, which has helped supply the cut coral stone used in constructing Barbadian Civic buildings and expensive homes in the past. (Telling, 2015) The use of coral limestone on the island is seen as an indication of wealth. To the west of Saint Phillip is Christ Church, the parish known as the area of `Rich Diversity' and offers a varying coastline with hotels and restaurants. This parish neighbours Saint Michael, the parish referred to as the parish `For Everyone'. Here one will find the Island's Capital City, Bridgetown where Barbados makes its trades in exports and imports. (Barbados Tourism, 2016)

Figure 56: Barbados in the Caribbean. Figure 57: The Eleven Parishes of Barbados.

91

East Coast - St. Joseph, St. John, St. Andrew

The North Coast - St. Lucy

South Coast - St. Phillip, Christ Church

The Middle - St. George

South Coast - St. Michael, Chist Church
92

West Coast - St. James, St. Peter

East Coast - St. Joseph, St. John, St. Andrew

The North Coast - St. Lucy

(From Top Left to Bottom Right) Figure 58: East Coast St. Joseph, St. John, St. Andrew Figure 59: North Coast - St. Lucy Figure 60: South East St. Phillip, Christ Church

South Coast - St. Phillip, Christ Church

The Middle - St. George

Figure 61: The Centre - St. George, Saint Thomas Figure 62: The City - St. Michael Figure 63: West Coast St. James, St. Peter Figure 64: Barbados Contour map.

South Coast - St. Michael, Chist Church

West Coast - St. James, St. Peter
93

Imports and Exports
The island of Barbados is heavily dependant on imported goods and services. Almost everything is imported. In 2013, Barbados exported $577M and imported $1.98B, resulting in a negative trade balance of $1.41B. (OEC Barbados, 2013) The top export destinations of Barbados are the United States ($82.5M), Jamaica ($53.8M), Trinidad and Tobago ($53.7M) and Guyana ($46.2M). (OEC Barbados, 2013) These main exports include locally produced crude oil from the Barbados National Oil Company Limited, (this crude oil is then refined elsewhere under a processing agreement and re-imported) Hard-Liquor, packaged medicaments, (such as medicine and antibiotics) passenger and cargo ships, (also known as boats, cruise ships, excursion boats, ferry-boats, barges, tankers) and cement. (OEC Barbados, 2013) The top import origins are the United States ($568M), Trinidad and Tobago ($447M), Russia ($121M), Suriname ($83.5M) and Canada ($80M). (OEC Barbados, 2013) The main imports include refined petroleum and packaged medicaments. (OEC Barbados, 2013) The importation of materials has accounted for as much as 50 to 60 percent of the total cost of a house. (Watson & Potter, 2001) As seen in Figure 65, the total cost for the various wood imports in 2014 was $30.3M, the total cost of metals was $76.5M and the total cost of plastic imports was $72.9M. In relation to this thesis research, wood, the "poor man's material" used in the island's traditional Chattel House, was either imported from South America, Canada and the US or cut down from plantations. To build a chattel house today would be more expensive than building a concrete block home with the local CMU because of the imporation and maintenance costs of wood. Explained in greater detail in Chapter Six, the local, available and affordable materials on the island that this thesis will investigate incorporating into house construction are the following: 1. Concrete - the most common material currently used in constructing houses. As discussed in Chapter Two and Three, this material for many, unlike the previous use of imported wood, (the "poor man's material") is an indication of permanence, independence and wealth. 2. Bamboo - the potential of which has not yet been realized by local builders and designers perhaps because very little is currently grown commercially. 3. Sugar Cane Rubbish (Bagasse) - the potential currently limited to altering landscapes but, with significant industrial investment, could supply construction materials to the island and region. 4. Recycled Plastics - the potential of which has already been used for other windows in affordable housing but still provides significant opportunity for exploration and further development.

Figure 65: Wood, Metal and Plastic Imports.

94

95

96

With the provided research on the available resources on the island, (explained in greater detail in Chapter Six), how does one design and build an affordable house that reconnects the disconnected link between architecture and a low budget (primarily) with the locally available materials? As seen in the comparison of material pallets between the adaptable wooden chattel house in Chapter Two and the rather static but durable concrete block Government funded homes in Chapter Three, this strategy aims to identify the potential use of a new locally sourced material pallet that combines the adaptable wooden Chattel House construction principles of versatility and lightness with the concrete starter homes construction principles of locality and durability.

Proposed Material Palette (See Chapter Six):

1. Concrete 2. Bamboo 3. Bagasse 4. Recycled Plastic
Figure 66: Proposed material Pallet.

97

98

TWO

Adaptable Construction Methods of Deployment
In Chapter Two, the principles of the Chattel House, its transportable qualities through its modular "kit of parts" and loose stone foundations, were explained in detail in relation to adaptable construction, methods of deployment, and community involvement. This rich potential found within the adaptable means of construction, also seen in many of the chosen case studies discussed in Chapter Four, was ignored when designing the borrowed patterns of the Governmentfunded starter homes (CMU and precast concrete) that were built for occupants without any involvement of the owner or community in its design and construction. Although the words "movable possession" today often conjures up memories of slavery and housing the poor, these compact modular homes on loose stone foundations were, in fact, part of a social revolution that evolved into a low-cost, portable alternative to the traditional harsh memories of the slave huts. The idea of building modular components is nothing new. (Modular Construction History, 2013) This method of designing and building captured its popularity globally between World War I and World War II before really taking off in the 1950's. (Modular Construction History, 2013) The Barbadian Chattel House, brought about, as discussed in Chapter One, through the abolition of slavery in the early 19th Century, understood the importance of the module itself in terms of its proportions for functional space, its modular dismantling of whole wall sections with the installed window and doors for transportation and relocation, as well as the potential for future modular growth. This strategy therefore strives to positively represent and in turn, reintroduce the potential use of the modular principles and adaptable construction methods of deployment seen in the vernacular architecture of the island's Chattel House with a new locally sourced material pallet for the adaptability in its construction and permanence.

Figure 67: A Conceptual Diagram Illustrating Adaptable Construction Methods of Deployment with a Chosen Variety of Materials.

99

100

THREE

Adaptable Spatial Volumes
Following the concept of Chattel Houses' modular make up, further discussed in Chapter Two, the choice in material and method of construction permitted the removal and addition of walls with ease to allow further extensions and thus, changes in spatial volumes. The owners of the Chattel Houses, who were also the builders, developed systems for adding modules towards the back of the structure for additional rooms and space. This allowed the home to continuously grow in scale both horizontally and vertically. This concept was also seen in the Affordable Housing project made of bamboo in Vietnam, as well as the Ekhaya hut in Cape Town, Case Studies which were provided in Chapter Four. The current Government Housing system, further explained in Chapter Three, was designed to allow future expansion by the owner as time and money permited. However, the provided designs of these starter homes do not facilitate this change easily. The level of construction and demolition required is far more complex compared to the simple lightweight removal of whole wall section panels for future additions made to the Chattel House. As a result, this strategy aims to make use of the adaptable spatial volume principle, arguably found within both the chattel and Government housing projects, but with the focus being that of a simple, systematic, more modular approach in growth both horizontally and vertically - a characteristic only seen in the Chattel House. Figure 68: A Conceptual Diagram Illustrating Adaptable Spatial Volumes Expanding Laterally.

101

102

FOUR

Adaptable Through Transformability
As mentioned in Chapter Two, the cleverness of the Chattel House design is seen not only in its methods of deployment, its versatility and mobility, but also in its design for coolness and privacy. This has been done through the transformable use and placement of openings. The Chattel House today makes use of several window types ranging from the sash windows with window hoods (awnings), louvered shutters, and demerrara windows, but the most common and original is the jalousie window. This window mitigates and protects the interior space from the natural elements as well as separates the public from the private spaces and is located on both the internal and external walls of the home. The jalousie window in Barbados is traditionally made of wooden louvres set within a frame. Today, these lourves can be made out of plastic, glass, wood and aluminium. Joined on a track and manually operated with a crank, these wooden louvres can be tilted open and shut in unison to control the flow of ventilaton entering and escaping the space. (Oran Ltd., 1964) Whether a sun shower or heavy rainfall, jalousie windows have the ability to be left partway open, allowing the desirable ventilation to still flow through the space. Its flexibility makes it a popular product. (Oran Ltd., 1964) The Government Housing system referred to in Chapter Three, made use of a more restricting sash window system. Completely exposed to the heat from the sun without the help of curtains or window hoods, this sash window is slid open and closed on a vertical axes. This method of opening and closing on a vertical plane removes the flexibility aspect seen in the tilting jalousie window. As a result, during times of heavy rainfall and sun showers, this choice in window hinders the desirable air flow and level of shade obtained, making the house itself uncomfortable to be in without the additional use of electrical appliances such as ceiling fans and HVAC units. The choice in materiality, like that of the wooden Chattel House versus the concrete starter home, plays a huge role in the thermal dynamics accumulated within these spaces. Methods to minimize this accumulated heat within these concrete starter homes is currently underway. More Mass = More Heat 6" Concrete walls - 3" Concrete walls 3" Concrete walls = cooler, dissipates heat This strategy aims to further develop the impact of the adaptable module through the use of transformable openings influenced by that of the tilting jalousie window design for coolness and privacy found within the island's vernacular Chattel House for different situations throughout the day.

Figure 69: Adaptable Through Transformability Figure 70: Jalousie Window.

103

Conclusion
The production of innovative new projects that are specifically tailored to meet the affordability requirements of low-income families is of utmost importance. (Potter, 1992) The experience gained through the history of the Chattel House strongly suggests that the Government of Barbados should make use of the desire and ability low-income families have to build homes for themselves. This can be done through the self-help (DIY) tactics seen in the adaptable design strategies provided. These adaptable design strategies, heavily influenced by the island's vernacular Chattel House, not only allow but also act as a guide to help those low-income families who wish to build for themselves, to do so. As expressed throughout each individual strategy, all of which work together to create a whole, the benefits of the Chattel House design have been discredited and cast aside into a corner of missed opportunities. These adaptable design strategies aim to create new and innovative affordable housing solutions that will advocate for the benefits of the island's historical Chattel House system of parts.

104

CHAPTER SIX
Design Proposal

107

ONE

TWO

THREE

FOUR

108

DESIGN PROPOSAL
The Contemporary Vernacular Design Program
The design component of this thesis focused on the design of a modest home for the Barbadian lowincome earner. With the concept of the Barbadian vernacular Chattel House, this thesis aims to produce a housing alternative that is both affordable and architecturally innovative, through the means of the adaptable design strategies discussed in Chapter Five. Location: Barbados Building Type: Low-income House User: Low-income earners ONE: Adapting to the Island's Material Resources TWO: Adaptable Construction Methods of Deployment THREE: Adaptable Spatial Volumes FOUR: Adaptable Through Transformability

Figure 72: Adaptable Design Strategies.

109

ONE Adapting to the Island's Material Resources
This component of the design aims to identify, as well as make use of a locally sourced material pallet that combines the adaptable Chattel House principles with the durable properties of the existing Government house. Location: Barbados Local: Affordable and Available Materials Structure: Concrete, Bamboo Skin: Recycled Plastics, Woven Bamboo, Bagasse Floor: Concrete, Bamboo, Bagasse Light Weight Concrete (Cellular Concrete) The Local Arawak Cement Plant is known for producing a consistently high quality of Portland cement using 98% of Barbadian raw materials and is used in the production of the island's concrete along with the local sand, crushed limestone and water. (Arawak Cement Ltd, 2010) Design Limitations Influenced by the movable wooden "kit of parts" design seen in the Barbadian Chattel House and the more permanent properties of the Concrete Government houses, how does one design kit of parts components with the local concrete that is light enough to be transported and assembled without the use of heavy equipment? Barbados Concrete: Cement + Water (Paste) with the Sand + Crushed Limestone (lighter Aggregate) Avg. weight of a concrete block: 8"x 8"x 16" =28 LB Limitations or Areas of Opportunity? Typically, concrete is known for being very dense and heavy, characteristics, which are suitable and preferred for most applications such as footings, walls and floor slabs. (True Level Concrete, 2016) However, Cellular Concrete, also known as foam concrete, performs as a versatile lightweight concrete material. The mixture of water, cement and foaming agent produces this lightweight concrete. (Foamed Concrete, 1975) Water and cement are mixed together in such a way as to allow a high degree of hydration of the cement particles. When this is achieved, a foam like substance is produced under pressure from the mixture of water, air, foaming agent and chloride accelerator. (Foamed Concrete, 1975) The foam and cement mixture are blended into a uniform, foamed cement swirl. The aggregate typically used in the production of standard, heavier concrete is replaced by the air bubbles produced during the process of mixing the foam with the cement and water mix. (True Level Concrete, 2016) This mixture is then cast in a form and cured to form a lightweight cellular concrete structure. Advantages and Disadvantages Light-weight foamed concrete (LWC) has gained its popularity in construction over the recent years due to its lightness, versatility and cost reduction potential. (Kun Guan, 2010) One of the unique qualities of LWC is the absence of an added aggregate. With the

110

Prototype One

Prototype Two

Prototype Three

Structure: .Concrete .Bamboo Figure 73: Proposed Material Pallet. Three prototypes of different forms were explored, all with the same set of parts.

Skin: .Bamboo .Bagasse .Plastic

Floor: . Concrete .Bamboo .Bagasse

111

Figure 74: Barbados Local Cement Plant. Figure 75: Concrete Texture.

112

help of the existing cement plant on the island, the production of LWC can be a positive alternative along with the standard concrete production already taking place, allowing the Cement Plant to further benefit the island. LWC can be produced rather rapidly both on and off site. (Kun Guan, 2010) It is also seen as a more economical method of construction in terms of the ease in its transportation as well as the reduction in manpower required. (Kun Guan, 2010) There is also a reduction in the overall weight of the structure, resulting in the decreasing use and need of structural frames, footing and piles. (Kun Guan, 2010) Although the production of LWC, and concrete in general, is still unnatural with its chemical reaction properties during its production, it arguably opens the doors to different ways by which the local resources can be used. Design Intent Inspired by a video found on YouTube, (titled `Concrete Foam House in 8 Hours' - See Video Reference), where a group of young men built a LWC house in their own backyard in just eight hours with simple hand held equipment and personalised molds, the design intent for this thesis is to make use of the durable properties of the local cement available in order to allow the production of LWC posts and slabs either in a factory or on site by the owners themselves, acting as one of the two options for a structural element in the lowincome, Chattel inspired house.

113

Recycled Plastic Panels
The Sustainable Barbados Recycling Centre, Inc. (SBRC) was formed in early 2008. (SBRC, 2015) The waste stream entering the facility is generally comprised of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) and Construction and Demolition (C&D) Waste, which each make up about 50% of this waste stream by weight. Design Limitations What would the impacts be of making use of the traditional wall construction framing seen in the chattel house, but instead of imported wooden panels acting the structures skin, one uses engineered lightweight panels made out of locally recycled plastics collected at the Barbados' recycling centre? These versatile panels could be modular in size, acting as door, window and walls, depending on its placement, and light enough to be operated, transported or relocated within the structure itself without the use of heavy equipment. Limitations or Areas of Opportunity? Conventional wall construction has utilized studding and framing, with sheathing and finish materials of one type or another placed on one side to complete the wall. The conventional wood frame of the Chattel House is clad with dimensional lumber in time-consuming construction and added expense through the importation of wood as well as its costly maintenance for termites and rot. The expense of obtaining and maintaining the imported wood seen in the traditional Chattel House construction, deny adequate housing, hence the introduction of the more durable concrete Government homes that make use of

the local concrete resources. What would the impacts be of making use of the traditional wall construction framing seen in the Chattel House, but instead of imported wooden panels for the structures skin, one uses engineered lightweight panels made out of locally manufactured recycled plastics collected from the Barbados Recycling Centre? Advantages and Disadvantages Approximately 1,000 tons of waste, 500 truckloads, is delivered to the Sustainable Barbados Recycling Centre (SBRC) everyday. (Blenman, 2016) The recovery of recyclable materials from this mass reduces the amount of waste normally taken to the local landfill by 70%. (Blenman, 2016) Preconco, a Barbadian Engineering Firm, already implements the use of recycled PVC windows frames in their designs. In 2010, after months of research and improving technologies, they also started recycling PET bottle waste into roof shingles as a modern manufactured roofing alternative. (Preconco, 2016) The practice of recycling in the home is a rather new concept on the island. Implementing this conversion of plastic waste into recyclable plastic panels for lowincome housing would not only encourage but also educate locals on the means of recycling, as well as continue, if not increase the diversion of waste taken to the actual landfills. These recycled plastic panels would be designed to avoid swelling, rotting or absorbing moisture; they would be easy to work with in terms of cutting and fixing with standard tools and easily maintained. Similar to the production of concrete, manufacturing these plastic panels from recycled waste is also a chemical process however; it

114

makes use of the already existing SBRC and acts as an educational tool in the means of recycling. Design Intent Inspired by Kengo Kuma's Contemporary Hut installation discussed in Chapter Four, as well as by the works of Preconco, a Barbadian Engineering Firm who already implements the use of recycled PVC windows frames and roof shingle alternatives made from recycled PET bottle waste in their designs, the design intent of this thesis aims to make use of the high quantity of plastic collected at the local Recycling Centre on the island for the production of lightweight, modular sized recyclable plastic panels for the building and roof skin. These versatile panels would be modular in size, acting as both door and window openings depending on its placement, and light enough to be operated, transported off site or relocated within the structure itself by man. The transformable quality of these versatile recycled panels would allow the openings to have a variation in degree to which they open, thus allowing the desirbale airflow and shade whether it be a day of sun showers or heavy rain.

Figure 76: Plastic Texture

115

Sugar Cane Rubbish (Bagasse)
The sugar produced from Sugar Cane, also known as the white gold of the island, has been an ideal crop for Barbados due to its production of great wealth and admirable reputation. (Barbados Tourism Encyclopaedia, 2016) This crop is harvested between the Months of January to May. When sugar cane is crushed to extract the juice, the remaining pulp, also referred to as sugar cane rubbish, is called bagasse. It has a low fabrication costs and produces a highend green quality material that is biodegradable and reusable. (Bagasse Fibre, 2014) Bagasse Production: Harvested Sugar Cane ­ milled = Sugar + Juice + Sugar Cane Pulp/Bagasse. Design Limitations This bagasse material, the potential of which is currently ignored in Barbados other than its deposition on fields as a fertilizer or for burning fuel at the local mills, one of which is active, is currently under investigation by Material Scientists around the world whose goal is to confirm the potential use of bagasse's natural fibres in the area of construction. (Bagasse Fibre, 2014) Influenced by the Barbadian Chattel House, how can the locally harvested bagasse pulp be used in this lightweight design and construction process of the modest low-income house and what would the effects of this be on the island's agriculture? Limitations or Areas of Opportunity? The production of sugar cane as an agriculturally

economical system, stands today as an inefficient system. (Barbados Tourism Encyclopaedia, 2016) Inappropriate use of mechanization and dry seasons has been the cause of this. (Thompson, 2013) The continued survival of this industry has been through the support of additional funds from the Government, a continuous exchange that in turn would also run out of fuel. Why would the Government of Barbados continue to indefinitely support an unprofitable industry? (Holder, 2007) The sugar cane industry itself needs to be restructured.

"Most of the 30,000 acres being used for sugar farming in Barbados are relatively small farms of 200 acres on average. To properly benefit from mechanization a farm should be not less than 700 acres." (Barbados Tourism Encyclopaedia, 2016)
The restructuring proposal proposed by the chairman of the agricultural sector of Barbados, Lindsay Holder suggests the shift from a `sugar' industry to a `sugar cane' industry, a multi-purpose system where the traditional sugar and molasses would still be produced, with the addition of ethanol and electricity from its bagasse pulp and harvesting practice improvements. (Holder, 2007) Although the potential of bagasse has evidently been taken into consideration, the research in its use for construction purposes on the island is still viewed by locals as impratical due to the structural qualities that the material is believed to lack. This area of research needs further investigation.

"It is important to recognize that the restructuring of the industry is not driven primarily by the desire to reduce the dependence on fossil fuels

116

. Figure 77: Bagasse Texture

117

. Figure 78: Sugar Cane Production

118

for energy needs, but by the desire to preserve the agricultural sector." (Holder, 2007)
Advantages and Disadvantages The use of bagasse in construction as a building product itself is still under siege in terms of the success in its use. (Bagasse Fibre, 2015) The natural fibers themselves, local to the island, are easily available for currently six months of the year and low in cost. The suggestion for this multi-purpose sugar cane factory would allow the traditional sugar and molasses to be harvested and milled for five months of the year, and the harvesting of the high fibre sugar cane crop for its bagasse properties for the following six months of the year. (Holder, 2007) Still under investigation are the following issues in relation to the service life of the bagasse product for its use in construction: 1. Moisture absorption 2. In some cases, inadequate toughness 3. Reduced long-term stability for outdoor applications 4.Weather conditions of the material such as temperature, humidity, UV radiation The tests performed by material scientists, who are exploring these properties around the world, have confirmed that when appropriate manufacturing procedures are applied, bagasse displays mechanical properties such as tensile strength, flexural strength, and impact strength. (Bagasse Fibre, 2015)

"The sustainable tomorrow for future generations lies with the present industrial development towards eco efficiency of industrial products and their process of manufacturing." ­ (Bagasse Fibre, 2015)
Design Intent Influenced by the contemporary use of materials in Kengo Kuma's Contemporary hut as well as the resourceful use of materials in the immediate context of the Ekhaya house in Cape Town, both discussed further in Chapter Four, the intention of this design is to suggest the idea of using compressed bagasse OSB oriented "strand boards" as 2"x8" roof rafters, in place of the imported lumber, as well as modular size lightweight compressed bagasse OSB panels to contribute to the building envelope of recycled plastic panels. OSB: Oriented Strand Board - A structural panel suitable for a wide range of construction and industrial purposes. (Floor, Roof and Wall Sheathing) OSB Panels: 4'x8' Sheets - or cut to size. 8'x24' (Industrial) Or larger (Special Order) OSB Thickness: (Most Common) 1/4", 3/8", 7/16", 15/32", 19/32"and 23/32" Weight: Ranges from 1.25 psf to 2.5 psf Dimensional Lumber: 2"x4", 2"x6", 2"x8" It is believed that the aesthetic design itself, and the desire to continue with the experiments for a possible alternative in existing material resources, will be the driving force to help transform the depended island today into a more self-sufficient tomorrow.

119

Bamboo
The durable properties of Bamboo, a plant grown in Barbados but in little quantity and thus, hardly documented, is a popular building material known in areas such as East Asia and South America. Design Limitations Using bamboo, the potential of which is perhaps unfamiliar and therefore overlooked in Barbados, is currently one of the most sustainable means of construction in the world. (Sustainable Building, 2012) Influenced by the Barbadian Chattel House, whose imported wooden skin and structure is light enough for man-handled manipulation, how can the locally harvested bamboo, increased in quantity by which it is currently grown, be used in this lightweight design and construction process of the modest low-income house? Limitations or Areas of Opportunity? The biggest issues for this choice of material in relation to Barbados is the small quantity currently grown, as well as the lack of skills possessed by the locals to build with it due to the existing unfamiliarity. Can we grow more bamboo? Will it be a cost effective building material? How can this be seen as an opportunity of change, a means of education and jobs while maintaining the influence of the rich vernacular for a more self-sufficient tomorrow? Advantages and Disadvantages

The structural component of the imported wood for the Chattel House can be replaced by the use of locally harvested bamboo. Depending on the species, Bamboo can grow up to one meter a day and be cut down at three years old, a period of growth which allows the bamboo to reach its full potential. (Hardy, 2015) Again, depending on the species grown, it may be hollow and therefore lightweight and transportable. Along with the structural properties of these rods, the potential of weaving the itsy splits to contribute to the building envelope and internal partitions is also of interest in combination of the newly taught, improved and existing skills of the local artisan and builder. The use of bamboo allows the luxury of being connected to nature while still being affordable. (Hardy, 2015) The building quality, cost and long lasting properties of such low-income homes is heavily dependent on the species grown and harvested as well as the level of maintenance required. For many, low-cost housing and bamboo construction do not work together, but it is believed to be an option still worth investigating. The cost of a house built with bamboo is dependent on the following: 1. Bamboo Supply: Locally grown and harvested in comparison to the greater cost of importing wood. There is no manufacturing component required for its supply. 2. Location and Availability of Craftsmen: The existing conditions of the chosen land for the house and roads access. Who knows how to build with bamboo? How can this practice be taught and implemented? How can the already existing building traditions be incorporated with this material?

120

3. The overall budget and standards: low-income housing. 4. Design Shape and level of Difficulty: This is dependent on the sizing of the bamboo, what needs to be cut and how many times, as well as how these various sized pieces join together. (Keep in mind all these homes need to be easily assembled, perhaps disassembled in some cases, transported and reassembled.) Design Intent Influenced by the contemporary use of bamboo in the low-income housing project by HP Architects in Vietnam, discussed further in Chapter Four, the intention of this design is to suggest the idea of making use of the existing bamboo grown on the island as another option for both, the supporting structure of the house, as well as modular sized lightweight locally woven panels to contribute to the building skin of recycled plastic panels and bagasse boards. This material, as the research suggests, is easily grown and harvested, making it one of the most cost effective as well as natural materials available, a contrast to the factory built recycled plastic panels, compressed strandboards and chemically altered lightweight concrete.

Figure 79: Rod and Woven Bamboo Texture.

121

TWO Adaptable Construction Methods of Deployment
This component of the design strives to positively represent and in turn, reintroduce the potential use of the module and its adaptable construction methods of deployment seen in the vernacular architecture of the island's Chattel House. Influenced by the historical Chattel House and the contemporary affordable projects discussed Chapter Four, such as the Tiny House Movement and the kit of parts Low-Income Housing project by HP Architects in Vietnam, this thesis highly focused on the overall structural system of such a kit of parts, and thus the pros and cons of the chosen local materials and how they can be assembled easily. The intention is to design a structure that can be deployed on site with ease by the owner for permanent or temporary use. The prototype would be brought to site as a kit of parts, like that of the vernacular chattel house, ready for assembly. Three prototypes of different forms were explored, all with the same set of parts, the recycled plastic and compressed bagasse manufactured panels, the bagasse OSB "strand boards" as roof rafters, and the precast cellular concrete and bamboo supporting systems, which varied in form and connections to the other elements. Through the use of model making (See Appendix D), the advantageous and disadvantageous properties of each form was further investigated in order to produce the most suitable system that allowed the selected local materials to work at its optimum level independently as well as in unison. Creating the Movable Module In order to begin investigating modular sizes of the structural elements and other building envelope components, the overall size of the module had to first be worked out. The vernacular Chattel House, one of the first examples of prefabricated housing on the island, used this idea of modular construction with rational sizing of components, elements and spaces. (Crocker, 1971) This idea of modularity resulted in rational solutions of affordable and efficient subdivision construction of the module. (Modular Construction History, 2013) The only limitation to the size of each individual movable module was the width of the roads on the island and the structural relocating systems, such as the tray of a truck that would allow the transportation of the kit of parts or house as whole from one site to the next. The amount of fuel required to deliver these kits of parts that make up one module, would be reduced when they are tightly packaged on one truck, rather than in dozens of small deliveries. (Modular Construction History, 2013) Many modular buildings today consist of 3-6 different modules. For this design, the limitation is one module to one truck. The size of the module itself is at the maximum width of a structural relocation system. With these dimensions, the owner's movable possession can be relocated either as a complete entity, one module per truck, or taken apart by sides and stacked in the tray to then be relocated. The number of modules deployed in relationship to the lot of land provided is further discussed in the following strategy.

122

Figure 80: Creating the Module. Within a 3,000 sqft site, the modules were rearranged in different configurations to explore the different qualities of space. Prototype One: Two Modules = 400 sq ft. Prototype Two: Three Modules = 600 sq ft. Prototype Three: Four Modules = 800 sq ft.

123

Formwork Formwork

Formwork Formwork

Formwork Formwork

Prototype One
124

Prototype Two

Prototype Three

Structure Relocation: Transportation as a whole entity or as a Kit of Parts Typical Flat Bed Truck: W 2.6m (8'-4") x L 6m (20'-0") Road Limits: W 2.6m (8'-4") x H 3.6m (11'-9") x Length Varies Size of Module: W 2.6m x L 6m x Height Varies Adaptable Methods of Deployment Once the size of the module was determined, adaptable construction methods of deployment were further investigated through the use of model making: 1. PROTOTYPE ONE: Structural frames + Components 2. PROTOTYPE TWO: Structural posts + Components 3. PROTOTYPE THREE: Structural frames + Components Figure 81: Bringing Prototypes to site as a kit of parts - to be assembled with out the use of heavy 6.1m equipment. Built for the People, by the People. Figure 82: Sizing the Module and Relocation System.
2.6m 6.1m 6.1m 6.1m
0.91 0.91

6.1m

2.6m

6.1m
0.91 0.91 0.91

6.1m
0.91 0.91

0.91

0.91

2.6m

0.91

0.91

0.91

0.91

125

6.1m
0.91 0.91

0.91

0.91

0.91

A kit of parts is a system of designed components that join together to create a desirable whole. With this kit of parts, the DIY owner/builder would be able to produce an enclosure or series of enclosures of functional, economic and aesthetically pleasing spaces through a logical and repetitive structural grid. (Crocker, 1971) This would enable the owner/builder to build rapidly with ease and reduce construction waste. It is important to note the practical requirements needed for the successful functionality of this module such as the supporting walls, floors, roof and location and space required for services. (Crocker, 1971) There are two structural system options proposed: The first structural system is based on a single modular sized framing unit of precast cellular concrete (LWC) and/or bamboo, which is repeated three times per module. The second structural system is that of modular sized precast LWC and/or bamboo posts with roughly 6 posts per module. The precast LWC frames and posts can be made on or off site with rentable/ shared equipment (from local departments /neighbors) and adjustable formwork to suit the form desired. The harvested bamboo, the more natural material, can also be cut and joined together on site to support the chosen form. Although described as separate materials, the bamboo and the LWC can also work together structurally rather than as separate entities. The main supporting structural system was on a distinctly defined structural grid and the secondary structure of roof rafters, was a subdivision of the frame and posts spacing, and following that was the final component of the structure, the panels. (Crocker, 1971) When these structural frames and posts are made (on or off site) and secured into place within the structural

grid of one module, followed by the addition of roof rafters, the bagasse, the woven bamboo and recycled plastic panels are then slid into place to create the mixed material palette of the structure's building envelope. The floors are constructed of joists and floor panels, which would again be made on or off site. These floor panels also slide into place within the structural frame. The detailing of these components would be based on a logical, dimensionally coordinated, structural design. (Crocker, 1971) One of the main purposes of making use of the adaptable modular construction methods of deployment was to allow the creation of this affordable home without hindering the sense of freedom in the design and the need to resort to system building of limitations and wasted space. (Crocker, 1971) The whole system is to be viewed as a trouble-free construction kit that allows the community, the owner and builder to once again have involvement with the construction of their house, as well as the freedom to move with it, adjust and expand as needed over time, like that of the vernacular Chattel House, hence movable possessions. The dimensioning of the components in relation to the transportation and accessibility is as follows: The structural systems: Posts + Frames Height: Do not exceed 3.6m in height (Road Transportation Requirement) This does not limit the overall building height to 3.6m but may require an additional relocation system (flat bed truck) For this design the standard height has been kept at 2.6m Width: Do not exceed 2.6m in width (Maximum width of Relocation System)

126

Figure 83: Prototype One and Three: Structural System One: Precast Frames

127

128

Length: Do not exceed 6m in length. (Standard Length of a flat bed truck) However this length may vary. Depth: Varies depending on the height, length, width and material of post/frame. Secondary Structure: Rafters Width: Do not exceed 2.6m in width (Maximum width of Relocation System) Length: Do not exceed 3m in length. (Within the Standard 6m Length of a flat bed truck and capacity of material). Depth: Varies depending on the height, length, width and material of post/frame. Understand the limitation of the materials chosen to act as rafters ­ in this case it is the choice between bamboo rafters and purlins. Tertiary Structure: Panels (Windows + Doors) Width: Do not exceed 0.9m (3'-0") in width. (Barrier Free Design) Length: Do not Exceed 2.6m (8'-5") in height. Minimum 2m (6'-8") in Height. Depth: Depth Varies depending on Material Choice.

Figure 84: Prototype Two - Structural System Two: Precast Posts. Figure 85: Removing Prototypes from Site.

129

1. Recycled Plastic Panel Roof Skin 2. Bamboo Rafters/ Bagasse OSB 3. Recycled Plastic, Bagasse OSB and Woven Bamboo Panels 4. Precast Cellular Concrete Frames and Post 5. Precast Cellular Concrete Frames 6. Joists and Floor Panels Figure 86: Prototype One Axonometric Assembly. Figure 87: Prototype One on Site.

130

131

1. Recycled Plastic Panel Roof Skin 2. Bamboo Rafters/ Bagasse OSB 3. Recycled Plastic, Bagasse OSB and Woven Bamboo Panels 4. Precast Cellular Concrete Post and Beams 5. Precast Cellular Concrete Posts 6. Joists and Floor Panels Figure 88: Prototype Two Axonometric Assembly. Figure 89: Prototype Two on Site.

132

133

1. Recycled Plastic Panel Roof Skin 2. Bamboo Rafters/ Bagasse OSB 3. Recycled Plastic, Bagasse OSB and Woven Bamboo Panels 4. Precast Cellular Concrete Frames and Post 5. Precast Cellular Concrete Frames 6. Joists and Floor Panels Figure 90: Prototype Three Axonometric Assembly. Figure 91: Prototype Three on Site.

134

135

Figure 92: All Prototype Assembled on Site.

137

THREE Adaptable Spatial Arrangements
This strategy aims to make use of the adaptable spatial volume principle, found within both the Chattel and Government housing projects, but with the focus being that of a simple, systematic, more proportional approach in growth, a characteristic only seen in the Chattel House. The structure of the module would be conceived as to allow lateral combinations, thus enlarging or restructuring the house lengthwise and widthwise, allowing the occupant to manipulate the space as time and money permitted. Reasons for Adaptable Spatial Arrangements: . Increase/Decrease in family size. . Increase in salary ­ can purchase more space. . Change in use of space. The floor area of the low-income Government houses in Barbados, range roughly from 400 sq ft., as the smallest, to 800 sq ft., all within a 3,000 to 3,500 sq ft. site. Although this project isn't site specific due to the movable possession concept, it is still very much grounded to Barbados and its cultural roots. With the heavy influence of the new low-income Government houses of repeated form and fixed floor areas, it seemed suitable to work within the parameters of the existing floor areas to investigate the different spatial configurations that could be obtained from the derived module. Within this 3,500 sqft lot, the modules were rearranged in different spatial configurations, testing out the limiting size of the module itself and the qualitative spaces the additional floor plans variations could create. Inspired by the modular growth of the Chattel House as well as the expansion of the Ekhaya and Villa Verde housing projects discussed further in Chapter Four, this strategy allows these innovative homes to increase in size in a systematic but unconstrained manner with ease by the owner. Floor Area of one module: 2.6m x 6m = 15.6 sqm 1. 2. 3. 37 sqm (400 sq ft.) = 2 modules 56 sqm (600 sq ft.) = 3 modules 74 sqm (800 sq ft.) = 4 modules

1.

Figure 93: Prototypes 1-3 - Right Isonometric. Figure 94: Systematic Growth. Prototype Modular one two three 4 3 2

2.

Prototype Modules Prototype Modules Prototype Modules

3.

138

Prototype One

Prototype Two

Prototype Three

139

Figure 95: Prototype One - Modular Growth on Site- Front Elevation. Figure 96: Prototype One Modular Growth Side Elevation. Medium: Island Photography and Physical Models Collaged.

140

141

142

Figure 97: Prototype Two Modular Growth Side Elevation. Figure 98: Prototype Three Modular Growth Side Elevation. Medium: Island Photography and Physical Models Collaged.

143

Figure 99: Conceptual Render of Prototype One Growng on Site. Medium: Physical Models and Photographic imaes collaged. 145

FOUR Adaptable Through Transformability
This strategy aims to further develop the impact of the adaptable module through the use of a transformable building skin influenced by that of the versatile design for coolness and privacy found within the island's vernacular Chattel House. The structure of the modules would be conceived as to allow experiential and physical spatial changes within an adjustable building envelope of manually moved lightweight panels.These panels, the window, door and walls, were designed to allow such transformations of space and thus had the same modular height and width of 3'-0" by 6'-8". This allowed the adjustment of room volumes with the opened concept of public activity during the day and closing for security and privacy reasons at night, while still feeling connected to the outdoors. These modular sized panels also responded to environmental factors such as sun, wind and rain. Based on the lightweight material, these panels can be manually adjusted to allow different shading environments throughout the day as well as a natural flow of ventilation while still being sheltered from the rain.

N
North Elevation Wind Path Sun Path Circulation

N

West Elevation Figure 100: Section A-A Figure 101: Section B-B Figure 102: Sun and Wind Path Diagrams.

146

N

N

W

Prototype One

W int er Su

Prototype Two

W

i

e nt

un rS

Prototype Three

Floor Plan
W in

r te

n Su

W

int

er

Su

n

un

Su

er

rS

n

mm

me

Su

Su m

Su

n

Su n

er

er

n

mm

mm

Su

Floor Plan
W t in er n Su
Su n int er
Su

Su

n

un

er

rS

mm

me

Su

N
Su m

Floor Plan

147

148

Figure 103: Section A-A Closed Figure 104: Section A-A Open
149

Figure 105: Section B-B Closed Figure 106: Section B-B Open

Figure 107: The Importance of the Verandah Figure 108: The Mixed Material Palette - Building Skin.

152

153

154

Figure 109: Inside Outside Figure 110: Engaging with the Surroundings.

155

Figure 111: The Quality of Light Open. Figure 112: The Quality of Diffused Light - Closed.

156

157

Figure 113: View from above Closed Figure 114: View from below - Open

158

159

160

Figure 115: Allowing privacy and ventilation Closed Figure 116: Engaging with the public - Open

161

CONCLUSION
Design does matter. Today, more people are growing concerned with how they choose to live. Different pressures ­ financial and otherwise ­ have made adaptable architecture a more viable option. What needs exploring are the methods used by designers to respond to personal, societal, and even environmental priorities. It is not only about saving money ­ it is also a system for producing innovative, personalized homes while still providing predictability and confidence in a process often accompanied by risk. The proposed affordable housing should promote progressive development through adequate design. "The physical design of our homes, neighborhoods, and communities shapes every aspect of our lives, yet too often Architecture are desperately needed in places where they can least be afforded." (Design like you give a damn, 2006) Affordable housing in Barbados has a somewhat unknown future. With the research provided throughout this thesis, there is evidently room for growth in the ways the rich vernacular Chattel House is utilized by policy makers and those designers involved, a structural system that has proven to be both technically and politically difficult to achieve. The highly appropriate, but very much ignored, vernacular housing system of the island remains ignored and undervalued by the vast majority of the population and even denounced by some. The architectural design of the unique chattel house is a true example of innovation with its capabilities of easily adapting to local climatic, social and economic conditions. In meeting the housing needs of the poor, the Government of Barbados "should promote and upgrade vernacular architecture.. dwelling design should respond to climatic and cultural characteristics of the country." (Potter, 1992) The borrowed designs should give way to the vernacular architecture. (Bonhomme, 1978) The proposed affordable housing designs should build on the long-standing tradition of self-help construction seen in the island's indigenous vernacular system. Architects who are seeking to make their services and designs accessible to the many versus the few, have turned to an alternative housing industry. These architects hope to make a better tomorrow through space; architecturally designed homes that can be built efficiently and sustainably, on-time and on-budget. They strive to mend the broken bond between the architectural quality of space and a low budget, an area where creativity and care is needed most. It is, "architecture for the people, by the people." (Parvin, 2013) The most intriguing part of this research and design ­ I hope ­ is that it has opened the doors to new visions of tomorrow's affordable housing for both designers, as well as the general public, who will now be able to understand with the presented schemes of strategies and limitations that a low cost-affordable house does not necessarily translate into a space without the positive influence of architecture.

162

Appendix A: The Chattel House Orthographic Drawings Photographic Analysis

165

Chattel House Variations

1.

N
166

Site Plan

Figure 117: Site Plan of a traditional Chattel House Village scene built in the grounds of one of Barbados' Old Prime Minister's Home. - Tyrol Cot's Chattel Village Museum and Heritage Site. These designed homes are replicas of the 1920 and 1930's Chattel houses and are specifically positioned on site around a central social core to demonstrate the home life of Barbadians of that era. Drawings by: Gillespie & Steel Associates Ltd.
167

Ma in R oad

Figure 118: Original Chattel House - Orthographic Drawings Elevations. Phase One House - with gabled roof. Phase Two House Lean to toof. Figure 119: Original Chattel House - Orthographic Drawings - Plan. Scale: 1/4"=1'-0"
168

Legend: BDR: Bedroom LRM: Living Room KTCH: Kitchen BY Backyard Note: 1st Phase House - framed floor seperated into a Bedroom and Living Space. 2nd Phase House - Lean to Kitchen, earth floor, enclosed yard with an out house for washroom utilities
169

Figure 120: Original Chattel House in poor condition. Note: The galvanized sheeting for the roof material and jalousie windows as well as the deteriorating condition of the wood cladding due to high maintenance costs.

170

171

Figure 121: Chattel House with covered front PorchOrthographic Drawings - Plan Figure 122: Chattel House -Elevations. Note: 1st Phase House in the middle. 2nd Phase House - towards the back with a lean to Kitchen with wooden floor. 3rd Phase House towards the front with a hipped roof covering the Porch. Scale: 1/4"=1'-0"
172

Legend: BDR: Bedroom LRM: Living Room KTCH: Kitchen BY Backyard Note: 1st Phase House - framed floor seperated into a Bedroom and Living Space. 2nd Phase House - Lean to Kitchen, wooden and/or ceramic tiled floor on concrete slab. 3rd Phase House Hipped roof Patio for added living space.

173

Figure 123: One of the many Chattel House variations with a covered Porch at the front of the House. Note: The placement of jalousie windows for ventilation and cooling purposes and the solid foundation that would have originally been loose stone before.
174

175

Figure 124: (Decorated) Chattel House with front Verandah Entrance Orthographic Drawings - Plan Figure 125: Chattel House Elevations. Note: 1st Phase House 2nd Phase House towards the back. (Gabled Roof Addition) 3rd Phase Verandah with a pediment roof. Scale: 1/4"=1'-0"
176

Legend: BDR: Bedroom LRM: Living Room KTCH: Kitchen BY Backyard Note: 1st Phase House - framed floor seperated into a Bedroom and Living Space. 2nd Phase House - wooden and/or ceramic tiled floor on concrete slab. 3rd Phase House - Verandah entrance.
177

Figure 126: One of the many Chattel House variations with a Pediment Covered Verandah over the entrance of the House. Note: The placement Window hoods for shading and cooling purposes and the Georgian Influence in style with the Pediment Portico and lines of symmetry.
178

179

Appendix B: The NHC Starter Home Orthographic Drawings Photographic Analysis

181

One of the seventeen NHC Starter Home Site Plans showing the subdivisions of land into lots for the erection of residential lowincome housing. Housing Options: . Rent to Own . Rentals . Land Only . Buy House and Land

Subdivision of Land into Lots and Erection of Houses for Residential Purposes at Lower Greys, Christ Church

182

Key

Contessa (536 sq ft)

Orchid (644 sq ft)

Figure 127: NHC Starter Homes Site Plan. Survey Information provided by Preconco - Engineering firm in Barbados - by W.A.G Scott, Land Surveyor dated 16 June 2010 showing: Lot Boundaries and Areas Minor House Details in Plan

Pearl (820 sq ft)

Septic Tank Filter Bed Absoprtion Well Grease Trap

183

Bedroom 2 11'5"x8'6"

Kitchen 11'3"x7'4"

WC 8'2x4'4" Dining & Living 11'3"x10'1" Bedroom 1 11'9"x8'6"

Figure 128: NHC Starter Home Contessa - Floor Plan. Note: Drawings taken from the NHCO Website. One half is an open plan concept for the kitchen and living space, the other half is divided into bedrooms and washroom area. Floor Area: 536 sq ft. Figure 129: NHC Starter Home - Contessa 3d Render taken from the NHC Website.

184

185

Bedroom 2 11'5"x 8'

Kitchen 11'3"x 8'

Figure 130: NHC Starter Home Orchid - Floor Plan.
WC 8'2 x 4'6"

Dining & Living 14' x 11'3"

Note: Drawings taken from the NHCO Website. One half is an open plan concept for the kitchen and living space with a small patio at the front, the other half is divided into bedrooms and washroom area. Floor Area: 644 sq ft. Figure 131: NHC Starter Home Orchid 3d Render taken from the NHC Website.

Bedroom 1 11'5"x10'8" Patio 11'7"x 4'6"

186

187

Kitchen 11'3"x 8' Bedroom 2 11'5"x 9'3"

WC 8'2 x 5'7

Figure 132: NHC Starter Home Pearl - Floor Plan. Note: Drawings taken from the NHCO Website.

Bedroom 1 11'5"x 8'7"

Dining & Living 21'4" x 11'3"

Bedroom 1 11'5"x 9'7"

One half is an open plan concept for the kitchen and living space with a small Patio at the front, the other half is divided into bedrooms and washroom area. Floor Area: 820 sq ft. Figure 133: NHC Starter Home Pearl 3d Render taken from the NHC Website.

Patio 11'7"x 4'6"

188

189

Appendix C: Design Proposal Conceptual Renders

191

192

Figure 134: Sleeping Quarters In the Loft. Closed Figure 135: Afternoon Nap Open

193

194

Figure 136: Socializing in the Patio. - Open Figure 137: Preparing food in the Patio - Closed.

195

196

Figure 138: The Backyard. Figure 139: Prepping for Laundry in the Backyard.

197

Appendix D: Modelling Process Model Massing - Stage One Model Massing - Stage Two Model Massing - Stage Three

199

STAGE ONE

Figure 140 & 141: Model Massing - Experimenting with different forms inspired by the vernacular Chattel House

200

201

Figure 142: Prototype One Model. Figure 143: Prototype One Model showing the transformable building skin components and modular growth. Medium: Photographic Collaging of physical models.

202

203

Figure 144: Prototype Two. Figure 145: Prototype Two Model showing the transformable building skin components and modular growth. Medium: Photographic Collaging of physical models.

204

205

Figure 146: Prototype Three Figure 147: Prototype Three Model showing the transformable building skin components and modular growth. Medium: Photographic Collaging of physical models.

206

207

208

Figure 148: All Prototypes Collaged.
209

STAGE TWO

Figure 149: Prototype One. Figure 150: Prototype One Modular Growth. Medium: Photographic Collage of Physical Models.

210

211

Figure 151: Prototype Two Figure 152: Prototype Two Modular Growth. Medium: Photographic Collage of Physical Models.

212

213

Figure 153: Prototype Three Figure 154: Prototype One Modular Growth. Medium: Photographic Collage of Physical Models.

214

215

STAGE THREE

216

Figure 155: Prototype One. Figure 156: Prototype Two Figure 157: Prototype Three Medium: MDF Laser cut model with Veneer and Plastic panel cladding.

217

REFERENCES
Books
Ban, S. (2014). Humanitarian architecture. Aspen: Aspen Art Museum Birhauser, V. (1997). 36 Propositions for a Home: Basel. Boston Berlin. Boyer, Christine M., (2008). Heterotopia and the city: Public space in a postcivil society. London: Routledge. Crocker, A. (1971). Module and metric; the theory and practice of dimensional co-ordination in metric. New York: Praeger. Etchells, Frederick. (1946). Le Corbusier: Towards a new architecture,. London: Architectural Press Davis, S. (1995). The architecture of affordable housing. Berkeley: University of California Press. Design like you give a damn: Architectural responses to humanitarian crises. (2006). New York, NY: Metropolis Books. Foucault, Michel, (2008). Heterotopia and the city: Public space in a postcivil society. London: Routledge. Fraser, H., & Hughes, R. (1986). Historic Houses of Barbados (2nd Ed.) Bridgetown: Barbados National Trust.

Fraser, H., Watson, K., Stevenson, P., & Gollop, W. (2012). Barbados National Trust: Guardians of our Heritage: 50 years. Barbados: Miller Publishing. Friedman, A. (2001). The Grow Home. Montreal [Que: McGill-Queen's University Press. Jowett, B. (1991). The Republic. Champaign, ill: Project Gutenberg. Kacmar, D. (n.d.). BIG little house: Small houses designed by architects. Kieran, S., & Timberlake, J., (2004) Refabricating Architecture: How Manufacturing Methodologies are Poised to Transform Building Construction. McGrawHills. USA Krauel, J., (2004), Experimental Architecture Houses. Universe Publishing. USA Kronenburg, R., (2007) Flexible Architecture: Architecture that Responds to Change. London Laurence King Publishing Ltd. Kronenburg, R., (2008) Portable Architecture: Design and Technology. Birkahuser Verlag AG Kronenburg, R., (Eds.) (1998), Transportable Environments: Theory, Context, Design and Technology. London and New York, E & FN Spon an Imprint of Routledge. Ludwig, M. (1998). Mobile Architektur: Geschichte und Entwicklung transportabler und modularer

Bauten. Stuttgart: Dt. Verl.-Anst. McLellan, G., (1999). Some Phases of Barbados Life: Tropical Scenes and Studies. St. Joseph, Barbados, W.I. Flagship Investments. More, T., (1999). Utopia. Raleigh, N.C.: Alex Catalouge. Oliver, P., (1997). Encyclopedia of Vernacular Architecture of the World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Ortega, A., Rybczynski, W., Ayad, A., Ali, W. & Acheson, A., (1975), The Ecol Operation: Ecology + Building + Common Sense. Minimum Cost Housing Group, School of Architecture, McGill University. Montreal Canada. Potter, R. (1992). Housing conditions in Barbados: A geographical analysis. Mona, Jamaica: Institute of Social and Economic Research, University of the West Indies. Rodwin, L. (1961). The Future Metropolis, New York: G. Braziller. Russel, B., & Oliviere, G., (2001) Design Does Matter: An Anthology of Essays. US & CA, Teknian. Sadler, Simon. (2005). Archigram architecture without architecture. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Schittich, C. (2010). In Detail: Small structures: Compact dwellings, temporary structures, room modules.

Basel: Birkhäuser. Seidel, F. (2008). New small houses = Nouvelles petites maisons = Neue kleine häuser. Köln: Evergreen. Siegal, J. (2002). Mobile: The Art of Portable Architecture. New York: Princeton Architectural Press. Siegal, J., Stewart, J., & Mitchell, W. (2008), More Mobile: Portable Architecture for Today. New York: Clarkson Potter. Simpson, D. (n.d.). Young-old: Urban utopias of an aging society. Lars Muller Publishers. Slavid, R. (2007). Micro: Very small architecture. London: Laurence King. Slesin, S. (1985). Caribbean style. New York: C.N. Potter :. Smith, R., E., (2010), Prefab Architecture: A Guide to Modular Design and Construction. Hoboken, NJ.: John Wiley & Sons. Walker, J. & Trew, S., (2011), Jill Walker: Chattel Houses. Barbados, Best of Barbados Ltd. Walker, J. (2002), Jill Walker's Barbados: 50 Years of Barbadian Life Recorded in Jill's Drawings and Paintings. St. Thomas, Barbados: Distributed by Best of Barbados, Welches Plantation. Watson, M., & Potter, R. (2001). Low-cost housing in Barbados: Evolution or social revolution? Barbados: University of the West Indies Press.

Zeiger, M., (2009), Tiny Houses. New York: Rizzoli; New York: Distributed to the US trade by Random House.

http://www.nevhouse.com/#header Kent Griswold. (n.d.). Retrieved March 23, 2016, from http://tinyhouseblog.com/tiny-house-concept/nickand-lilahs-glass-cabin/ Low cost bamboo housing in vietnam by H&P architects. (2013). Retrieved March 23, 2016, from http:// www.designboom.com/architecture/low-cost-housefor-middle-vietnam/ Meme Meadows Experimental House by Kengo Kuma and Associates. (2013, January 16). Retrieved December 4, 2015, from http://www.dezeen. com/2013/01/16/meme-meadows-experimentalhouse-by-kengo-kuma-and-associates/ Recycled Plastic Nevhouses. (n.d.). Retrieved December 4, 2015, from http://inhabitat.com/singapores-prefabrecycled-plastic-nevhouses-offer-cheap-housing-anddivert-waste-from-landfills/ Peters, M., MP. (2004). Gruenrekorder » Field Recordings from Barbados | Michael Peters. Retrieved March 29, 2016, from http://www.gruenrekorder.de/?page_ id=351 Richard Olsen's Handmade Houses. Olsen, R., (2011) http://www.richardolsen.org/blog/2012/07/16/smallis-beautiful-architecture-without-architects-the-barbadian-chattel-house/ Shimogamo Jinja Hojoan by Kengo Kuma and Associates. (2013). Retrieved March 23, 2016, from http:// www.dezeen.com/2013/01/11/shimogamo-jinja-hojoan-by-kengo-kuma-and-associates/ Shroder, S., SS. (2010, August/September). The Real-

Articles & Websites
Ale¬jan¬dro Ara¬ve¬na. (n.d.). Retrieved March 23, 2016, from http://www.pritzkerprize.com/laureates/2016 About Barbados. (n.d.). Retrieved March 23, 2016, from http://barbados.org/barbados-parishes.htm#. VvLCXBghA7I Adaptability. (2012) Designing for Adaptable Futures. Retrieved from http://www.archdaily.com/tag/adaptability/. Barbados. (n.d.). Retrieved March 23, 2016, from http://atlas.media.mit.edu/en/profile/country/brb/ Barbados Today. (2014) Barbados Statistics. Retrieved from http://www.barstats.gov.bb/ Black Bess Group. (n.d.). Retrieved March 23, 2016, from http://blackbess.com/index.html#!/about Blenman, S. (2016). Reducing, Reusing, Recycling and Recovering Waste the Bajan Way - Caribbean DevTrends. Retrieved March 29, 2016, from http:// blogs.iadb.org/caribbean-dev-trends/2016/01/18/ reducing-reusing-recycling-and-recovering-waste-thebajan-way/ Home. (n.d.). Retrieved December 4, 2015, from

ity about Building with Bamboo. Retrieved March 29, 2016, from http://www.guaduabamboo.com/ construction/the-reality-about-building-with-bamboo Things To Do. (n.d.). Retrieved March 29, 2016, from http://www.barbados.org/sugar.htm#.VvqhWBghA7I Thompson. (2011). Barbados Sugar Cane Industry: The dinosaur that fails to go extinct. Retrieved March 29, 2016, from https://barbadosfreepress. wordpress.com/2011/02/12/barbados-sugar-caneindustry-the-dinosaur-that-fails-to-go-extinct/ Uses for Bamboo in Sustainable Building - www. greenbuild.org. (2012). Retrieved March 29, 2016, from http://www.greenbuild.org/new-construction/ uses-for-bamboo-in-sustainable-building/ Villa Verde Housing / ELEMENTAL. (2013). Retrieved March 23, 2016, from http://www.archdaily. com/447381/villa-verde-housing-elemental Vernacular Houses and Domestic Material Culture on Barbadian Sugar Plantations, 1640-1838. The Journal of Caribbean History. Bergman, S., & Handler, J., From http://jeromehandler.org/wp-content/ uploads/House-09.pdf. VTN | Vo Trong Nghia Architects - S-House 2. (n.d.). Retrieved December 4, 2015, from http://votrongnghia.com/projects/s-house-2/ Vo Trong Nghia unveils second prototype for low-cost Vietnam housing. (2014, September 16).

Retrieved December 4, 2015, from http://www. dezeen.com/2014/09/16/s-house-low-cost-housingvietnam-vo-trong-nghia-architects/ Welcome to Arched Cabins! (n.d.). Retrieved December 4, 2015, from http://www.archedcabins. com/ What Is The Tiny House Movement? (2009). Retrieved March 23, 2016, from http://thetinylife.com/ what-is-the-tiny-house-movement/

Videos
Alastair Parvin. (n.d.). Architecture for the People by the People. Retrieved March 23, 2016, from https:// www.ted.com/speakers/alastair_parvin T. (2013). Ekhaya - an affordable informal housing solution: Johnny Anderton at TEDxCapeTown. Retrieved March 23, 2016, from https://www.youtube. com/watch?v=75LfMlG-NQk Half Cut Tea . com | Nick Olson & Lilah Horwitz. (n.d.). Retrieved March 23, 2016, from https:// vimeo.com/70993261 T. (2014). Houses made of grass | Elora Hardy | TEDxUbud. Retrieved March 23, 2016, from https:// www.youtube.com/watch?v=zvKngNF78Dg


