DEFINING THE FIELD OF IMMIGRATION STUDIES: A PRELIMINARY STUDY OF RESEARCH CONTRIBUTIONS by Olena Ingerova, BA, York University, 2006

A Major Research Paper presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in the Program of Immigration and Settlement Studies

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2008

© Olena Ingerova 2008

Author's Declaration

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this major research paper. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this paper to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. ___________________________________ Signature

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this paper by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

_______________________________________ Signature

ii

DEFINING THE FIELD OF IIMMIGRATION STUDIES: A PRELIMINARY STUDY OF RESEARCH CONTRIBUTIONS © Olena Ingerova, 2008 Master of Arts Immigration and Settlement Studies Ryerson University ABSTRACT This is a study that in a preliminary way explores the boundaries of immigration as a field of study. It does so at two scales ­ the national and the local ­ by examining a sample of articles published in the Journal of International Migration and Integration and Michael Doucet's Bibliography on Immigration and Settlement in the Toronto Area, Third Edition. The implications of findings are then discussed in the light of concepts such as multidisciplinarity, authorship, and knowledge production.

Key words: immigration research; discipline; multidisciplinary; authorship

iii

TABLE OF CONTENTS Introduction ......................................................................................... 1 Methodology ........................................................................................ 5 Journal of International Migration and Integration ......................................... 9 Bibliography on Immigration and Settlement in the Toronto Area ..................... 16 Analysis ............................................................................................ 22 Discussion .......................................................................................... 28 Works consulted ................................................................................. 36 APPENDIX A ­ JIMI Sample.................................................................. 39 APPENDIX B ­ Bibliography Sample........................................................ 46

iv

LIST OF TABLES

Table 1 ­ Doucet Bibliography, Section A, Article Selection ................................ 7 Table 2 ­ JIMI, Solo and Joint Publications by Academic Discipline ..................... 11 Table 3 ­ JIMI, Article Distribution by Topic ................................................ 14 Table 4 ­ Doucet Bibliography, Solo and Joint Publications by Academic Discipline ..17 Table 5 ­ Doucet Bibliography, Article Distribution by Topic ............................. 20 Table 6 ­ JIMI and Doucet, Top 12 Contributing Disciplines .............................. 22 Table 7 ­ JIMI and Dooucet, Top Five Contributing Disciplines in Rank Order ........ 24

v

INTRODUCTION Recent years have seen a m assive growth in writing ab out imm igration and

settlement. This is symptom atic of a trem endous upsurge in acad emic writing about immigration. W hile imm igration studies does not exist as an acad emic discipline in Canadian universities, it is m ost certainly a distinct field of study, as evidenced by the existence of scholarly publica tions, university programs, and conferences dedicated to he study of immigration. In addition to being a newly expanded field of study, the literature on immigration is both multidis ciplinary and multisectoral in nature. People write about immigration from different organizational pl atforms, including universities, governm ent, and the non-profit sector. Within each organizational platform further subdivisions occur. Scholars an d resear chers af filiated with unive rsities con tribute f rom a m ultitude of academic disciplines; governm ent contribution s range from m unicipal Task Forces to intergovernmental organizations ; the non-profit sector ranges in focus from research to service to advocacy. This m ultidisciplinary and m ultisectoral natu re of immigration

research raises some interesting questions hitherto unexplored. For example, what are the boundaries of immigration as a field of study? Who is contributing to this field? D oes one's disciplinary or organizational setting infl uence research and/or topics of res earch? In what way can this occur? What implications does this have for immigration research? Multidisciplinary programs emerged in response to the dem ands arising f rom the larger political clim ate of anti-imperia lism, civil rights, anti-racism , and women's

movements that saw previously m arginalized groups gain access to university campuses. These racialized, gendered, and classed groups demanded changes to the curriculum that

1

reflected th eir pres ence in the academ y a nd explored and celebrated their diverse histories, w hich were not plausible in the confines of the trad itional discip lines. The

emergence of m ultidisciplinary pro grams as a result expan ded the field of inquiry and reconfigured the contours of knowledge 2001) As m ultidisciplinary pr ograms gained a de gree of relative institutional com fort, they began to establish their own boundaries Complicating the picture is the fact that and define them selves m ore clearly. and m ethods of knowledge production (Katz,

multidisciplinary fields of study have grown

while the d isciplines themselves have not, resu lting at the sam e time in the blurring and the expansion of boundaries (Katz, 2001) . The definition of these boundaries is

becoming more im portant in the present ac ademic clim ate of budgetary r estraints, cutbacks, and shrinkages that see the e mergence of a c onsumerist model of higher

education that em phasizes the m arketing of graduates and knowle dge production (Katz, 2001; Archer, 2008). According to Katz (2001), hi s has led to a stricter policing of the borders between disciplines both on the scholarly and the administrative side.

Considering that m ost multidis ciplinary prog rams are run by f aculty who have prim ary appointments in particular disciplines and th at most departm ents prefer to hire people trained specifically in th eir disciplines (Katz, 2001), this newfound redefinition of

disciplinary boundaries can carry interesting implications for multidisciplinary programs. Immigration is a par ticularly in teresting case because, by virtue of being a new

field of study in additio n to being a m ultidisciplinary one, its boundaries have not yet been established. In order to gain institutional stability, the field needs to be more clearly defined. W hat disciplines does it draw on? W hat binds thes e dis ciplines toge ther? Are

2

there any differences a

mong the m ember di sciplines with respect to theoretical

frameworks and philosophical a pproaches? How does autho rship affect research ? Is it a multidisciplinary field that borrows from other disciplines or an interdisciplinary one that truly integ rates exis ting discip lines to methodologies, interpretation and analysis? In order to answer the questions surr ounding the evolution of i mmigration as a field of study, we must first de fine it. This is a study that in a prelim inary way explores the boundaries of imm igration as a field of following four questions: study. Specifically, I seek to answer the define appropriate objects of inquiry,

(1) In the m ultidisciplinary f ield tha t is im migration studies, which disciplines are contributing? (2) What topics are getting the most attention? (3) Is there a link between an author's discipline and research focus? (4) Is immigration a multidisciplinary field or an interdisciplinary one?

This study takes place in a Canadian c ontext and it does so on two scales: the national and the local. First of all, I a m in terested in Canada because immigration is a national pro ject. Second , I am interested in To ronto becaus e m ost i mmigrants settle in cities and Toronto is by far the largest recipient of newcomers. As a proxy of immigration research, I have taken two publications to captu re the two scales of my exploration: the Journal of International Migration and Integration (JIMI) to represen t national research

3

and Michael Doucet's latest Bibliography on Immigration and Settlement in the Toronto Area, Third Edition (henceforth Bibliography). JIMI is a product of the International Metropolis Project and provides a "new

multidisciplinary forum for the study of hum an migration and integration". It emphasizes multidisciplinary, inte rdisciplinary, com parative, and po licy-relevant r esearch. At the same ti me, it is an independent, peer-revie wed and "auton omous academ ic journal th at advocates scholarship independent of the poli tical or policy views of its in stitutional

sponsors." It covers a wide range of topi cs concerning both immigration and integration, as well as pertaining to ethnocultural di versity (Abu-Laban and Vermeulen, 2000). While JIMI in in ternational in scope, it is f irst and foremost a Canadian publication and is cosponsored by the Metropolis P roject, Citi zenship and Imm igration Canada, the Social Sciences and Hum anities Res earch Council of Canada, the Un iversity of Alberta, the University of Saskatchewa n, the Atlantic (A MA), Mont real (IM), Vancouver (RIIM), Toronto (CERIS) and Edm onton (PCERII) Me tropolis Centres, th e Gouvernem ent du Québec, Ministère des Relations avec les citoye ns et de l' Immigration, and a consortium of Canadian federal government departments. Michael Do ucet ha s be en com piling sources o f immigration rese arch concern ing Toronto since 1999, each updated edition reflec ting the enorm ous grow th in literature. The original 1999 version contained 554 entrie s, which grew to 946 in the Second

Edition. His latest Bibliography contains 3,428 entries and provides a listing of books, monographs, research reports, graduate thes es, book chapters, and journal articles that deal with immigration and settlement in the Toronto area.

4

METHODOLOGY

The two publications chos en for analysis, JIMI and Bibliography, were treated as sources of d ata. Select articles from each one were profiled as data un its. The authors of each work were iden tified and clas sified with respect to th eir organization platform. The three identified platforms were academ ic, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and government. Each of the three platform s was then further subdivided into disciplinary and sec toral affiliations. Academ ic sources were tabu lated accord ing to the au thors' affiliations as indicated in each respective pub lication, NGO sources with respect to

mandate (research, advocacy, or service based), and governm ent sources with respect to departments. In the cas e of joint publicati ons, each author was assigned equal weight, resulting in more authors than articles in the analysis. Cross-organizational collaborations were considered. Finally, research topics were analyzed to determ ine if there existed a link between authors' affiliation and the topics being researched. The first issue of JIMI appeared in wi nter of 2000. Currentl y, nine volum es have been published. However, since the year 2008 is not yet complete, Volum e No. 9 is not included in this an alysis to avoid co mpromising the re sults with an in complete sample. All th e a rticles were c ompiled in to a table publication's table of contents, beginning chronologically until the last in the orde r tha t th ey appeared in the with th e f irst issu e and con tinuing

issue of Volume No. 8. T

his list yielded 182 articles

covering the period from 2000-2007. Due to the operational constraints of this study, this number was cut in half by random ly selecting every other article beginning with the first article on the list. It should be noted the JIMI did not specify its editorial policy about the

5

ordering of articles on the li st. As such, it was presum ed that this ordering was random and will not affect the s election process of articles for the present s tudy. The resulting 91 articles were then profiled with resp ect to authorship. Each author's organizational and disciplinary af filiation w as noted an d tabulated. This inf ormation was derived f rom the Contributor's Notes s ection of each issue. Where insufficient information was prov ided, an additional search was perform ed on the in ternet using univers ity and organization websites to dete rmine author cred entials. W here bo th ap proaches f ailed to p roduce sufficient information, the author was classified as unidentified. Michael Doucet's Bibliography consists of three parts: (A) studies on immigration

and settlement in the Toronto area, (B) studi es of particular groups of comm unities, and (C) fictional accounts of the imm igrant experience in Toronto. In total, the Bibliography contains 3,428 entries, som e of which are duplicated under different headings. Section A numbers 2,099 1 sources, section B has 1,169, and section C has 161. Given the great discrepancy in num bers from JIMI, the fo llowing approach was taken to obtain a comparable sample: First of all, Sec tion C was not inc luded in the an alysis because the focus of thi s study is immigration resear ch. Second, only the works published between the years of 2000 and 2007 were included in th e analysis to align the Doucet analysis with the time period ex amined in JIMI. Th ird, since Section A contains approxim ately double the number of sources found in Section B, two works from Section A were taken for each work taken from Section B. Both subsections, which contain unequal num section A and section B are divided into bers of sources. To ensure an accurate

representative sample, the number of articles taken from each section was proportional to
1

Michael Doucet identifies 2,098 entries in this section. However, two separate counts have been performed and the number 2,099 will be used for all further calculations. 6

the number of sources containe d in each section . Finally, s ince some of the works were duplicated under different headings, this problem was addressed in the following manner: articles were selected random ly from each section in the o rder in which subheadings appeared in the bibliog raphy, starting with the first article under each subheading and following the calculations detailed in Table 1. Where the article thus selected had already been chosen from a different subsection, th e very next article on the list was chosen instead. It should be noted th at articles were sorted alphabetically by author, not

chronologically, in order to avoid overrepr occur in cases where only one

esentation of the year 2000, which would a particular subsection. The

article was chosen from

chosen articles were then interfiled and profiled in the same way as described for JIMI. The particular selection pro cess for articles fro m Section A was a little dif ferent from that for Section B. Section A contains 13 2 headings, numbering 899 eligible articles with a pub lication date between 2000 and 2007. In to tal, 60 artic les were se lected from this section using the calculations process detailed in Table 1 below. Table 1 ­ Doucet Bibliography, Section A, Article Selection Section A subheading # of eligible # of articles chosen articles
17 3 64 4 41 3 103 7 1

Order of selection
First articles on the list First article on the list Every 18th article (##1, 19, 37, 55) Every 18th article (##1, 19, 37) Every 17th one (##1, 18, 35, 52, 69, 86, 103)

General Works, PanCanadian Studies, and Collections Guidebooks, Bibliographies, and Directories Ethnic Neighbourhoods and Residential Segregation Studies Housing Experiences and Issues for Immigrants and Refugees Labour Market, Entrepreneurship, Economic Impacts, and
2

1

Michael Doucet identifies 12 headings in the table of contents. However, the bibliography itself contains one more section entitled "Demographic Profiles." 7

Socioeconomic Patterns Racism, Discrimination, Race Relations, PoliceCommunity Relations, and Related Studies Services and Agencies for Immigrants and Refugees Education, Childhood, Youth, Parenting, and Related Works Socialization, Civic Participation, Adaptation, Identity, and Related Works Immigrant and Refugee Health Immigration Policy Miscellaneous General Works Demographic Profiles

50 3

Every 22nd article (## 1, 23, 45) Every 17th article (## 1, 18, 35, 52, 69) Every 17th article (## 1, 18, 35, 52, 69, 86, 103, 120) Every 16th article (## 1, 17, 33, 49, 65, 81, 97, 113, 129, 145, 161, 177, 193, 209, 225, 241, 257, 273) Every 13th article (## 1, 14, 27, 40) Every 17th article (## 1, 18, 35, 52) First article on the list First article on the list

71 5 120 8 277 1 8

62 4 56 14 11 4 1

Total

899

60 ------

1

Section B contains 22 headings, 21 of

which conta in eligible article s with a

publication date between 2000 and 2007 for a total of 415 eligible artic les. Of these, 30 articles were chosen. S ince th ere were grea t discrepancies in the number of articles contained under each h eading ­ ranging from 2 to 77 ­ and only 30 articles were to be chosen, it was im possible to obtain a balanced sample using the sam e a pproach as was used in Section A due the large number of headings contained in this Section. In addition, articles were not grouped under headings by res earch topic like in Section A, but instead by a particular ethnic group to be studied. As a re sult, a different approach was

undertaken. All the eligible articles from Section B were interfiled, sorted alphabetically, and then each 14 th article was rando mly selected starting with the f irst article on the list. Once again, if the article chosen in this way had already ap peared on th e list of articles chosen previously, the very ne xt ar ticle on th e list was sele cted in stead. This way, the

8

individual articles themselves were chosen randomly but in a way that as best as possible attempted to ensure a fairly equal dis tribution of articles acco rding to the weight of each section. By selecting every 14
th

ar ticle in th e alphabe tical order, th e chances th at the

sections with a larger number of articles will be represented by a greater number of works were higher than for sections containing only intentionally skip over certain sections. Finally, the two sam ples derived from Section A and Section B were com bined and interfiled. The au thors from each work we re extracted and profiled in the sam e way as for JIMI. One major limitation of this study needs to be addressed at th is point. While I am sampling 50% of all JIMI articles, I am only sam pling 2.8% of research articles
3

a handful of entries, without the need to

in

Doucet's Bibliography (or 6.9% of research articles published between 2000 and 2007). Sampling 50% of the Bibliography articles was simply not feasible for this study. Instead, the same number of articles was chosen from Doucet as from JIMI to facilitate num erical comparisons between the two publications with respect to authors, partnerships, academic disciplines represented, and re search topics. W hile the desc ribed methodology allows at two scales to explore th e issue of discip linary and sectoral contribut ors to this f ield, I recognize that the fact that not all the articles were considered ­ particularly in Doucet's case, where only a small percen tage was sa mpled ­ m ay result in a skewed sample. Nevertheless, I feel that m y chosen appr oach satisf ies the m odest goals o f this

exploratory study in th e most practical way and the resu lting study can provide general direction for further research on this topic.
3

This excludes Section C from calculations. The total number of research articles is 3,268. Of these, 1,314 were published between 2000 and 2007. 9

JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION AND INTEGRATION The selection process for JIMI y ielded a lis t of 91 articles f or analysis. Of these, 49 were solo works and 42 were joint publications. In total, 130 individual authors could be identified. Of the 130, three were unidentified, four were affiliated with research-

based NGOs, seven were affiliate d with differ ent levels of governm ent (including one intergovernmental organization), and 115 we professors, graduate students, re m embers of the academ ia (including

research ass istants, intern ational lec turers, af filiated

researchers, and post-doctoral fellows). The academ ic community was represen ted by the following 26 disciplines :

anthropology (5), business adm inistration (1 ), crim inology (1), cultural diversity and citizenship (1), culture, organization and m anagement (1), dem ography (1), econom ics (12), education (10), geography (9), health sc iences including psychiatry and psychology (9), his tory (1), inte rnational re lations (1), Is raeli and Middle Eas ters s tudies (1),

linguistics (1), m anagement (1), m arketing (1), nursing (4), philosophy (2), political science (8), religious studies (1), social science (7), social work (6), sociology (26), urban planning (1), urbanization, culture and societ y (2), wom en's studies (1), and one was unidentified. The predom inant disciplines cont ributing to im migration research are thus sociology, economics, education, geography, health sciences, political science, and social science. With respect to solo p ublications, two were governm ent sources, three were ic. Of the 43 academ ic works,

NGOs, one was unidentified, and 43 were academ

10

sociology was by far the predom inant academic contributor with 15 publications. Th at's just over half of all the sociology authors. Social sciences accounted for four (4) works ; economics, political science and health sciences accounted for three (3) each ; tw o (2)

works each were con tributed by education, g eography and social anthropology ; and single works were produced by crim demography, history, international relati inology, cultural diversity and citizenship,

ons nursing, religious studies, and urban

planning. One academic discipline was unidentified. With respect to joint publications, 15 disciplines were represented: anthropology (3), business administration (1), culture, organization and management (1), education (8), geography (7), health sciences (6), nursing (3 ), Israeli and Middle Eastern studies (1), linguistics (1), political science (5), social science (3), social work (6 ), sociology (11), urbanization, culture and society (1), and women's studies (1). Table 2 summarizes th e information regarding solo and joint publications. Table 2 ­ JIMI, Solo and Joint Publications by Academic Discipline Academic Total # of publications Solo publications discipline Anthropology 5 2 Business 1 -administration Criminology 1 1 Cultural divers ity 11 and citizenship Culture, 1 -organization and management Demography 1 1 Economics 12 3 Education 10 2 Geography 9 2 Health sciences 9 3 Nursing 4 1 History 1 1 International 1 1 11

Joint publications 3 1 --1 -9 8 7 6 3 ---

relations Israeli and Middle Eastern studies Linguistics 1 Management 1 Marketing 1 Philosophy 2 Political science Religious studies Social science Social work Sociology 26 Urban planning Urbanization, culture and society Women's studies Unidentified 1 Total

1 ---

1 1

8 1 7 6 1 2 -1 91

3 1 4 -15 1 -1 49

5 -3 6 11 -1 1 -42

As Table 2 illus trates, of the 26 academ accounting for m ultiple publications were e

ic discip lines repres ented, the ones

ither pred ominantly joint publications

(economics, education, geography, health scie nces, nursing, and social work) or had a relatively equal distribution of solo and jo int publications (politi cal science, social p ublication contr ibutors were

sciences, a nd socio logy). None of the multiple

predominantly solo publications with the single possible exception of sociology, but even there the difference between solo and joint pub lications was fairly minor. The rest of the disciplines had only a single publication, which did not produce a large enough sample to determine the authorship dynamics in those cases. Of the 42 partnerships, 21 were within th e sam e dis cipline/organizational

platform, 16 were m ultidisciplinary, four we re between different sectoral affiliation (e.g. academic and government), and one included authors whose affiliation was unidentified. Of the 21 partnerships with in th e sam e discipline /organizational pla tform, one was

12

between governm ent sources, five were in eco nomics, four in soci ology, three each in geography and health sciences, two were in e ducation, and one each in political science, social scien ce, and culture, organ ization and m anagement. Of the four intersectoral publications, to were between governm ent wo rkers and sociologis ts, one between an NGO and geographers, and one between a government worker, a philosopher, a

sociologist, and an anth ropologist. Finally, of the 16 m ultidisciplinary partnerships, two were between sociology and anthropology, tw o between education and econom ics, and one each of the following: linguistics and social work; Israel i and Middle Eastern stu dies and socio logy; social work a nd wom en's stud ies; so cial scie nce, po litical scien ce, and sociology; philosophy and political science; political science and business administration; urbanization, culture and society and soci al work; sociology, psyc hology and education; political science and sociology; sociology and marketing; social work and education; and social work, urbanization, culture and management, and sociology. Among the 91 articles, 12 broad topics coul d be identified by grouping together articles with sim ilar research focus: ec onomic aspects of m igration (including labour market outcom es, career m obility, wages, eco nomic benefits of m igration, acces s to regulated professions, credentials recognition, occupational injury, foreign workers,

business m igrants, and brain dr ain), research an d policy (i ncluding policy debates and selectivity of m igrants), immigran t inte gration (including so cial integration,

acculturation, assim ilation, settlement, and

second generation m igrants), education

(including academ ic perfor mance of imm igrant children and youth and the educational attainment of m igrants), refugees (i ncluding resettlem ent and sponsorship),

multiculturalism, citiz enship and na tionalism (including tra nsnationalism and inclusion

13

and exclusion), urban aspects of

imm igration (including cities, housing, political

participation, and political represen tation), religion, racism and discrimination (including social m obility), illegal m igration (includi ng un documented m igrants a nd traf ficking), and other (including regional m igration, hi story of i mmigration, and dem ographic

profiles). A mong these them es, the topics gett ing the m ost attenti on were in econom ic aspects of migration (26), immigrant integrati on (10), and urban aspects of migration (8). The remaining categories contained between 3 and 6 sources each. Table 3 provides more detailed information on the distribution of articles by each broad topic category. Table 3 ­ JIMI, Article Distribution by Topic Topic category Specific focus by topic category Total4 26 Economic aspects of Language and employment ­ 1 migration Economic i ntegration/labour m arket outcom es ­5 Employment equity ­ 1 Employment ­ 4 Immigrant entrepreneurship ­ 1 Career mobility ­ 1 Access to regulated professions ­ 1 Credentials recognition ­ 1 Wages ­ 1 Tax-benefit analysis of immigration ­ 1 Socioeconomic wellbeing ­ 1 Human capital and employment ­ 1 Naturalization and employment ­ 1 Occupational injury ­1 Practicing traditional Chinese medicine ­ 1 Economics and citizenship ­ 1 Business migrants ­ 1 Foreign workers ­ 1 Brain drain ­ 1 Research and policy Research and policy ­ 2 6 Immigration policy ­ 1 Policy debates ­ 1 NGOs and the future of migration debate ­ 1 Immigrant selection and immigration ­ 1
4

The totals do not add to 91 because 4 works are not included on the account that their focus could not be determined. This includes two introductions to specific journal issues. 14

Immigrant integration

Education

Refugees Multiculturalism Citizenship and nationalism Urban aspects of immigration Religion Racism and discrimination

Illegal migration Other

Social integration ­ 1 Immigrant incorporation ­ 3 Assimilation ­ 1 Acculturation ­ 1 Poverty and integration ­ 1 Identity ­ 1 Second generation integration ­ 1 Settlement ­ 1 Children and youth (education) ­ 1 Academic performance of immigrants ­ 2 Immigrant concentration and education al attainment ­ 1 Religion and educational attainment - 1 Refugee resettlement ­ 2 Refugee integration ­ 1 Sponsorship and resettlement ­ 2 Social capital and multiculturalism ­ 1 Multiculturalism - 3 Citizenship and nationalism ­ 1 Inclusion and exclusion ­ 2 Transnationalism ­1 Political participation ­ 2 Political incorporation ­ 1 Metropolitan migration ­ 4 Housing ­ 1 Urban religion ­ 1 Religious diversity ­ 2 Ethnicity and social mobility ­ 1 Ethnicity, social capital and earnings ­ 1 Ethnicity and political representation ­ 1 Discrimination ­ 1 Racism - 2 Illegal migration ­2 Undocumented migrants ­ 1 Trafficking - 1 Demographic profiles ­ 2 Regional migration ­ 1 Charitable giving among immigrants ­ 1 Slavic brides ­ 1 History or immigration ­ 1

10

5

5 4 4 8

3 6

4 6

Further, a number of these works focuse d on specific groups of migrants (defined either geographically, by ethnicity, or according to various d emographic markers such as

15

age, imm igration status, etc.) or on part icular geographic regi ons. The specific groups targeted in this s ample were ref ugees (including further f ocus on wom en or specific regional origins), ethnic or re ligious groups (Chinese, Turks, Moroccans, Slavs, S outh Asians, Africans, Ghanains, Muslims), ch ildren and youth, business migrants, second generation m igrants, trafficked wom en, forei gn workers, and students. The particular geographic regions included ci ties (Toronto, Vancouver, M ontreal, B russels, Munich, Vienna), Canadian provinces (Alberta, Montreal, Quebec), countries (Canada, U.S., the Netherlands, Australia, Norway, Britain, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Sweden, Spain, Philippines, Switzerlan d, Lebanon, Finland) , and geographic and political regions (Europe, Subterranean Africa, European Union).

BIBLIOGRAPHY ON IMMIGRATION AND SETTLEMENT IN THE TORONTO AREA The selectio n process f or Mich ael Doucet's Bibliography produced a list of 91 articles. Of these, 70 were solo works a nd 21 were joint publications. In total, 125

individual authors were iden tified. Of the 125 authors, 1 00 were af filiated with the academic community, eight with various govern ment agencies, 13 with the NGO sector, one was an independent statutory body (Ont ario Human Rights Co mmission), and three could not be identified. Of the eight governm ent-affiliated contributors, three were f rom the Departm ent of Canadian Heritage, two f rom the Ontario Adm inistration of Settlement & Integ ration Services (OASIS), and three from Statistics Canada. Of the 13 NGO contributors, fou r were prim arily advocacy-based, four were fu nders, one w as research-based, and four

16

were service-based. However, of the four pr imarily service-based contributors, two wer e also involved in research and advocacy. Among the 100 academ ic contrib utors, 19 different acad emic disciplines an d programs of study were represented: aboriginal studies (1), anthropology (4), architecture (1), Canadian studies (1), comm unications (1), criminology (1), demography (1), tourism (1), economics (2), education including ea rly childhood education (23), geography (9), health sciences (18), infor mation studies (1 ), immigration and settlement studies (6), political science (2), social sc iences (2), social work (6), sociology (11), urban planning (4), and five (5) could not be identified. T he five academ ic contributors whose

disciplinary affiliation could not b e established were all graduate students whose schools and /or programs of study did not provide easy access to graduate theses. With respect to the 70 so lo publications, seven (7) were contributed by NGOs , three (3) by the governm ent, one (1) by Ontario Hum an Rights Comm ission, one (1) could not b e identified, and the rem aining 58 were acad emic works. Am ong the 58 academic works, the fiv e most predominant disciplines were education (14), geography (7), imm igration and settlem ent studies (6), health sciences (5) and sociology (5). The remaining academic disciplines can be seen in Table 4 below. Table 4 ­ Doucet Bibliography, Solo and Joint Publications by Academic Discipline Academic Total # of Solo publications Joint publications discipline publications
1 1 ---431 11 11 11 ----------

Aboriginal studies Anthropology Architecture Canadian studies Communications

17

Criminology 1 Demography Economics Education 23 Geography Health sciences Information Studies Immigration and Settlement Studies Political Science Social Science Social Work Sociology 11 Tourism 1 Urban planning Unidentified 5 Total 100 58 4 -972 18 5 1 66 2 211 633 11 2 --

----

1 ----

-14

2 9

13 1 ------2 ----

5 1 --- 4 5

6 ----

--42

When it cam e to joint publica tions (see Table 4), of the 21 collabor ations, th e majority ­ 14 ­ were within the sam e di scipline or organizati on: urban planning,

education (2), sociology, econom ics, health sciences (2), geog raphy (3), social work (2), government, and NGO (2). Five collaborations were multidisciplinary in nature ­ health sciences and social work; health sciences and sociology; sociol ogy and anthropology;

social sciences and crim inology; and soci ology, urban planning, a nd unidentified ­ and three collaborations were cross-sectora l: govern ment and urban planning, and NGO, sociology and urban planning.

18

It can be noted from

the above tabl e that among the acade

mic contributors,

anthropology, education, and geography were pr imarily in the form of solo publications; health sciences and urban planning in the for m of joint publications; and social work and sociology had an even distri bution of solo and join t p ublications. The re st of the

academic disciplines d id not produ ce a larg e enough sam ple to d etermine th e prim ary nature of authorship type. Immigration and settlem ent st udies is excluded from this

observation because it is a program of study, not an academic discipline and every single contribution was by a graduate student. Among the 91 articles, 12 broad research t opics could be iden tified, which were not all the sam e as in JIMI: labour m arket (including econom ic integration, ethnic ), settlem ent and integration (including nic

entrepreneurship, and access to professions

settlement services, settlem ent needs, soci al participation , acculturation, and eth

identity), education (including ethnic schools, heritage education, and language learning), urban aspects of m igration (including hous ing, hom elessness, ethnic neighbourhoods, residential m obility, and cha bilingualism, cultural exoticism nging urba n spaces), m ulticulturalism (including , m edia por trayal, and ethn ic literatu re), racism ,

citizenship and nationalism (including transna tionalism, exclusion, re turn migration, and policy issues), religion, heal th (including m ental healt h, health care, and f emale

circumcision), dem ographic p rofiles ( including diaspo ras, ethn ic co mmunities, and comparative demographic profiles), family (including ethnic parenting, immigrant fam ily dynamics, and international adoption), a nd other (including advocacy, community

research, illegal m igrants, child refugee claim

ants, queer Muslim s, and Toronto

immigration history). T he m ost researched to pics were settlem ent and integration (14

19

articles), education (13), dem ographic profiles (10), and m ulticulturalism (9). W ith the exception of religion (2), the remaining categories were not too far behind, with seven (7) mentions each for urban and labou r m arket as pects, s ix (6) each for citizensh ip and for fam ily. Table 5 provides m ore detailed

health, five (5) for racism , and four (4) information on article distribution by topic.

Table 5 ­ Doucet Bibliography, Article Distribution by Topic Topic category Specific focus by topic category Labour market Economic integration ­ 1 Access to regulated professions ­ 1 Ethnic entrepreneurship ­ 34 Employment ­ 1 Settlement and Information needs of service providers ­ 1 integration Immigrant settlement needs ­ 1 Settlement services ­ 4 Continental African service providers ­ 1 Identity ­ 4 Social participation ­ 1 Acculturation ­ 1 Diasporas ­ 1 Education Education ­2 Education and ethnic heritage ­ 2 Muslim educational institutions ­ 1 Holocaust education ­ 1 Language learning/teaching ­ 3 Teacher education ­ 1 Schools ­ 1 Youth engagement ­ 1 Youth careers ­ 1 Urban aspects of Homelessness ­ 3 migration Housing ­ 1 Changing urbanity ­ 1 Residential mobility ­ 1 Faith based ethnic neighbourhoods ­ 1 Multiculturalism Multiculturalism and media ­ 1 Multiculturalism ­ 4 Multiethnicity ­ 1 Cultural exoticism ­ 1 Ethnic literature ­ 1 Bilingualism ­ 1 Racism Racism ­ 4 Racial profiling ­ 1

Total

7

14

13

7

9

5

20

Citizenship and nationalism Religion Health

Demographic profiles

Family Other

Transnational communities ­ 3 Citizenship and exclusion ­ 1 Return migration ­ 1 Religion ­ 2 Mental health ­ 2 Immigrant health ­ 1 Immigrant women abuse ­ 1 Female circumcision ­ 1 Health care ­ 1 Francophone community ­ 1 Soviet Jews ­ 1 Chinese Canadians ­ 3 Black Canadians ­ 3 Little Portugal ­ 1 Comparative demographic patterns ­ 1 Cultural child rearing/ethnic parenting ­ 2 Family dynamics ­ 1 International adoption ­ 1 Queer Muslims ­ 1 Children seeking refugee status ­ 1 Toronto history of immigration ­ 1 Policy issues ­ 1 Community research ­ 1 Advocacy ­ 1 Illegal migrants ­ 1 City guide (travel) ­ 1

6 2 6

10

4 8

An overwhelm ing 65 articles also focuse d on particular immigrant groups, with more than 26 different ethni c groups alone researched. The five ethnic groups with the most m entions were the Chinese, Portugue se, Japanese, South Asian, and the Black community in Toronto. The Chinese community in particular was very well re searched, with 12 articles focusing on different aspe cts of this community, ranging from Chi nese immigrant women parenting practices to Chinese entrepreneurs to transnational practices in the Chinese comm unity. Am ong the m ost researched dem ographic groups were children and youth (15 articles), women (9), and entrepreneurs (4).

21

ANALYSIS

As expected from a sch olarly peer-reviewed jou rnal, the ov erwhelming majority of publications were produced by author s in the academ ia. 88.5% of individual

contributors were m embers of the academ ia. Doucet's Bibliography was not far behind, with 80% o f the identif ied autho rs af filiated with the ac ademia. This was a little more surprising b ecause this partic ular publication referenced a m uch greater v ariety of

research on imm igration. Am ong the works cited were books, m onographs, graduate theses, book chapters, journal articles, and res earch repor ts, inclu ding som e relatively obscure publications such as community/agency-developed reports. Despite this much greater sco pe, however, the vas t m ajority of works in the exam academic. Of the 26 academ ic disciplines and pr ograms of study found in JIMI and the 19 found in Bibliography, 12 disciplines appeared in both publicati ons: anthropology, ined sam ple were

criminology, dem ography, economics, educati on, geography, health sciences, political science, social science, social work, soci ology, and urban planning. Incidentally, with a few exceptions, these w ere also the discip lines with the largest num ber of contributions. These are detailed in Table 6 below. Table 6 ­ JIMI and Doucet, Top 12 Contributing Disciplines Discipline JIMI Anthropology 5 Criminology 1 Demography 1 Economics 12 Education 10 Geography 9 Health sciences 9 Political science 8 22

Doucet 4 1 1 2 23 9 18 2

Social science Social work Sociology 26 Urban planning

7 6 1

2 6 11 4

Doucet's Bibliography involved seven disciplines th at did not appear in JIMI: aboriginal studies, arch itecture, Canadian studies, comm unications, information studies, immigration and settlement studies, and touris m. JIMI, on the othe r hand, included twice as many disciplines that did not appear in Bibliography: business administration, cultural diversity and citizens hip, culture orga nization and m anagement, nursing, history, international relations, Israeli and Middle Eastern studies, linguistics, m anagement,

marketing, philosophy, religious studies, urba nization culture and society, and women's studies. Som e of these were due to contribu tions by inter national sch olars and s imilar disciplinary affiliations simply do not exist in Canada. Eight of the 14 d isciplines were due to contributions by international scholars. However, the remaining six were Canadian contributions and the fact that there are dis crepancies in dis ciplinary participation in th e two publication venues suggests that certai n aspects of imm igration research are

particular to the natio nal while o thers to the local s cale. Further, five of the eight disciplines contributed by international sc holars ­ nam ely business adm inistration,

history, international relations , linguistics, and philosophy - do exist in Canada as well, yet Canadia n scholars af filiated with these disciplines did not appear in the articles examined in this study. The num ber of contri butions by each discipline also seem s to suggest that som e immigration issues are ge tting more attention on the national than on the local scale, and vice versa. Table 7 shows the five biggest contributing disciplines in each publication in order of importance.

23

Table 7 ­ JIMI and Dooucet, Top Five Contributing Disciplines in Rank Order Publication JIMI Doucet Discipline Sociology (26) Education (23) Discipline Economics (12) Health sciences (18) Discipline Education (10) Sociology (11) Discipline Geography (9) Geography (9) Discipline Health Sciences (9) Social work (6) While the top five disciplines are almost identical ­ with four out of five being the same in the two publications , their importance in each case v aries sign ificantly when we consider the numbers themselves. Sociologists are twice as activ e on the national forum than they a re on the loc al, while th e revers e is true f or hea lth scie ntists and educators. Interestingly enough, g eographers hold th e same positio n in bo th forum s, while economists are only active on the national scale. This is interesting when we consider that seven of the 91 Bibliography articles exam ined here res earch econo mic aspects of

immigration, suggesting that on the local level topics such as immigrant employment and their econo mic integration lend the mselves to exploration by other disciplines. In this particular case, imm igrant and ethnic entrep reneurship was researched by two separate geographers and a collaborative team of gove rnment officials and an urban planner (3 articles in to tal); access to regulated prof essions by Imm igration and Settlem ent Studies graduate student; econom ic integration by an NGO; and immigrant employ ment by a sociologist. One possible explanation for this is the limitation of this study with respect to sample size. It is possible that the sample was not large enough to encompass the entire range of disciplines present in each public ation. A m ore detailed study could either

reduce the discrepancies or confirm and even widen the apparent divergence.

24

One notable disciplinary absentee on both the national and the local sca les is the faculty of history. Of the 215 ac ademic contributors identifi ed in the two sam ples, only one was af filiated with the depar tment of histo ry. This is hig hly surp rising conside ring that immigration history is a very significant subject in th e field of immigration. In the case of JIMI, one possible expl anation is th e nature of the journa l itse lf. JIM I is a

relatively new ­ having been in existence fo r only eight years ­ contem porary journal that, by virtue of being a Metropolis P roject public ation, has a very clear policy

orientation. Since policy is by nature concerned with the present and the immediate future defined by short political term s, this is not a forum conduc ive to the engagem ent of e exa mple of the study

historians. In the case of Doucet, this could very well be a prim

limitations mentioned previously in the m ethodology section. Since only a s mall number of the Bibliography articles were sa mpled, it is possible that historians sim ply did not make this list. Further research will easily answer this question. JIMI had a relatively ev en distribution of joint publ ications (53.8%) and solo works (46.2%), while the Bibliography sam ple was pred ominantly c omprised of solo IMI had 42 joint publications, while Bibliography

publications, to the tune of 77%. J

contained 21. However, the total num ber of individual contributors from both the solo and the joint publications was almost id entical, with 130 for JIMI and 125 for

Bibliography. Som e a cademic disciplines were m ore pr one to a particular type of authorship than others. In both cas es, publ ications produced by authors affiliated with health sc iences were predom inantly jo int collabor ations. In Bibliography, this

predisposition towards joint publications was also demonstrated in urban planning, while anthropology, education, and geography produced predominantly solo publications. T his

25

was not the case with JIMI, where bot predominantly collaborative works, joined

h education and geography produced by econom ics, nursing, and social work.

Political science, sociology and social science had a fairly even distribution of solo and joint pub lications in JI MI, while this was not the case w Bibliography. The type of collaborations also differed somewhat in each publications. Of the 42 joint pub lications identif ied in JI MI, the nu mber of those produced within th e sam e discipline/organizational platform was fairly close to th different disciplines and sectors. Exactly at of collaborations across ith any of the discip lines in

half of the publica tions (21) were joint

publications within the sam e discip line/organization, 16 w ere m ultidisciplinary, a nd 4 were cro ss-sectoral. The Bibliography sam ple of joint works, on the other hand, was predominantly populated by collaborations with in the sam e discipline. Three quarters (14) of the 21 collaborative works identified in Bibliography were within the sam e

discipline, five (5) were multidisciplinary, and three (3) cross-sectoral. In both JIMI and Bibliography, collaborations within the sam e academ ic discip line o r organiz ational platform we re alm ost identical. Both in cluded the government, econom ics, education, geography, health scien ces, and sociology. The Bibliography sam ple also inclu ded

collaborations within th e academ ic discip lines of urban planning and s ocial, as well as non-profit sector. The JIMI sam ple included political science, social science, and culture, organization and management. The scope of m ultidisciplinary co llaborations was m uch greater in the JIM I

sample, but both publications included anthro pology, health sciences , sociology, social work, and social s cience as common collabo rators. The Doucet sample also included

26

criminology and urban planning in research partnerships, whic h the JIMI sample did not. The JIMI sample included education, econom ics, political science, and the m ore obscure contributors in linguistics , Israeli and Middle Easter n studies, philosophy, business

administration, marketing, and urbanization, culture, and society. With respect to research topics, certain differences can be observed between the two publications. The JIMI sam ple produced a greater scope of research, while the Bibliography sample produced res earch that was more focused. For example, while both publications included works on settlement and integration, Bibliography articles were the only ones to m ention settlem ent services and program s and the settlem ent needs of different groups of ne wcomers. Likewise, wh ile both publications treated a lot of the same research topics, these were approached differently by each. Econom ic aspects of immigration was a hot topic on the national ag enda (27 articles in JIMI), but did not Bibliography).

garner nearly as m uch atten tion o n the m unicipal one (7 articles in Authors ad dressing ed ucation in JIMI focused on the academ

ic perform ance of

immigrant child ren an d the educa tional attain ment of adult m igrants, while authors writing abo ut education in Bibliography sources were m ore concerned with language learning among adult newcomers and ethnic schools for immigrant children. On the other hand, social inclusion, racism , and urban asp ects of i mmigration figured equally in both publications. One of the m ain differences in res earch focus between the JIMI sam ple and the Bibliography sam ple is in the precision of re search focus. W hile both publications ographic

contain a large num ber of works that fo cus on a specific ethnic or dem

community of migrants (32 works in JIMI and 65 in Bibliography), articles found in JIMI

27

do so on a much m ore varied geographic scale, while the Bibliography articles f ocus exclusively on Toronto (with th e exception of five sources th at also mention Vancouver, Montreal, Buffalo, Salk Lake City, Hong Kong, and Grenada). Of the 91 JIMI articles, 32 works address specific immigrant groups and 32 works fo cus on specific geographic

regions. Th ese are actu ally th e sam e articles. W here a specific immigran t group was addressed, it was also speci fically stated in what geogr aphic region(s) this group was studied.

DISCUSSION Immigration is a new field of study, and a rapidly expending one at that. The fact that scholarly journals and conferences de suggests that imm igration is seen as an dicated specif ically to immigration exist identifiable and unique field of study. Unlike ciplinary field whose

established academ ic disciplines , however, it is a multidis

dimensions are unclear. W hile there is now a handful of university program s dedicated specifically to the study of immigration 5, professors teach ing courses in these program s and publishing books and articles on immigration come from a multitu de of disciplines,
Ryerson University's Immigration and Settlement Studies Program is the only postgraduate program in Canada dedicated t o t he st udy of i mmigration. I n a ddition, University of To ronto of fers a graduate collaborative p rogram in Ethnic and Pluralism Studies, wh ich allows Master's or Do ctoral stud ents working toward s an in terdisciplinary sp ecialization to com plete co urses ou tside of th eir department or faculty and receive a sp ecialized note on their transc ripts. Participating departments and faculties include: Anthropology, C entre f or European, R ussian, and Eurasian St udies (C ERES), G eography, Hi story, Industrial Relations and Human Resources (CIRHR), Nursing Science, Political Science, Religion, Social Work, Sociology, Sociology and Equity Studies in Education (SESE), Women and Gender Studies Institute (WGSI), as well as cert ain relevant co urse i n t he De partment of Ec onomics and t he Facul ty o f Law. Similarly, Yor k U niversity's Centre f or Refu gee St udies of fers students enr olled i n other p rograms t o complete a specified list of c ourses to receive a General Certificate in Refugee & Migration Studies, a Graduate Diploma in Refugee & Migration Studies, or a Continuing Education Certificate in Refugee and Forced Migration Issues. Finally, Seneca College's Faculty of Continuing Educa tion and Tra ining now of fers a Social Service Worker Immigrants and Refugees Diploma. It is pos sible that ot her programs exist of which I am not aware at this time.
5

28

such as politics, geography, social work, urban planning, and early childhood education, to name a few. Just which academic disciplines make up this list can shed a light on what we consider the field of immigration to enco mpass. The way we institutionally carve up universities into school and departm ents and fi elds of study into disciplines reflects the way we draw bound aries aroun d academ ic e xpertise. "The actual sociopo litical

organization of libraries, publishing houses, conf erences, and scholarly journals likew ise mirrors the sociom ental organization of the wo rld in g eneral and of acad emic identity in particular." (Zerubavel, 1995: 1093) This study identified 33 different academ ic disciplines and area studies involved in immigration research. This represents a huge area of expertise and greatly diversif ies the kind of research being produced. This also makes it difficult to access the entire range of available research b ecause each discip line has its own channels for dissem inating research findings, not all of which are easily accessible or even known to those outside of the dis cipline in ques tion. Furt her, of the 33 distinct disc iplines, program s and fie ld of study identified here, not all are involved in immigration research equally. In fact, only 11 disciplines and one graduate program (Im migration and Settlem ent Studies) have

made any significant contributi ons in the sam ple exam ined in this study. This suggests that at the present, th e academ ia identifies immigration is sues predo minantly with the fields of anthropology, econom ics, educat ion, geography, health sciences, nursing, ogy. It should be furt her noted that while

political sciences, social work, and sociol immigration as a field of study is new, i

mmigration research is not and it would be

interesting to see if the di sciplines involved in immigrati on research prior to 2000 were

29

the same as identified here or if they ha ve changed over tim e. Further research beyond the scope of this study is required to answer this question. With respect to m ultidisciplinarity, the examination of joint publications suggests that imm igration is a multidis ciplinary f ield and not an inte rdisciplinary one. A

multidisciplinary field is one that draws

on num erous disciplines in teaching a nd beyond by "integrating across

research, w hile an interdisciplinary field goes a step

existing disciplines to define appropriate objects of inquiry, methodologies, and modes of interpretation and analys is" (Katz, 2 001: 524). While multidisciplinary collaborations do occur in im migration research, these seem to be m uch m ore pronounced on a national scale, while alm ost no nexistent on the loca l scale. JIMI, by virt ue of being a self-

proclaimed multidisciplinary journal that emphasizes multidisciplinary, interdisciplinary, comparative, and policy-relevant research, at tracts publications th at cross the boundaries of traditionally compartmentalized discipline-specific knowledge. Doucet's Bibliography, on the other hand, sim ply com piles imm igration research on Toronto, which rem ains largely limited to exploration by individual disciplines. This is evidenced by the f act that of the joint collaborations that did occur, half of those in JIMI and nearly 80% of those in Doucet were within the sam e discipline. The relatively small volume of publications that reach across disciplinary boundaries suggests th at immigration as a field of study has no t yet reached the level of inte rdisciplinarity. This conclus ion is based on the findings of this study and applies to imm igration research only. It is beyond the sc ope of this project to determ ine whether the academ ic instructio n to stud ents enrolled in the handf ul of programs dedicated to the study of imm igration tha t ex ist in Canada is perform ed at a multidisciplinary or an interdisciplinary level.

30

The liter ature on au thorship its elf, albeit lim ited, invites som e interes ting questions about imm igration research. Se veral writers (Mountz, 2002; Valim aa, 1998; Zerubavel, 1995) have suggested important ways, from research f that an author's identity affects re search in several ocus to re lationship with r esearch subjec ts to the are constructed thr ough our dialogue with

interpretation of findings. Our identities

significant o thers (Taylo r, 1994). In the case of academ ics, these sign ificant oth ers can include disc iplinary co mmunities, prof essional association s, institu tional comm unities, intellectual/epistemic traditions, national culture, and sociological categories such as race, gender, and class (Valimaa, 1998: 133). Considering these significant others in each case can allow us to ask practical research que stions m ore easily. Alison Mountz from the ent. She

University of British Colum bia s eems to lend som e weight to this argum

contends the ideas and methods she was in troduced to while studying feminist geography in the 1990s inform the way in w hich she de fines projects, asks questions, conducts research, and disseminates results. (2002: 188) According to her,
our own id entities an d th e id entities o f th ose with who m we work ed influ enced every aspect of our project... Data were thus influenced by differential citizenship histories, al ong with ot her p oints of di fference a nd ide ntification, s uch as race , class, employment status, and gender (2002: 189).

Mountz (2002) argues that in order to si

tuate knowledge and establish a view from

somewhere, data should always be presented in relation to the c ontext in which it was collected. The multidisciplinary nature of immigration as a field of study greatly expands the pool of these significant others, making it more difficult to contextualize the produced knowledge. In view of the multidisciplinarity of the field of immigration, the question is how such a wide range of author iden tities affects immigration researc h. While I cannot even

31

begin to an swer this q uestion without ex amining each individual work in detail ­ something that is well beyond the scope of this research project ­ I can offer two

observations derived fr om my study. First of all, ther e is an obvious link between the disciplinary af filiation of the auth or and the research top ic. For exa mple, a r esearch interest receiving a lot o f attention in the Bibliography is children and youth. This is in direct co rrelation with the overwhelm ing presence of re searchers affiliated with the discipline of education. In a similar vein, the greater emphasis on the economic aspects of immigration in J IMI is in par t due to a g reater presen ce of schola rs af filiated with the department of econom ics. This su ggests that academ ic areas of e xpertise are in deed compartmentalized and discip linary boundaries do exist. However, the fact that som researchers ­ socio logists in particular, in exploring such assimilation and educational wide topics as econom e ic

attainments of immigrant groups­ have crossed these

boundaries suggests that disciplinary affiliation is not the only factor in the determination of research interests. S ince th e natural cho ice of researc h topics wo uld norm ally lie within one's academ ic discipline, this suggests that other factors pertain researcher's identity are involv ed. Furt her, while a researcher's academ ing to ic or

organizational af filiation m ay explain th e f ocus on a pa rticular topic , it is unab le to explain the researcher's focus on a where this is the case. Funding is also changing the nature of immigration research across the board. The Social Sciences and Hum an Research C ouncil (SSHRC) has shifted its focus fr om particul ar ethnic com munity or a geographic area

supporting traditional academic curiosity-driven research to funding projects that address specified policy concerns (Shields, 2007: 4) This approach, while potentially useful,

32

needs to be treated with caution because it ha s the potential of dras tically changing the immigration research landscape. Policy m aking is by nature a political process. The involvement of a multitude of politician s, bur eaucrats, lob byists, in terest groups and

researchers brings a significant hum an elem ent to the process, m aking it unpredictable and volatile. As such, it m atters not only who produced the resear ch findings, but also who is goin g to inte rpret them and what goals they are m eant to supp ort. This ha s the potential to inadvertently com promise the integrity of immigration research by making it open to m anipulation. Shields points out that k nowledge absorption within governm ent can be hap hazard and inconsistent (Shiel ds, 2007: 9 ). As such, if the focus of

immigration research is shifte d to support political aim s, we risk losing sight of the big immigration picture. If resear ch interests are guided by po litical popularity of any given immigration issue, there is a gr eat potential for widening holes in immigration research. In addition, since any research that is largely dependent on governm ent funding is

vulnerable to changing currents in public adm inistration, we m ust be wary of the future of immigration research should a new adm inistration or approach in governance change the perceived value of policy-oriented imm igration research, research partnerships, or the Metropolis Project itself. This has serious implications for the future development of immigration as a field of study and the way im migration research is absorbed. The desired policy orientation of immigration research may once again redefine the boundaries of immigration as a field of study, which we are just now in the process of establishing in the first place. P olicy

making is by nature a short-si ghted process oriented toward the imm ediate f uture and little conc erned with th e pas t. The activ e direc tion of imm igration rese arch in this vein

33

has the potential to create and widen gaps in knowledge generated by this field. One such gap ­ nam ely the absence of historians ­ is already ev idenced in the Me tropolis

publication JIMI. If the trend towa rds the sh aping of imm igration research to address policy issues continues, the field risks compromising its truly multidisciplinary nature. This trend is even more alarming when we consider the kind of research currently being produced. The examined sample shows that more than 80% of all research is being produced by the academia. This type of authorship results is traditionally associated with trusted obje ctivity and accura cy of inform ation but re lies o n standa rd a cademic writte n dissemination outlets such as books and peer-reviewed acad emic journals, which have long publishing timelines, restricted access, and very limited audiences. As a result, any societal impacts of such resear ch take a considerable tim e to materialize (Shields, 2007: 3). If such research is actively directed to inform policy, it is not likely to do so in the

required time frame. As a resu lt, we risk en ding up with research th at, while designed to address a particular policy area, fails to affect change should political priorities ­ or the administration itself ­ change before the resear ch project is complete. At the sam e time, the invo lvement in this proje ct w ill h ave pr evented th e resea rcher f rom pursuing a different topic. Government initiated research also ta kes a lo ng tim e to com plete because it

usually tak es a f orm of reports com piled after leng thy nationa l consulta tions with stakeholders. (sentence removed) Knowledge produced by the service sector, on the other hand, is perhaps the most perceptive and practical because service providers are uniquely positioned at the in tersection of po licy, pr ogramming, and target communities (Sh ields, 2007: 10). Unfortunately, such knowledge fall s under the category of grey literature,

34

confining it to the outskirts of knowledge production. Although th e Metropolis Project has done a great deal to put grey literatu re on the m ap, it continues to be inferior to y to dis count, particu larly when they

academic research, m aking such findings eas

contradict political aims. While Citizenship and Imm igration Canada (CIC) and SSHRC value the involvem ent of servi ce providers in res earch `partnerships,' it is the a cademics who occupy the privileged position of carrying the weight of the project. NGOs are there to help acad emics do better research through improved access to research subjects, but they are seen as too value charg ed a nd unqualified to m eet research quality and

objectivity standards to produce independent research to affect government policymaking (Shields, 2007: 12). As evidenced by the pr esent study, immigration research remains the domain of academ ic scholarsh ip and only a produced by the non-profit sector. The im small portio n of identif ied research was plications of this are troubling when we

consider policy im plications. If policy m aking is based on research and the research coming out of the onl y sector working direc tly with immigran ts is margina lized, the policy makers are then presented with a skewed picture. Further research is required to determine why the non-profit sector is not we ll represented in imm igration research and what can be done to address this issue. Overall, while this study is unable to immigration as a field of study ­ in light limitations ­ it nevertheless provides a dire definitively establis h the boundaries of of the previously di scussed m ethodological ction for further research. Expanding the

sample of exam ined article s both in term s of num bers and the tim e period exa mined would help determ ine with a greater accuracy what the dim ension of this field are and whether or not these have shifted over ti me. In light of the changing nature of

35

immigration research, it would also be desi rable to exam ine whether o r not chang es in policy are reflected in immigration research an d what is the nature of the link ­ if one exists ­ be tween the two. Finally, f urther discussions on in tegrating multiple disciplines would help provide direction on how to guide the future development of immigration as a field from multidisciplinarity to interdisciplinarity.

36

WORKS CONSULTED 2000. Abu-Laban, Baha and Hans Vermeulen. "Introduction." Journal of International Migration and Integration, 1 (1), 1-3. 2008. Archer, Louise. "The New Neoliber al Subjects? Young/er academ ics' constructions of professional identity," Journal of Education Policy 23 (3), 265-285. 2008. Doucet, Michael and Hii, Rebecca. Bibliography on Immigration and Settlement in the Toronto Area, Third Edition. CERIS Working Paper No. 65. Available on http://ceris.metropolis.net 2000. Journal of International Migration and Integration 1 (1), Winter 2000. 2000. Journal of International Migration and Integration 1 (2), Spring 2000. 2000. Journal of International Migration and Integration 1 (3), Summer 2000. 2000. Journal of International Migration and Integration 1 (4), Fall 2000. 2001. Journal of International Migration and Integration 2 (1), Winter 2001. 2001. Journal of International Migration and Integration 2 (2), Spring 2001. 2001. Journal of International Migration and Integration 2 (3), Summer 2001. 2001. Journal of International Migration and Integration 2 (4), Fall 2001. 2002. Journal of International Migration and Integration 3 (1), Winter 2002. 2002. Journal of International Migration and Integration 3 (2), Spring 2002. 2002. Journal of International Migration and Integration: Special Double Issue 3 (3-4), Summer/Fall 2002. 2003. Journal of International Migration and Integration 4 (1), Winter 2003. 2003. Journal of International Migration and Integration. Special Issue: Private Sponsorship and Partnerships in Refugee Resettlement 4 (2), Spring 2003. 2003. Journal of International Migration and Integration 4 (3), Summer 2003. 2003. Journal of International Migration and Integration 4 (4), Fall 2003. 2004. Journal of International Migration and Integration 5 (1), Winter 2004.

37

2004. Journal of International Migration and Integration 5 (2), Spring 2004. 2004. Journal of International Migration and Integration 5 (3), Summer 2004. 2004. Journal of International Migration and Integration 5 (4), Fall 2004. 2005. Journal of International Migration and Integration 6 (1), Winter 2005. 2005. Journal of International Migration and Integration. Special Issue: The ReEmergence of Religion in International Public Discourse 6 (2), Spring 2005. 2005. Journal of International Migration and Integration 6 (3-4), Summer/Fall 2005. 2006. Journal of International Migration and Integration 7 (1), Winter 2006. 2006. Journal of International Migration and Integration 7 (2), Spring 2006. 2006. Journal of International Migration and Integration 7 (3), Summer 2006. 2006. Journal of International Migration and Integration. Special Transnationalism and Migration: Chinese People on the Move 7 (4), Fall 2006. 2007. Journal of International Migration and Integration 8 (1), Winter 2007. 2007. Journal of International Migration and Integration. Special Issue: Accessing the Higher Echelons of a Host Country's Labour Market: Policy Directions from the Personal Experiences of Skilled Migrants 8 (2), Spring 2007. 2007. Journal of International Migration and Integration 8 (3), Summer 2007. 2007. Journal of International Migration and Integration. Special Issue: Issues of Workplace Discrimination and Employment Barriers 8 (4), Fall 2007. 2001. Katz, Cindi. "Disciplining Interdisciplinary," Feminist Studies 27 (2), 519-525. 2002. Mountz, Alison. "Fem inist Politics, I mmigration, and Academ ic Identities," Gender, Peace and Culture 9 (2), 187 ­ 294. 2007. Shields, John. "Mobilizing Immigration Research for Policy Effect: The Case of CERIS." CERIS Working Paper no. 58. Available on http://ceris.metropolis.net 1994. Taylor, Charles. "The Politics of Recognition" in Any Gutmann, ed. Multiculturalism: Examining the Politics of Recognition. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Issue:

38

1998. Valimaa, Jussi. "Culture and Identity in Higher Education Research," Higher Education 36 (2): 119-138. 1995. Zerubavel, Evitar. "The Rigid, the Fuzzy, and the Flexible: Notes on the Mental Sculpting of Academic Identity," Social Research 62 (4), 1093 ­ 1106.

39

APPENDIX A: JIMI Sample
Article "When is my Dutch good enough?" Experiences of refugee women with Dutch labour organizations A Canadian exceptionalism? Trust and diversity in Canadian cities A framework for understanding crossnational differences in the relationship between research and policy A note on Jeffrey Reitz' policy paper pub. Year Author type Authors Affiliation

2006 2006

multiple single

Halleh Ghorashi and 2 culture, organization Maria van Tilburg and management Abdolmohammad Kazemipur sociol ogy

2001 2001

single multiple

Roger Henke

social sciences

Baha Abu-Laban and sociology and Hans Vermeulen anthropology Lucia Lo and Lu Wang 2

A political economy approach to understanding the economic incorporation of Chinese sub-ethnic groups 2004 Access and equity issues in employment and service provision for NESB immigrants in New Zealand public sector organizations 2

multiple

geography

000

multiple

Noel Watts and Andrew Trlin

linguistics and social work

Apport démographique de l'immigration internationale dans la région Métropolitaine de recensement (RMR) de Montréal, 1976­1996 2003 Attitudes toward work: Ethnic minorities and immigrant groups in Vancouver 2005 Beyond "Entry-level" Jobs: Immigrant Women and Non-regulated Professional Occupations 2 Canadian immigration, mexican emigration, and a North American regional interpretation Capital social et vie associative de quartier en contexte multiethnique: Quelques réflexion à partir de recherches Montréalaises 2

single single

Ayéko A. Tossou Harald Bauder Liza McCoy and Cristi Masuch

demography geography

007

multiple

2 sociology

2005

single

Imtiaz Hussain

international relations

004

single

Annick Germain

urban planning

40

Career Nomadism and the Building of a Professional Identity in Female Immigrants 2

007

single

Hélène Cardu Dirk Jacobs, Marco Martiniello and Andrea Rea Fernando Mata and Don McRae Shibao Guo and Don J. DeVoretz

education social sciences, political science, sociology sociology and gov. education and economics

Changing patterns of political participation of citizens of immigrant origin in the Brussels capital region: The October 2000 elections 2002 Charitable giving among the foreign-born in Canada 2000 Chinese immigrants in vancouver: Quo vadis? 2 006 Citoyenneté, nationalité et laïcité: Le débat sur la France multiculturelle depuis les années 80 2002 Closing the wage gap: Economic assimilation of Canadian immigrants reconsidered 2 000 Contesting sacred urban space:The case of the Eruv 2005 Diagnosing and preventing "brain waste" in Canada's immigrant population: A synthesis of comments on reitz 2001 Economic impacts of immigrants in the Toronto CMA: A tax-benefit analysis 2000 Ethnicity and social mobility: The case of Turks in Germany 2001 Ethnoracial Origins, Social Capital, and Earnings 2007 Ethnoracial political representation in Toronto: Patterns and problems 2002

multiple multiple multiple

single

Yvan Gastaut Derek Hum and Wayne Simpson Myer Siemiatycki

history

multiple single

2 economics political science

single multiple single single multiple

Richard A. Wanner

sociology

Shuguang Wang and Lucia Lo 2 geography Andreas Pott M. Reza Nakhaie sociology sociology

Myer Siemiatycki and Anver Saloojee 2 political science

Explaining the socioeconomic well-being of immigrants and returned migrants: An econometric analysis of the Hong Kong and Canadian censuses of 2001 2006 Facilitating the arrival of illegal immigrants in the Netherlands: Irregular chain migration versus smuggling chains 2004

multiple

Tian Fangmeng and Ma Zhongdong

2 social science

single

Richard Staring

criminology

41

Focusing on children and youth: The role of social capital in educational outcomes in the context of immigration and diversity 2 Genre et performance scolaire en milieu minoritaire au Quebec. Les élèves originaires d'Afrique subsaharienne Getting a foothold: Male immigrant employment integration and structural change in Sweden, 1970­1995

004

multiple

Yvonne Hébert, Xiaohong Shirley Sun and Eugene Kowch 3 education Jean-Paul Mbuya Mutombo and Ghislaine Ngoie Wa Bienge 2

2004

multiple

gov

2001

single

Immigrant concentration and educational attainment: Evidence from US data 2002 Immigrant Employment Success in Canada, Part II: Understanding the Decline 2007 Immigrant intelligentsia and its second generation: Cultural segregation as a road to social integration? 2000 Immigrant skill utilization in the Canadian labour market: Implications of human capital research 2001 Immigration and the metropolis: Reflections on urban history Include or exclude: Discourses on immigration in Germany 2000 2002

multiple single

Pieter Bevelander economics Alexei Izyumov, NanTing Chou, Paul Coomes and Babu Nahata 4 economics Jeffrey G. Reitz sociology

multiple

Isreali and Middle Alek Epstein and NinaEastern studies and Kheimets Sociology

single single single

Jeffrey G. Reitz Alejandro Portes Dietrich Thränhardt

sociology sociology political science

Incorporating Muslim migrants in western nation states ­ a comparison of the United Kingdom, France, and Germany 2005

single

Matthias Koenig

sociology

Institutional change and emerging cohorts of the "New" immigrant second generation: Implications for the integration of racial minorities in Canada 2004 Introduction 2 Introduction 2 000 004

multiple multiple multiple

Jeffrey G. Reitz and Kara Somerville

2 sociology

Baha Abu-Laban and sociology and Hans Vermeulen anthropology Jean Lock Kunz and Peter S. Li gov. and sociology

42

Introduction to policy debates

2004

single

Baha Abu-Laban

sociology

Labour market integration of refugees in Norway under changing macro-economic conditions 2 004 Labour market outcomes of immigrant and racial minority university graduates in Canada 2 003 Laicity and religious diversity Quebec's approach: Report to the minister of citizen relations and immigration 2005

single

Svein Blom Paul Anisef, Robert Sweet and George Frempong Conseil des relations interculturelles g

gov sociology, psychology, education

multiple

single

ov

Le logement des réfugiés à Montréal trois ans après leur arrivée: le cas des demandeurs d'asile ayant obtenu la résidence permanente 2001 Les dynamiques de la migration contrainte: suivons le troupeau! Les enjeux de l'entreprenariat immigré 2005 2005

multiple single single

Damaris Rose and Brian Ray Julie Kaizen Antoine Pécoud

geography and ngo unidentified academic social anthropology

Licensure of Internationally Educated Nurses Seeking Professional Careers in the Province of Alberta in Canada

2007

multiple

Linda Ogilvie, Barbara Leung, Terry Gushuliak, Marion McGuire and Elizabeth Burgess3 nursing, 2 Pinto unidentified

Measuring up: Academic performance of Canadian immigrant children in reading, mathematics, and science 2003 Metropolitan migration in the past: Labour markets, commerce, and cultural interaction in Europe, 1600­1914 2000 Multicultural society under attack: Introduction 2 002 Multiculturalism and white paranoia in Australia 2002 Naturalization and employment integration of Turkish and Moroccan immigrants in the Netherlands NGOs and the future of the migration debate 2 Occupational injury among immigrants

single

Xin Ma

education

single multiple single

Dirk Hoerder Baukje Prins and Boris Slijper Ghassan Hage

social sciences philosophy, political science social anthropology

2006 000 2003

multiple single multiple

Pieter Bevelander and Justus Veenman 2 economics Frank Sharry Wilfreda Thurston and Marja Verhoef ngo 2 health sciences

43

On immigrant integration: Reply to Stoffman

2004

single single

Peter S. Li Kim C. Matthews

sociology sociology

Perceiving Discrimination: Psychological and Sociopolitical Barriers 2006 Practising traditional Chinese medicine in a Canadian context: The roles of immigration, legislation, and integration 2006 Preface 2 Public-private partnerships in refugee resettlement: Europe and the US Relationships between demographic variables and immigrant parents' perceptions of assimilative adolescent behaviours 2 007 2003

single multiple single

Lyren Chiu nursing Annick LenoirAchdjian and Maryse social work and Potvin education Joanne van Selm ngo

002

multiple

Noorfarah Merali and Claudio Violato 2 psychology

Religious identity and educational attainment among recent immigrants to Canada: Gender, age, and 2nd generation 2005 Residential concentration and participation in local politics: The case of immigrants of the FSU in Israel 2002 Selectivity and immigration in Canada 2002

single

Peter Beyer

religious studies

single multiple multiple single

Size Matters: Attracting New Immigrants to Canadian Cities 2006 Slavic brides in rural Alberta 2005 Social capital and refugee resettlement: The social networks of refugees in Canada2003 Sponsorship and resettlement success

Gustavo S. Mesch Derek Hum and Wayne Simpson Jennifer Hyndman, Nadine Schuurman and Rob Fiedler Marian J. Rossiter

sociology 2 economics 3 geography psychology

multiple

Navjot K. Lamba and Harvey Krahn 2 sociology Morton Beiser Michael Lanphier psychiatry sociology

2003 single single

Sponsorship: Organizational, sponsor, and refugee perspectives 2003 State migrant-exporting schemes and their implications for the rise of Illicit migration: A comparison of Spain and the philippines 2 004

multiple

Christina Siracusa and political science and Kristel Acacio sociology

44

Survival on the margins: Summary of a research project on undocumented migrants in Munich

2004

single

Philip Anderson

social sciences

Sustaining a Strong Cultural and National Identity: The Acculturation of Immigrants and Second-generation Canadians of Asian and African Descent 2007 The changing face of Chinese immigrants in Canada 2006

single multiple

Peter R. Grant psychology Shibao Guo and Don education and J. DeVoretz economics

The Credentialing Problems of Foreign Trained Personnel from Asia and Africa Intending to Make their Home in Canada: A Social Psychological Perspective 2007 The economic causes and consequences of Canadian citizenship 2005 The emergence of a South Asian business elite in the United Kingdom 2001

multiple multiple single

Peter R. Grant and Shevaun Nadin

2 psychology

Don J. DeVoretz and Sergiy Pivnenko 2 economics Anuradha Basu economics

The Finnish red cross in refugee settlement: Developing the integration timeline as a tool for integration in the kotopolku project The invisible barrier: Neighbourhood poverty and integration of immigrants in Canada 2

2003

single

Johanna Matikainen Abdolmohammad Kazemipur and Shiva Halli 2 Hakan Gürses, Barbara HerzogPunzenberger, Karl Reiser, Sabine Strasser and Dilek Çinar David Verbeeten Shamit Saggar Simon Haddad and Dima Jamali Shiva S. Halli and Vedanand

unidentified

000

multiple

sociology

The necessary impossibility: Dynamics of identity among young people of different backgrounds in Vienna 2001 The Past and Future of Immigration to Canada 2 007 The political incorporation of South Asian elites in Britain 2001 The politics of refugees' non integration: the dilemma of Palestinians in Lebanon 2003 The Problem of Second-generation Decline: Perspectives on Integration in Canada 2

multiple single single multiple

philosophy, sociology, 2 anthropology, gov. social sciences political science political science, business administration sociology and marketing

007

multiple

45

The Professional Insertion of Immigrants Born in the Maghreb: Challenges and Impediments for Intervention 2007 The racial subtext in Canada's immigration discourse 2001 The starting line and the promotion of EU anti-discrimination legislation: The role of policy oriented research 2000 Toward a new modus vivendi between academic research and practical social policy 2 001 Trafficking women: Gendered impacts of Canadian immigration policies 2001 Transnationalism among African immigrants in North America: The case of Ghanaians in Canada 2003 Travailleurs Étrangers sur le Marché du Travail Suisse: Quels Modes D'incorporation? 2 007 Twinning projects between immigrant families and quebecois families: Volunteer work, mutual aid, or intervention? 2 Valorisation du multilinguisme et de l'éducation bilingue dans des familles immigrantes 2 What happened to the Canada-United States brain drain of the 1990s? New evidence from the 2000 US census

multiple single

Annick LenoirAchdjian, Isabelle Drainville, Denise 3 social work, 1 Helly, Sébastien urbanization, culture Arcand, Michèle Vatz and society, 1 Laaroussi and Amel management, and 1 Mahfoudh sociology Petr S. Li sociology

single single

Jan Niessen

ngo

multiple

Wsevolod W. Isajiw sociology Jacqueline OxmanMartinez, Andrea Martinez and Jill 2 social work, Hanley women's studies

single single

Thomas Y. Owusu Claudio Bolzman

geography cultural diversity and citizenship

003

multiple

Johanne Charbonneau urbanization, culture and Michèle Vatz and society; and Laaroussi social work Diane Dagenais and Marianne Jacquet

000

multiple

2 education

2006

single

Richard E. Mueller

economics

46

APPENDIX B: Bibliography sample Publication
ABDEL-SHEHID, Gamal. 2000. "Who Da' Man: Black Masculinities and Sport in Canada," PhD thesis, York University.

Year

Author Affiliation Type
health sciences

2000 sin gle

ABENS, Aija. 2003. "Changing Profile of Parents and Students in a Latvian Heritage Language School: A Twenty-Five Year 2003 sin gle Follow Up," MEd thesis, York University. ABU-HATOUM, Nayrouz. 2007. "On the Borderzone: Toronto's Diasporic Queer Muslims," MA thesis, York University. ACCESS ALLIANCE MULTICULTURAL COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTRE. 2003. Best Practices for Working with Homeless Immigrants and Refugees: A Community-Based Action-Research Project. Phase I: Research. Toronto: Access Alliance Multicultural Community Health Centre. 2007 sin gle

education

anthropology

2003 sin gle

NGO

ADVOCATES FOR COMMUNITY-BASED TRAINING AND EDUCATION FOR WOMEN. 2001. Challenges and Connections: Meeting the Information Needs of Professionals 2001 sin gle Working with Immigrant Women. Toronto: and Connections: Meeting the Information Needs of Professionals Working with Immigrant Women. Toronto: Maytree Foundation. AGARD, Rawle G. 2005. "Strange Fruit: The Reification of Race and the Myth of Official Multiculturalism in Selected Canadian Media," [analysis of the Toronto Star], MA thesis, University of Windsor.

NGO

2005 sin gle

communications

AGRAWAL, Sandeep Kumar and QADEER, Mohammad A. 2008. Faith-based Ethnic Residential Communities and Neighbourliness. CERIS Working Paper Series No. 63. Toronto: 2008 Joint Centre of Excellence for Research on Immigration and Settlement - Toronto. [Available at www.ceris.metropolis.net] AHMAD, Farah; SHIK, Angela; VANZA, Reena; CHEUNG, Angela M.; GEORGE, Usha; and STEWART, Donna E. 2004. "Voices of South Asian Women: Immigration and Mental Health," Women and Health 40 (4), 113-130.

multiple 2 urban planning

2004 m ultiple

5 health sciences, 1 social work

ALBOIM, N. 2002. Fulfilling the Promise: Integrating Immigrant Skills into the Canadian Economy. Toronto: Caledon 2002 sin gle Institute of Social Policy. ALI, Mehrunnisa; TARABAN, Svitlana; and GILL, Jagjeet Kaur. 2004. Unaccompanied/Separated Children Seeking Refugee Status in Ontario: A Review of Documented Policies and Practices. CERIS Policy Matters Series No. 13. Toronto: Joint Centre of Excellence for Research on Immigration and Settlement. [Available at www.ceris.metropolis.net]

NGO

2004 m ultiple 3 education

47

ANISEF, Paul and LANPHIER, Michael (eds.) 2003. World in a 2003 m ultiple 2 sociology City. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. AZMI, Shaheen H.2001. "Muslim Educational Institutions in Toronto, Canada," Journal of Muslim Minority Affairs 21 (2), 259-272. 2001 sin gle political science

BEJAR, James. 2006. "Transnational Communities: Filipina Nurses in Rural Manitoba 1965-1970," MRP, Immigration and 2006 sin gle Settlement Studies Program, Ryerson University. BEYENE, W. Y. 2000. Settlement Service Needs for Ethiopian Newcomers in Toronto. Toronto: Ethiopian Association in 2000 sin gle Toronto. BOURHIS, Richard Y. 2003. "Measuring Ethnocultural Diversity Using the Canadian Census," Canadian Ethnic Studies 2003 sin gle 35 (1), 9-32. CAPPE, Brenda. 2007. "The Campaign for Holocaust Education 2007 sin gle in Toronto: An Oral History," MA thesis, University of Toronto. CHAMBON, Adrienne S.; HELLER, Monica; KANOUTÉ, Fasal; LABRIE, Normand; MADIBBO, Amal; MAURY, John; and MALUBUNGI, Mueni. 2001. L'immigration et la communauté franco-torontoise: Rapport final. Toronto: Centre de Recherches en Education FrancoOntarienne. [Available at www.ceris.metropolis.net] CHEONG, Yuan Mai. 2006. "Exoticism and East Asian Women: Moving Beyond Geishas and Dragon Ladies," MRP, Immigration and Settlement Studies Program, Ryerson University. CHOW, Wing-Hang A. 2003. "Pastoral Perceptions of Church Ministry Functions in Canadian Chinese Churches," [examines pastors in the Toronto Chinese Evangelical Ministerial Fellowship], EdD thesis, Souther Baptist Theological Seminary.

ISS

NGO health sciences education

7 education (OISE Centre de Recherches 2001 m ultiple en Educaiton FrancoOntarienne)

2006 sin gle

ISS

2003 sin gle

education

CONTINENTAL AFRICAN SERVICE PROVIDERS. 2001. Continental African Service Providers Conference. Continental 2001 sin gle African Service Providers Conference. Toronto: Continental African Service Providers. DALI, Keren. 2004. "Reading by Russian-Speaking Immigrants in Toronto: Use of Public Libraries, Bookstores, 2004 sin gle and Home Book Collections," International Information and Library Review 36 (4), 341-366. DAVIDSON, Thelma. 2001. "Former Soviet Jews in Toronto: Post-Collapse of the Soviet Union," MA thesis, Trent 2001 sin gle University. DE SILVA, Samangi N. 2003. "The Contested Terrain of Citizenship and Exclusion in Canada: Sri Lankan Women's Narrative Accounts of School and Social Experience in the Diaspora," MA thesis, University of Toronto. 2003 sin gle

NGO

information studies

canadian studies

unidentified

48

DEROUIN, Jodey Michael. 2004. "Asians and Multiculturalism in Canada's Three Major Cities: Some Evidence from the Ethnic 2004 sin gle Diversity Survey," Our Diverse Cities 1 (Spring), 58-62. DUNN, Samuel. 2004. "Building a Research Culture: Perspectives from a Community Health Centre in Toronto," Our 2004 sin gle Diverse Cities 1 (Spring), 109-110. DUVAL, David T.2004. "Linking Return Visits and Return Migration among Commonwealth Eastern Caribbean Migrants in Toronto," Global Networks 4 (1), 51-67. 2004 sin gle

gov

NGO

tourism

FIX, Elizabeth and SIVAK, Nadine. 2007. "The Growing Case 2 gov (Canadian for Youth Engagement Through Culture," Our Diverse Cities 4 2007 m ultiple Heritage) (Fall), 145-151. FLANDERS, John; CHUI, Tina; and TRAN, Kelly. 2005. "Chinese Canadians: Enriching the Cultural Mosaic," Canadian 2005 Social Trends, 76, 2-7. FONG Eric; CHIU, Luk; and OOKA, Emi. 2005. "Spatial Distribution of Suburban Ethnic Business," Social Science Research 34 (1), 215-235. FUNG, Kenneth P. 2003. "Study of Alexithymia in Chinese Canadians," M Sc thesis, University of Toronto. GHOSH, Sutama. 2005. "We Are Not All the Same: The Differential Migration, Settlement Patterns, and Housing Trajectories of Indian Bengalis and Bangladeshis in Toronto," PhD thesis, York University. multiple 2 gov, 1 urban planning

1 NGO funder, 1 2005 m ultiple sociology, 1 urban planning 2003 sin gle health sciences

2005 sin gle

geography

GILL, Jagjeet.2007. Exploring Issues of Identity among Punjabi-Sikh Youth in Toronto. CERIS Working Paper Series No. 53. Toronto: Joint Centre of Excellence for Research 2007 sin gle on Immigration and Settlement - Toronto. [Available at www.ceris.metropolis.net] GLAVINIC, Mila L. 2005. "Developing an Online Community Practice: A Case Study of Professional Development Needs for 2005 sin gle ESL Practitioners Working with the Canadian Language Benchmarks," MA thesis, University of Toronto.

education

education

GRANT, Hugh and SWEETMAN, Arthur. 2004. "Introduction to Economic and Urban Issues in Canadian Immigration Policy," 2004 m ultiple 2 economics Canadian Journal of Urban Research 13 (1), 1-24. HAYAKAWA, Yukari. 2007. "Access to Professions: The Experience of Japanese Immigrants In Canada," MRP, Immigration and Settlement Studies Program, Ryerson University. HOWARD, Heather. 2005. "Dreamcatchers in the City: An Ethnohistory of Social Action, Gender, and Class in Native Community Production in Toronto," PhD thesis, University of Toronto. 2007 sin gle ISS

2005 sin gle

anthropology

49

HYMAN, Ilene; FORTE, Tonia; DU MONT, Janice; ROMANS, Sarah; and COHEN, Marsha. 2006. "Help- Seeking Rates for 2006 m ultiple 5 health sciences Intimate Partner Violence (IPV) among Canadian Immigrant Women," Health Care for Women International 27 (8), 682-694. JENKINS, William M. 2005. "Deconstructing Diasporas: Networks and Identities among the Irish in Buffalo and Toronto, 2005 sin gle 1870-1910," Immigrants and Minorities 23 (2, 3), 359-398. KAMINSKY, Elizabeth. 2006. "The Evolution of Advocacy in the Ontario Immigrant Settlement Sector," MRP, Immigration 2006 sin gle and Settlement Studies Program, Ryerson University. KHAJA, Khadija. 2004. "Female Circumcision: Life Histories of Somali Women," [compares Somalis Muslim women in Salt 2004 sin gle Lake City and Toronto], PhD thesis, University of Utah. KILBRIDE, Kenise Murphy. 2000. A Review of the Literature on the Human, Social, and Cultural Capital of Immigrant Children and Their Families with Implications for Teacher 2000 sin gle Education, CERIS Working Paper Series No. 13. Toronto: Joint Centre of Excellence for Research on Immigration and Settlement - Toronto. [Available at www.ceris.metropolis.net] KIM, Tae-Young. 2007. "Second Language Learning Motivation from an Activity Theory Perspective: Longitudinal Case Studies of Korean ESL Students and Recent 2007 sin gle Immigrants in Toronto," PhD thesis, University of Toronto.

geography

ISS

social work

education

education

KUNZ, Jean Lock; MILAN, Anne; and SCHETAGNE, Sylvain. 2000. Unequal Access: A Canadian Profile of Racial Differences 2000 m ultiple 3 NGO in Education, Employment, and Income. Toronto: Canadian Race Relations Foundation. KWAK, Kyunghwa and BERRY, John W. 2001. "Generational Differences in Acculturation among Asian Families in Canada: A Comparison of Vietnamese, Korean, and 2001 m ultiple 2 health sciences East-Indian Groups," International Journal of Psychology 36 (3), 152-162. LAU, Chun K. 2004. "Moving Back and Forth Between Hong Kong and Toronto: A Narrative Inquiry Into a Family's Cultural 2004 sin gle education and Educational Experiences," EdD thesis, University of Toronto. LEUNG, Ho Hon.2000. Settlement Service Policies and Settlement Issues among Chinese Canadian in Canada. 2000 sin gle gov Toronto: Citizenship and Immigration Canada - OASIS. [Available at www.ceris.metropolis.net]

50

LO, Lucia; TEIXEIRA, Carlos; and TRUELOVE, Marie. 2002. Cultural Resources, Ethnic Strategies, and Immigrant Entrepreneurship: A Comparative Study of Five Immigrant Groups in the Toronto CMA, CERIS Working Paper Series No. 2002 m ultiple 3 geography 21 [Caribbean community]. Toronto: Joint Centre of Excellence for Research on Immigration and Settlement - Toronto. [Available at www.ceris.metropolis.net] MAHTANI, Minelle. 2000. "Mapping the Paradoxes of Multiethnicity: Stories from Women of Multiethnicity in Toronto, Canada," PhD thesis, University College, London. 2000 sin gle geography

MAITER, Sarah; TROCME, Nico; and GEORGE, Usha. 2000. Building Bridges: The Collaborative Development of CulturallyAppropriate Definitions of Child Abuse and Neglect for the 2000 multiple 3 social work South Asian Community, report on a CERIS-funded research project, 2000. [Available at www.ceris.metropolis.net] MEHTA, Krishan. 2005. "Rethinking Immigrant Success: The Case of Four South Asian Entrepreneurs in Toronto," MA thesis, 2005 sin gle unidentified University of Toronto. MENSAH, Joseph. 2002. Black Canadians: History, Experiences, Social Conditions [Some Toronto references]. Halifax: Fernwood Publishing. MENZIES, Peter M. 2005. "Orphans within Our Family: Intergenerational Trauma and Homeless Aboriginal Men," [based on interviews with 16 homeless Aboriginal men in downtown Toronto], PhD thesis, University of Toronto. MILLS, Beth H. 2002. "Family Land in Carriacou, Grenada and Its Meaning within the Transnational Community: Heritage, Identity, and Rooted Mobility," [did interviews in Brooklyn and Toronto], PhD thesis, University of California at Davis. MORTAZAVI, Mazyar. 2006. "Reconciling Change: The Kensington Challenge," M Arch thesis, University of Waterloo. MURDIE, Robert A. 2002. "The Housing Careers of Polish and Somali Newcomers in Toronto's Rental Market," Housing Studies 17 (3), 423-443. 2002 sin gle social sciences

2005 sin gle

aboriginal studies

2002 sin gle 2006 sin gle 2002 sin gle

anthropology architecture geography

NOH, Samuel and KASPAR, Violet. 2003. "Perceived Discrimination and Depression: Moderating Effects of Coping, 1 sociology, 1 health 2003 m ultiple Acculturation, and Ethnic Support," American Journal of Public sciences Health 93 (2), 232-238. NYERS, Peter. 2005. "The Regularization of Non-Status Immigrants in Canada: Limits and Prospects," Canadian Review 2005 sin gle of Social Policy 55, 109-114. political science

OGIORUMUA, Vera Eniso. 2001. "Nigerian Immigrant Youth and the Toronto School System: A Challenge to the Students," 2001 sin gle education MEd thesis, York University. OJIMA, Maki. 2004. "An Inquiry Into Concept Mapping as a Form of Pre-Task Planning in Adult Japanese ESL 2004 sin gle education Learners' Essay Writing," MA thesis, University of Toronto. OMIDVAR, Ratna and RICHMOND, Ted. 2003. Immigrant Settlement and Social Inclusion in Canada. Toronto: The 2003 m ultiple 2 NGO Laidlaw Foundation.

51

ONTARIO ADMINISTRATION OF SETTLEMENT AND IMMIGRATION SERVICES. 2002. Putting The Pieces Together Resource Catalogue II: Products Developed for Use in 2002 sin gle Immigrant Settlement Programs Across Ontario. Toronto: OASIS. ONTARIO HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION. 2003. Paying the Price: The Human Cost of Racial Profiling. Toronto: Ontario 2003 sin gle Human Rights Commission. PON, Gordon. 2004. "Anti-Racism Education in the Cosmopolis: Reflection by Chinese Canadian Elites about Race and Racism," PhD thesis, York University. RAMSARRAN, Parbattie. 2006. "Mending the Double Rupture: The Reconstruction of an Ethnic Identity and Distinct Ethnic Community among Indo-Guyanese in the Greater Toronto Area," PhD thesis, York University. RASILE, Teresa C. 2003. "The President Salvador Allende School: A Case Study in the Education of Chilean Refugee Children in Toronto," MA thesis, University of Toronto. REITZ, Jeffrey G. 2007. Immigrant Employment Success in Canada, Part 1: Individual and Contextual Causes. Journal of International Migration and Integration 8 (1), 11-36. RENAUD, Jean; BÉGIN, Karine; FERREIRA, Virginie; and ROSE, Damaris. 2006. "The Residential Mobility of Newcomers to Canada: The First Months," Canadian Journal of Urban Research 15 (2), 67-81. RUPRECHT, Tony.. 2001. Toronto's Many Faces: A Guide to the Media, Museums, Restaurants, Festivals, Monuments, Prominent Citizens, and Shops of More Than 60 Cultural Communities in the City, 3 ed. Kingston: Quarryrd Press. 2004 sin gle

gov

independent statutory body education

2006 sin gle

sociology

2003 sin gle

unidentified

2007 sin gle

sociology

1 sociology, 1 urban 2006 m ultiple planning, and 2 unidentified 2001 sin gle unidentified at all

SAKAMOTO, Mitsuyo. 2000. "Raising Bilingual and Trilingual Children: Japanese Immigrant Parents' Child- Rearing 2000 sin gle Experiences," PhD thesis, University of Toronto. SALAFF, Janet W. and CHAN, Pearl. 2007. "Competing Interests: Toronto's Chinese Immigrant Associations 2007 m and the Politics of Multiculturalism," Population, Space, and Place 13 (2), 125-140. SHAHSIAH, Sara. 2005. "Identity, Identification, and Racialization: Immigrant Youth in the Canadian Context," MRP, 2005 sin Immigration and Settlement Studies Program, Ryerson University. SHAUGHNESSY, Sarah C. 2004. "Cultural Differences in Social Relevance: Does the Analytic/Holistic Distinction Apply?," [compares Chinese and Western European 2004 sin students at the U of T], MA thesis, University of Toronto. SIMICH, Laura. 2000. Towards a Greater Toronto Charter: Implications for Immigrant Settlement. Toronto: The Maytree 2000 sin Foundation. SOLOMON-HENRY, Gale. 2006. "African Indigenous Knowledges and Education: Implications for Youth ofAfrican 2006 sin Descent and Black-Focused Schools in Toronto," EdD thesis, University of Toronto. ultiple

education

1 sociology, 1 anthropology

gle

ISS

gle

unidentified

gle

NGO

gle

education

52

TARDIF, Christine Y. 2003. "Conflict and Adolescent Autonomy among Chinese-Canadian Immigrant Mother- Child 2003 sin gle Dyads: An Intracultural Study of the Influence of Acculturation Disparity," PhD thesis, University of Toronto. TEIXEIRA, Jose Carlos. 2001. "Community Resources and Opportunities in Ethnic Economies: A Case Study of Portuguese 2001 sin gle and Black Entrepreneurs in Toronto," Urban Studies 38 (11), 2055-2078. TEIXEIRA, Jose Carlos. 2007. Toronto's Little Portugal: A Neighbourhood in Transition, Research Bulletin No. 35. 2007 sin gle Toronto: Centre for Urban and Community Studies, University of Toronto. TORBATI, Maryam. 2006. "Immigrant Entrepreneurship: A Case Study of Iranian Businesses in the Toronto CMA," MA 2006 sin gle thesis, York University. TORCZYNER, James L. 2003. The Shaping of Toronto's Black Community: A Demographic Analysis of the Black Community in Toronto and Regions. Montreal: Toronto Black Communities 2003 sin gle Demographics Project, McGill Consortium for Ethnicity and Strategic Social Planning. VANDE BERG, Travis. 2005. "ISKCON and Indians: Religion and Identity in North American Hinduism," 2006 sin gle [examines temples in Chicago and Toronto], PhD thesis, Loyola University Chicago. WAN, Fung-Ling Mary. 2003. "Language, Social Networks, and Parenting in the Lived Experiences of Five Working-Class Chinese Immigrant Women in Toronto: An Ethnographic Study," PhD thesis, University of Toronto. WANG, Lu and LO, Lucia. 2004. Chinese Immigrants in Canada: Their Changing Composition and Economic Performance, CERIS Working Paper Series No. 30. Toronto: Joint Centre of Excellence for Research on Immigration and Settlement - Toronto. [Available at www.ceris.metropolis.net] WANG, Shuguang and TRUELOVE, Marie. 2003. "Evaluation of Settlement Service Programs for Newcomers in Ontario: A Geographical Perspective," Journal of International Migration and Integration 4 (4), 577-606. WERNECK, Renata I. 2005. "Early Childhood Caries and Access to Dental Care in Portuguese-Speaking Immigrant Children Aged Up to 48 Months in the City of Toronto," M Sc thesis, University of Toronto. WOROTYNEC, Sonia (Zofia). 2005. "CHILD, INTERRUPTED: International Adoption and Canadian Immigration Policy," MRP, Immigration and Settlement Studies Program, Ryerson University. WORTLEY, Scot and TANNER, Julian. 2005. "Inflammatory Rhetoric? Baseless Accusations? Responding to Gabor's Critique of Racial Profiling Research in Canada," Canadian Journal of Criminology 47 (3): 581-609. 2003 sin gle

health sciences

geography

geography

geography

demography

sociology

sociology

2004 m ultiple 2 geography

2003 m ultiple 2 geography

2005 sin gle

health sciences

2005 sin gle

ISS

2005 m ultiple

1 social sciences, 1 criminology

53

WU, Fei. 2003. "Chinese Community and the Police: A Study of Chinese People's Perception of the Police in 2003 sin gle the City of Toronto," MSW thesis, University of Toronto. XU, Shijing. 2006. "In Search of Home on Landscapes in Transition: Narratives of Newcomer Families' Cross- Cultural 2006 sin gle Schooling Experience," [examination of Bay Street Community School], PhD thesis, University of Toronto. YEE, June. 2001. Apprenticeship Opportunities and Barriers for Immigrant Youth in the Greater Toronto Area, report on a 2001 sin gle CERIS-funded research project, 2001. [Available at www.ceris.metropolis.net] YUEN, Elaine. 2005. "The Experience of Chinese Women and 2005 sin gle School Councils in Toronto," MA thesis, University of Toronto. ZINE, Jasmin. 2002. Living on the Ragged Edges: Absolute and Hidden Homelessness among Latin Americans and Muslims in West Central Toronto: Final Report. Toronto: 2002 sin gle Equinox Research and Consulting Services for the Informal Housing Network Project. [Available at www.ceris.metropolis.net]

social work

education

social work

unidentified

sociology

54

