The Influence of YouTube: Selling Luxury Cosmetics in the Digital Age by Andrea Chidley Dr. Carolyn Kane

A MRP presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Professional Communication

August 21, 2017 Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2017 © Andrea Chidley, 2017

i

Author's Declaration for Electronic Submission of a MRP I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this MRP. This is a true copy of the MRP, including any required final revisions. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this MRP to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this MRP by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I understand that my MRP may be made electronically available to the public.

ii

Abstract This MRP analyzes the use of social media in selling high-end cosmetics. As social media continues to evolve, luxury cosmetics companies like Nudestix are using social media platforms like YouTube to create brand awareness. This paper uses a textual and visual content analysis of six YouTube videos to analyze how how-to and instructional videos may be used to market and promote lesser known, indie cosmetics brands. Research on marketing, in addition to other research articles, is used to explain the importance of brand stores, seed and word of mouth marketing campaigns. This research study uses qualitative data collected from the YouTube video sample to provide insights for indie cosmetics brands looking to grow their indie cosmetics brand using beauty influencers and how vlogs can create brand recognition.

Keywords: YouTube, luxury, cosmetics, brand, marketing, social media

iii

Acknowledgements I would like to thank Dr. Carolyn Kane for all of her support, guidance and patience that she provided to me throughout this MRP process. I would also like to thank my second reader, Dr. Eva Woyzbun for her industry insights and advice throughout the many stages of this project.

iv

Dedication I would like to dedicate this MRP to my mom, as she has been my number one supporter throughout my post-secondary education. I would also like to dedicate this MRP to my friends and family who have been an amazing support system throughout my journey at Ryerson University.

v

  

  

  

  

  

Table of Contents Declaration ...................................................................................................................................... ii Abstract ......................................................................................................................................... iii Acknowledgements ........................................................................................................................ iv Introduction ......................................................................................................................................1 Research Questions ..........................................................................................................................2 The Nudestix Story ..........................................................................................................................2 Literature Review.............................................................................................................................3 Methodology ..................................................................................................................................20 Findings and Discussion ................................................................................................................24 Conclusion ....................................................................................................................................40 Appendix ........................................................................................................................................42 References ......................................................................................................................................48

vi

Introduction The popularity of social media and digital marketing has transformed sales in the cosmetic industry from print media and beauty editor features to participatory media which involves beauty bloggers interacting with their fans. Focusing on the role of YouTube in this process, this MRP analyzes how social media can be used to advance sales for selling high-end cosmetics. Social media platforms allow for more content to be posted on multiple social media channels by beauty bloggers (Khamis et al, 2017), resulting in more exposure for high-end cosmetics brands and the opportunity for new brand associations to form. Digital marketing has changed the way luxury cosmetics products are advertised and sold because companies can promote their products and brand story on social media platforms (Yarrow & O'Donnell, 2009). Big cosmetic companies are using bloggers to reach more and new customers (Faust & Householder, 2009). The uses of digital marketing strategies implemented by luxury cosmetic companies are to increase brand awareness and encourage product sales. In order to create my sample, I will be analyzing the digital marketing strategy of Nudestix Inc. on the social media platform, YouTube. YouTube, as we know, is a video sharing website that easily allows beauty bloggers to upload creative content to discuss new cosmetic products. YouTube thus provides a platform for beauty bloggers to entice consumers to buy high-end cosmetic products by featuring the brands and selling the product. Nudestix Inc., is a luxury beauty brand launched in 2014 that markets their make-up pencils to young women who want an effortless make-up look. The collaboration between beauty bloggers and luxury cosmetics companies is a contractual deal that involves the promotion of a new product to garner attention from fans on social media. This MRP begins with an explanation

1

of how and why consumers feel obligated to buy high-end beauty products, given the way in which social media platforms have changed marketing and advertising campaigns. As online content is becoming monetized and commercialized through beauty blogging, consumers need to be aware of this growing trend. The value of the project is thus grounded in raising awareness of seed marketing campaign awareness, paid creative content and product awareness for consumers. The areas of research aid in answering the following research question: 1. How does the delivery of cosmetics information from the beauty influencer to fans contribute to the success of their video? a) How can we recommend these findings to other independent cosmetic companies looking to strengthen their brand presence on social media using beauty influencers? The Nudestix Story Nudestix is a Canadian indie brand that was founded in 2014 in Toronto by Jenny Frankel and her teenage daughters, Ally and Taylor (Nudestix, 2017). The company's philosophy is that clients should accentuate their natural features using a simple pencil applicator, a concept inspired by Jenny's teenage daughters, Ally and Taylor who would rather spend more time sleeping in than waking up early to apply make-up (Nudestix, 2017). Nudesstix products are easy to use and can be blended with fingers, or can be applied on the face using a brush or sponge. Their line includes concealer, lipstick, blush, mascara and illuminators (Nudestix, 2017). Since launching in 2014, Nudestix has taken a different approach to advertising their brand using social media channels rather than traditional print campaigns. The brand uses Snapchat, Instagram, YouTube and Facebook to spread awareness about their cosmetics product line (Nudestix, 2017). By promoting and advertising their brand on social media, Nudestix is able to control the messaging and are able to ensure that the posts are authentic to their brand

2

story. Additionally, using social media channels allows for more consumers to come into contact with the brand as the posts can be shared and promoted. Literature Review The literature review provides insight into consumer awareness and the strategic marketing ploys that are designed to entice consumers to purchase sponsored cosmetics products. The MRP draws from literature written on: digital advertising and marketing; brand management; luxury branding; and the influence of fashion and colour. Digital Advertising and Marketing The prominence of social media amongst young adults has created a new opportunity for marketing firms to advertise to target demographics using social media and beauty influencers. Chae et al. (2017) argue that the use of word of mouth (WOM) communication marketing and seeded marketing campaigns (SMC) used by marketing agencies to promote products on social media actually lead to spillover effects. When a spillover effect happens, the focal product that was supposed to gain attention leads to an overall category being discussed by consumers instead. An example of this is would be the release of a new liquid lipstick that is featured in a beauty vlog. Yet instead of the new liquid lipstick mesmerizing customers, online followers start discussing the various liquid lipstick formulas on the market. Today, consumers often discover brands and trends through social media, through seed marketing campaigns and word of mouth marketing campaigns (Chae et al, 2017). Marketing firms are partnering with beauty bloggers who are prominent on social media websites because of the large following and praise about the products. The partnership between and the beauty blogger is a marketing ploy to expose the new product in a convenient, popular way. The marketing firm that is hired by the brand can then

3

meet their quotas for exposing the new product and the beauty blogger receives free products and a monetary incentive (Chae et al, 2017). Despite the rise in of seeded marketing campaigns, Chae et al (2017) argue that this form of marketing is not as efficient as word of mouth because consumers actually discuss a wide range of cosmetic products rather than a specific brand product. Seed marketing campaigns and word of mouth campaigns allow for consumers to discuss products related to the sponsored product which is not effective marketing. Chae et al. (2017) explain that there are three categories that happen when word of mouth marketing and seeded marketing campaigns are used to promote a product. The three categories are: focal product spillovers, brand spillovers and category spillovers. According to Chae et al. (2017), a focal product spillover happens when consumers who are not apart of the seed marketing campaign but still discuss the sponsored product through word of mouth. Brand spillovers occur when non-seed consumers create a word of mouth discussion about the same brand as the featured product, but do not discuss the featured product (Chae et al, 2017). Lastly, category spillovers which occurs when non-seed consumers partake in word of mouth marketing by discussing a general category of cosmetics rather than the promoted brand product (Chae et al, 2017). These categories demonstrate that seeded marketing campaigns on social media do not always provide the ideal outcome when attempting to influence consumers. According to Stokinger and Ozeum (2016) social media has changed marketing communications and has allowed consumers to become more informed about new products and to desire a high quality of life. Advertisements on social media are easy to consume because they do not require a long attention span and can reach consumers around the world. In the United Kingdom, the luxury beauty industry is estimated to grow over six percent in the next five years

4

and due to globalization, more brands are entering the luxury cosmetic market (Stokinger & Ozeum, 2016). Luxury beauty brands create a brand story that is exclusive, mysterious and alludes to special treatment for their loyal customers, which creates a desire within consumers. The popularity of social media has created a new market with new potential buyers, which has sparked an interest from luxury beauty brands to spread their brand narrative through new forms of advertising. Stokinger and Ozeum (2016) argue that the introduction of Web 2.0, which was designed to allow users to create online, creative content to share, initiated the start of social media platforms and therefore changed traditional forms of marketing. Social media provides users with the ability to spread a message and share ideas amongst their social networks; this is very lucrative and influential. Social media intrigues luxury brands because there are brand associations online and these interactive platforms allow for consumers to perform their own research about the brand, which is a new form of communication (Stokinger & Ozeum, 2016). Social media platforms allow for cosmetics companies to interact with their customers through creative, consumable content that can translate into brand loyalty (Muchardie et al, 2016). When brands invest in their social media strategy, it demonstrates that the brand is trying to improve communication about the brand, new products and trends to customers. Social media interactions between the brand and consumers are positive and it creates a two-step communication that is consumable, fast and interactive between the two parties (Muchardie et al, 2016). Digital marketing campaigns allow for consumers to communicate with brands on multiple social media platforms and allows for the company to generate information about what consumers are seeking in luxury cosmetics brand. This communication strategy also provides

5

cosmetics companies with an opportunity to engage with their customers and respond to their comments and questions. Khelladi & Castellano (2016) analyze how luxury brands were hesitant to showcase their brand using digital marketing strategies. In order to maintain associations with upper-class styles, luxury brands have avoided advertisements in the past, relying instead on an ethos of mystery and luxury. This creates a problem because social media requires brands to be active, transparent and desirable to young adults in a matter of seconds. Luxury brands have started creating an online presence on social media accounts because despite having iconic names, luxury brands have to appeal to digital native consumers who have grown up with technology and are beginning to have purchasing power (Khelladi & Castellano, 2016). Web 2.0 has changed the Internet as social media platforms and digital marketing campaigns have allowed for creative content to be uploaded, shared, and discussed within a matter of minutes. Web 2.0 has changed social interaction, as young adults desire convenient content that fulfills their short attention span. Thus all, brands now have to consider their E-Reputation now because it is important to upload content that reflects the brand message, the brand identity and improves user experience (Khelladi & Castellano, 2016). Luxury brands in particular, in creating online content will have to consider their traditional reputation amongst stakeholders and longtime clients. While the reputation of a brand is built over time with customers, the e-reputation of a brand can change very quickly because it is based on the instant impression of the brand (Khelladi & Castellano, 2016). Luxury brands have to manage a traditional approach to providing customers with exceptional, personal service but also have to maintain an active social media presence. The corporate brand image is now built through the e-reputation of a brand and opinion of users on

6

social media (Khelladi & Castellano, 2016). When brands post to their social media accounts, they are transferring information from the company to the consumer and the consumers spread the brand messaging through word of mouth. Social media is about sharing and the more viral content brands create such as iconic campaigns, contests or interactions, the more the brand will be discussed and their content will be shared virtually or verbally (Khelladi & Castellano, 2016). It is important for luxury brands to consider their social media presence due to the purchasing power of the digital natives. Digital natives have grown up in the digital age and are versed in using various digital platforms seamlessly, which requires iconic luxury brands to implement a digital marketing strategy (Khelladi & Castellano, 2016). Social media content must be easy to consume and allow for the young consumers to gather information about the brand in a short amount of time. Digital natives desire convenience and variety yet are reluctant to have a negative brand experience and want to build trust with desirable brands (Khelladi & Castellano, 2016). Therefore, luxury brands have to consider the power of digital natives when posting online and their online brand story because the advertising era is evolving. Before the implementation of Web 2.0 and the popularity of social media, marketers used to tell a brand story using traditional forms of print advertising and the voices of consumers were not considered (Gensler et al, 2013). Brands could sell a product and the story behind the product and consumers could generate their own word of mouth strategies to sell the product to each other. The digital era has allowed for the consumer voice to become more prominent in the brand story and can help to sell the brand through creative content but can also hinder a company with negative commentary on these posts (Gensler et al, 2013). Brands must consider their online reputation with consumers before generating a new campaign because advertisements must represent the brand story but resonate with consumers. When consumers have poor experiences

7

with brands, there is no a need to call and complain to the company directly; consumers have the power to express their frustrations on their social media accounts (Gesler et al, 2013). When consumers discuss their negative experience online, it is not only available for the brand to acknowledge and respond too but has the potential for all consumers to read about the bad experience. Despite the negative effects that social media can have on a brand, negative reviews of a brand product can be used to benefit the company as well. Social media now requires brands to create a hybrid-advertising model that combines the brand's ideas and consumer data to create a campaign that can be easily shared and consumed (Gesler et al, 2013). Seed marketing campaigns allow for beauty bloggers and other social media influencers to create online attention about featured products that are sponsored to promote. Social media has also given brands the power to respond to negative attention from consumers on their social media accounts and demonstrates that the brand is conscious about their e-reputation (Gesler et al, 2013). This provides advertisers with an advantage because by monitoring user comments online, the brand can note the reoccurring problems that consumers are having with the brand. This allows the brand to address the problem in their next campaign and gauge what their customers are looking for in the brand. Luxury fashion brands did not transition to the digital age seamlessly as fashion houses were reluctant to implement digital marketing strategies (Kontu & Vecchi, 2016). Couture fashion promotes exclusivity, hierarchal class divisions and luxury in addition to presenting forward thinking clothing for the upcoming seasons. Although the fashion industry did not embrace social media at first, the couture houses have started to embrace social media platforms due to digital content strategy (Kontu & Vecchi, 2016). Luxury fashion houses have also become more

8

visible on social media due to the prominence of supermodels on the various platforms showcasing themselves in couture fashion. Social media is important to exposing couture fashion to digital natives because visual content continues to grow in popularity primarily because it is easy to consume by digital natives (Kontu & Vecchi, 2016). Fashion can create a narrative for viewers without using words and social media platforms allow for viewers to comment on the photos and provide their input on the product. The rise of the digital era has changed how brands conduct their business, how they market their products and how they promote new launches. Traditionally, brands used print media and promotional campaigns to convince retailers to purchase the new product and promote the product in store. This has changed how brands market their products since consumers can interact with the fashion brand online rather than waiting for a third party retailer, or couture fashion store to carry the product. Social media has allowed for luxury fashion and cosmetics to release new designs and new collections followers immediately and for consumers to share their brand experience (Kontu &Vecchi, 2016). Brands that have implemented a social media strategy understand the changing role of the company and how interactions with customers are changing. Social media can improve the experience for customers as brand accounts provide less risk for consumers buying high-end fashion and luxury cosmetics online (Kontu & Vecchi, 2016). Consumers have the ability to research the brand and analyze the brand's social media feed to ensure they are making a strategic, informed purchase. Social media has allowed for the consumer voice to be heard by companies and for consumers to be considered in future campaigns and digital marketing strategies.

9

Brand Management In order to grasp attention from followers online, beauty influencers have to establish their own brand in order to create consistent, online content. Self-branding allows for beauty influencers to gain commercial prominence on social media websites like YouTube and business relationships with cosmetic brands (Khamis et al, 2017). By creating a personal brand, beauty influencers are able to cater their online, creative content to their loyal followers. Therefore, beauty influencers are able to partner with cosmetic brands because it is an opportunity to create new content and online attention for the influencer and the company. Due the prominence of beauty influencers on social media channels, cosmetic companies identify the value of sponsoring and endorsing the conversations that beauty influencers have with their followers (Khamis et al, 2017). Thus, beauty influencers discuss new products on their social media channels and perform make-up tutorials to inspire followers using established and independent beauty brands. Beauty influencers captivate consumers because these media personalities create online content reviewing new cosmetic products and helping consumers decide whether to buy the products or not (Muchardie, 2016). The social media platform, YouTube allows for consumers to search for reviews and tutorials using products from a plethora of brands and a range of beauty influencers. Due to the reach of YouTube, audiences can discover influencers in from various countries around the world. Beauty influencers differ from A-List celebrities because of the information they share with their fans. These online personalities are able to connect with fans because they share a consistent story about their daily lives that aligns with their online persona and brand (Stokinger et al, 2016). Audiences value the opinion of beauty influencers because they appear to be a regular individual who discusses new cosmetic products and posts make-up tutorials online.

10

Social media platforms allow for users to establish their brand and their life by what they post on social media (Khamis et al, 2017). The life of the beauty influencer is constructed in order to grow their online following, maintain their audience and make money. Platforms like YouTube elevate the reach of beauty influencers by promoting their videos that then translates into beauty endorsement contracts and free cosmetics products (Muchardie 2016). Beauty influencers gain attention and notoriety from their presence online which is dependent on the amount of subscribers they have on their YouTube channel and the amount of likes they receive on their new videos. Beauty influencers challenge traditional forms of media because these online personalities do not have producers or networks helping to product their content. These online beauty gurus write, film, product and edit their content so that it captures the attention of their audience and mirrors a lavish and expensive lifestyle. Aaker (1996) explains that brand equity is the value of the brand that is derived from the perception of the consumer rather than the actual product. The digital presence of a brand should capture the attention of consumers aesthetically and emotionally. Aaker (1996) explains that the brand equity framework is about creating brand awareness, brand loyalty and associating the brand with a lifestyle or theme. Brand loyalty is a marketing tactic used to attract new customers to the brand and to maintain relationships with devoted customers (Aaker, 1996). As cosmetics brands are promoting their brand on social media websites, beauty bloggers are included in cosmetic branding because consumers trust their professional opinion. When a brand partners with a social media influencer, it is to promote the brand identity and the values of the company (Aaker, 1996). Although beauty bloggers are paid by the brand to promote their products, these online content creators discuss products in a conversational manner with their followers. These beauty bloggers disguise

11

product advertising by naming their video a product review or first impressions (Aaker, 1996). The influencer is used by brands to reach new customers and to spread awareness about the brand on more social media channels. The influencer that is chosen to work with the brand is an individual that embodies that brand identity and aligns with the values of the brand (Aaker, 1996). Additionally, Aaker and Joachimsthaler (2000) discuss the importance of building a brand website for customers and the value of advertising a brand through events rather than using traditional media campaigns. Digital advertisements can be featured on multiple social media platforms at the same time, which allows the brand message to captivate more audience members. Aaker and Joachimsthaler (2000) argue that building a brand website and social media accounts are important to creating connections with consumers. Aaker and Joachimsthaler (2000) explain that a brand's website and social media presence should align with the brand identity and create a positive experience for customers. Additionally, the social media presence of the brand should carry the same message across all channels; it is important for the marketing and communications team and the creative teams to work together. With the rise of social media, it is important for a brand to share their story and create a brand identity online (Aaker & Joachimsthaler, 2000). By creating an online presence, brands connect with more customers around the world, especially global consumers. Traditional advertisements using billboards or magazine spreads would provide one still image of the brand and the product without providing an experience for the customers (Aaker & Joachimsthaler, 2000). Digital marketing and advertising create multiple experiences for customers on different social media platforms, which contributes to a strong brand identity. Digital advertising is about creating an experience for a customer that is interactive, informative and creates a personal

12

connection for the customer and the brand (Aaker & Joachimsthaler, 2000). Social media platforms allow for brands to post digital advertisements frequently because the photos or videos will be consumed at different times by different followers. Cosmetics brands have to be active on social media and interact with consumers who interact with the brand by answering product questions or creating giveaway contests (Aaker & Joachimsthaler, 2000). Digital marketing and communications requires aesthetically pleasing posts and colloquial language to connect with young customers on social media. The digital marketing and social media departments work together and collaborate on social media strategies that will expose and connect with more customers (Aaker & Joachimsthaler, 2000). Social media posts are crafted carefully because the photos have to align with the brand identity, brand mantra and brand colours. Creating this cohesive structure allows for the brand message to continue to grow and gain momentum for the brand on social media (Aaker & Joachimsthaler, 2000). Gardner (2008) argues that advertisers are trying to appeal to more females by incorporating women of different body shapes, ages and races to brand advertisements. When cosmetic brands are featuring products on social media platforms, the digital advertisement includes swatches of the products on different skin tones. The cosmetic brand has to promote a product and demonstrate how a product looks on different people because this influences consumers to purchase the products (Gardner, 2008). For exampled, in 2003, Dove started a campaign called, "The Campaign for Real Beauty," and this was after Dove did a survey and eighty percent of women said that the advertising industry sets an unrealistic standard of beauty (Gardner, 2008). Dove created this self-love campaign to promote body positivity and to feature women of all race, size and colour to promote diversity in the advertising industry. The structure of the campaign included listening to women, starting a conversation about the unrealistic beauty

13

standards in North America and establishing a charity to help empower young girls and improve their self-esteem (Gardner, 2008). The campaign facilitated a conversation and helped to create a new brand identity for the company (Gardner, 2008). The brand story resonated with more consumers because the marketing campaign promoted diversity and body positivity. The campaign also used emotional branding to compel women to join the conversation and connect with the Dove brand on the Internet (Gardner, 2008). Dove created a marketing campaign that helped the company include digital strategy to connect with younger consumers. Luxury Branding This source is relevant as Kapferer and Bastien (2009) argue that luxury brands create a brand story that is so exclusive that consumers will purchase the luxury brand to demonstrate social class (Kapferer & Bastien, 2009). Consumers desire high-end cosmetic products because they are perceived to be higher quality than drugstore items. Luxury brands choose to advertise or not to advertise to consumers because luxury brands know the mystery and illusion surrounding the brand will be enough to entice consumers to purchase their products (Kapferer & Bastien, 2009). When beauty bloggers promote expensive beauty products and discuss the benefits and features of the product, fans want to try it themselves. Consumers justify spending money on luxury goods as a form of self-gratification for achieving a goal, working long hours or to brighten their mood (Kapferer & Bastien, 2009). When beauty bloggers promote high-end cosmetics, they do not explain how the product is made and the profit margins that the company is making on product. Luxury cosmetic retailers do not have to sell the product to consumers; the brand name already does that (Kapferer & Bastien, 2009). Brand name cosmetics are being sold through word of mouth because beauty bloggers appear to be honest and trustworthy when selling these expensive cosmetic products. Therefore,

14

luxury brands do not have to make quality products or provide exceptional customer service because consumers care about social status and owning brand names (Kapferer & Bastien, 2009). When beauty bloggers recommend cosmetic products and discuss new cosmetic launches, fans want to try these high-end goods because of the promotion of the product. High-end cosmetic products do not necessarily mean they are better than the affordable drugstore equivalent; the luxury brand has worked diligently on the packaging and perfecting the brand story (Kapferer & Bastien, 2009). Consumers will continue to purchase cosmetic brands for their reputation, brand story and relationship with beauty influencers. High-end cosmetics thrive in the beauty community because of word of mouth between family and friends, which fuels a desire to belong and to maintain social status (Kapferer & Bastien, 2009). Luxury cosmetics are marketed as exclusive and made with better ingredients. Yarrow and O'Donnell (2009) explain that millennial consumers want to own brand name items because it creates status and provides personal gratification (Yarrow & O'Donnell, 2009). When beauty bloggers discuss products in videos or post a positive product review online, their opinion influences their followers to buy the product and support this online personality. This is a productive tool for analysis as Yarrow and O'Donnell (2009) define the marketing strategies used on millennial consumers as releasing less product to create more publicity about a product and the role of association marketing (Yarrow & O'Donnell, 2009). Through the use of social media, brands are able to reveal new products to their consumers faster than traditional mediums like print or talk shows. Therefore, when a product is revealed by the brand on social media, the promotion of the product leaves consumers wanting to know more details. Brands do not enjoy putting items on sale because it leads to an increase in discounted items and cuts into the brand's profit margin (Yarrow & O'Donnell, 2009). Therefore, brands are

15

intentionally making small quantities of popular items to create awareness, interest and instill a fear about missing out on the launch of a new product. When there is only going to be a limited number of products released to the public, the story created online about the product influences consumers that they need to own the product (Yarrow & O'Donnell, 2009). The attention and the buzz surrounding the products create more demand and owning the products becomes a necessity rather than a want (Yarrow & O'Donnell, 2009). The buildup to the release of a new make-up product gives beauty bloggers more influence because they continuously post about the product on social media. Classic advertisements do not appeal to millennial consumers because the message of the advertisement is not innovative, interactive and does not encourage individual expression (Yarrow & O'Donnell, 2009). A digital advertising campaign that incorporates consumers and colloquial language appear less formal to consumers and more accessible on social media platforms. Association marketing is used to attract millennial consumers through brand collaborations with popular brands and beloved celebrities (Yarrow & O'Donnell, 2009). Consumers continue to align with association marketing because it is a use of nonverbal communication, which subconsciously influences fans to associate the brand with being attractive and prominent. Millennial consumers are driven to spend when a popular brand has collaborated with a prominent beauty blogger because the product has been conveyed as a necessity, not a desire (Yarrow & O'Donnell, 2009). Barbara Kahn's research is relevant to this study because she outlines the demanding stages of the consumer purchasing process. This is a productive tool for this analysis because Kahn discusses in her research that the stages are: the living stage, the planning stage, and the

16

experiencing stage. These four stages help to provide information about how future indie beauty brands can use consumer insights when trying to build their brand presence online. The living stage of the customer purchasing process per Kahn (2013) is for the brand to understand customers are focused on their daily routines so it is important for a brand to meet their needs, to be consistent and eye-catching (Kahn, 2013). The cosmetic industry has adapted digital advertisement because they are transferable across multiple social media platforms. Brands should position themselves to be advertising at the right the place and the right time, it is important when partnering with retailers to understand the retailer's promotions calendar (Kahn, 2013). By aligning product launches with a retailer's promotions calendar, a brand can position itself to spark a need within a consumer. Successful global brands understand the market competition and how generate awareness accordingly (Kahn, 2013). Cosmetic companies should understand the season trends and coordinate with retailers to ensure their product is included in latest seasonal launches (Kahn, 2013). To compete with other brands, cosmetic companies must create a need within a consumer and promote their brand through social media, word of mouth and in-store events. In-store events are ideal for getting the attention of voluntary customers because they are provided brand education, the opportunity to test the products and understand the simple, fun brand message that can be easily shared on social media or through word of mouth (Kahn, 2013). The attention of involuntary customers happens when customers did not expect to be intrigued by the brand event (Kahn, 2013). Brand events featuring a beauty blogger promote an inclusive community that provides a space for fans to meet a digital personality. If the involuntary customer starts to lose interest, this is the opportunity for a brand to promote a contest using a hashtag or providing a handout with information about the brand for the customer to learn more and purchase products

17

(Kahn, 2013). It is important to engage with consumers in stores and create opportunities for the consumer to promote the brand by purchasing products and promoting the final look on social media. The planning stage is about creating excitement about the brand and resonating with customers about their needs and expectations of their desired products (Kahn, 2013). When customers are looking for a new product, they are looking for reaffirming information to validate their expectations of the product they are looking for (Kahn, 2013). Social media influencers and beauty bloggers can help to facilitate brand memory for consumers when they are discussing a product and the brand on social media. Beauty bloggers resonate with consumers and continue to influence consumers to buy new products because of perceived relationship between the influencer and fans (Kahn, 2013). Influencers appear to be vulnerable and tell their life story to their followers online, therefore fans do not identify influencers as celebrities. The purchasing and repurchasing stage demonstrates the strength of the brand and the loyal customers that continue to repurchase the brand and the products created (Kahn, 2013). Beauty bloggers are opinion leaders on make-up brands for their fans and the cosmetic industry as realized the monetary value in working with beauty influencers. Cosmetic companies will maintain these relationships by partnering with popular beauty bloggers to introduce a new product and promote the brand so that products become desirable (Kahn, 2013). Fashion and Colour Fashion marketing is about keeping the same styles but refreshing the look with new pieces and rebranding the old collection by styling the clothes in different ways (Barthes, 1990). The marketing and advertising campaigns that are created to promote the new clothing collection are refined and edited so consumers believe that fashion has changed and need to buy these new

18

clothes and update their wardrobe. According to Barthes (1990), clothing brands introduce new style trends to establish a fashion hierarchy and to create a desire within consumer to be current with the latest clothing trends. New fashion collections are recycled ideas and concepts from a previous time, which are communicated on digital platforms as necessities (Barthes, 1990). Fashion trends influence the cosmetic industry because the make-up looks shown on the couture runways reflect the products and make-up techniques that are sold to middle class consumers (Barthes, 1990). Cosmetic companies release products that coincide with a new fashion season and the marketing of the product justifies the rebranding of a staple cosmetic product. Cosmetic companies want to convince consumers to purchase a highly anticipated products because the story of the product serves a new purpose for consumers. The Influence of Colour Batchelor (2000) argues that colour is used to disguise and shield our true selves from the world. Beauty bloggers are successful because instead of talking at a person, they start a conversion about cosmetics with their fans and make recommendations about cosmetic products. Batchelor (2000) argues that make-up should enhance the natural features on the face and embracing various cosmetic colours can help to overcome the fear of all colours. Digital marketing campaigns provide consumers with interactive information about the shades that a brand offers and product information. Colour can express a feeling, a mood, and make a statement which allows for an individual to flourish and feel confident (Batchelor, 2000). Cosmetic brands that have a presence on social media promote tutorials that use their product to encourage consumers to purchase the featured products. Brands collaborate with beauty bloggers to showcase new shades to show how the new product can be used to create various beauty looks.

19

Historically, make-up was reserved for the wealthy until the nineteenth century when factory production of cosmetics began and a very profitable business model started in France (Eldridge, 2015) These early cosmetic products promised to enhance features, be good for the skin and even in this period, female consumers were the ideal demographic (Eldridge, 2015). Cosmetics companies saw a need for safe, hypoallergenic products and provided customers with manufactured cosmetics before consumers realized this was a desirable innovation. To summarize, since digital content is more accessible to consumers, digital advertising becomes a vital element within the marketing of luxury cosmetics and the use of beauty bloggers in their online brand strategy. Digital advertising on social media platforms becomes an advocate for brand loyalty since consumers are able to interact with the brand by commenting on the advertisements, and inquiring about the products. Furthermore, luxury branding adapts digital marketing and advertising trends to create an exclusive brand story, and persuades its consumers into regarding their products as needs rather than desires. Such a trend is achieved via digital platforms through the use of beauty bloggers with the intention to influence consumer purchase and repurchase. These influences are based on fashion and colour trends within haute couture industry, which determine the style for the seasons. Methodology Data Collection This research study looks for the answer to following two-part question: How does the delivery of cosmetics information from the beauty influencer to fans contribute to the success of their video? Additionally, how can we recommend these findings to other indie cosmetics companies looking to strengthen their brand presence on social media using beauty influencers? To ensure these questions are answered, a qualitative textual and visual content analysis was

20

conducted on six videos featuring Nudestix products posted on YouTube from February 1, 2017 to June 1, 2017. YouTube was selected as the social media platform to analyze the delivery of cosmetic information because it allows for the beauty influencer to develop creative content. Additionally, the YouTube platforms allows for influencer to create make-up tutorials using various make-up products and connect with their followers in the comment section below. To find the top beauty tutorials posted featuring Nudestix products, the term Nudestix was typed into the YouTube search queue. Initially, over eleven thousand videos were found that featured Nudestix products and the scope of the initial video search had to be narrowed. The videos selected for this research study were picked based on the number of views the video had, the number of subscribers of the beauty influencer had and the production quality. It was important to find videos that were well product beauty tutorials rather than sponsored videos or ads. The time frame was selected for relevance and to analyze how an indie brand like Nudestix is using social media platforms to spread brand awareness and advertise their products. After narrowing the number of YouTube videos that used Nudestix products based on the number of views established three themes: Engagement, Education and Honesty. Two subthemes that were prominent were production quality and visual appeal. These themes were then structured into six categories, recorded and coded in six tables; one for each video analyzed. YouTube was chosen as the only social media platform for this analysis because it is the primary website where beauty influencers upload new beauty tutorials and cultivate interest from a wide audience. YouTube allows for a visual and textual analysis due to the video content as well as the comment section where beauty influencers can list and link their affiliate codes. The links to affiliate codes allow for viewers to save money on products featured in the tutorial and the beauty influencer is compensated for.

21

This data collection is necessary because it provides insight and a further understanding of how indie cosmetics brands are using social media to advertise their product and partner with beauty vloggers to create brand awareness. Data Analysis A visual and textual comparative content analysis was chosen for the research methods in order to analyze the production quality, messaging, and use of affiliate codes to sell the cosmetics products the beauty vlogger used in their video. A content analysis was chosen for the research method after reading Zhang et al.'s (2017) content analysis of public service announcements promoting healthy eating in YouTube videos. This study was suitable as the researchers used a visual and textual content analysis to find similar themes in their sample of PSA videos. A content analysis method was the best research method to use to conduct this study because it helped to distinguish prominent themes that were consistent throughout each of the six YouTube videos. A comparative content analysis allowed for a simple coding sequence to be conducted manually hand and organized into comprehensive tables. The codebooks were separated into the following categories and coded for during the analysis of each video. The categories are as following: Viewer Interaction, Audience Engagement, Disclosure, Product Identification, Seed Marketing/PR Products and Affiliate Code. The Viewer Interaction category was used to measure the reach that the beauty vloggers and their tutorials have on YouTube and the number of views also helped to eliminate the number of videos featuring YouTube products in them. This section coded for the number of views the video received as well as the number of likes the video received from viewers and the number of dislikes. These numbers were important to understand if the beauty vlogger is engaged with their following and how they are creating consumable beauty tutorial content. Another category that

22

was used was audience engagement, which was necessary in analyzing how the beauty influence interacts with their viewers through the comment section on YouTube. Although the comments were not analyzed, it was important to analyze if the beauty personality interacts with their fans by replying to their comments on their YouTube video. The disclosure category was used to identify if the beauty tutorial was sponsored by a cosmetics brand and analyze if there was compensation for the beauty influencer creating this beauty tutorial. This analysis was important to analyzing the authenticity of the beauty vlogger without the conducting an interview. Additionally, it is important to note that the visual and textual content comparative analysis used qualitative data because there were only six YouTube videos used in this study. This method of analysis uses qualitative data because it seeks to understand the ways beauty vloggers cultivate brand awareness by using indie cosmetics brands in their make-up tutorials. This research study was deductive as it used theory, coding, a content analysis and a discussion to present the findings of this project. Limitations This research study had many limitations. To begin, the scope of this study was limited in the amount of time and space to include further research into more than one indie cosmetics brand. If the study had allowed for a longer analysis, it would have been helpful to compare the presence of Nudestix on multiple social media platforms against other indie brands. Additionally, beauty vloggers promote cosmetics products to their followers on other social media platforms like Instagram and Twitter. Therefore, it would have been productive to conduct a comparison of all of the social media platforms to provide further insight and information on the prominence of independent beauty brand building on social media platforms.

23

Additionally, this research study could have benefitted from interviews with independent beauty brands to ask more specific questions about their branding strategy using influencers. A longer time frame would have aided in collecting data to analyze how the Nudestix brand has grown due to their involvement with beauty influencers. The longer time frame would have provided insight into how indie beauty brands like Nudestix have developed and changed their social media presence since launching in 2014. Findings and Discussion This section contains samples from the YouTube videos that were analyzed and coded for this research study. The findings and analysis section is structured to explain each video that was analyzed by answering each research question and presenting the prominent themes that were found in the six videos. The videos are organized by posting date within the sample range for this research study, which was from February 1, 2017 to June 1, 2017. The delivery of cosmetic information from the beauty influencer to their fans contributes to the success of their beauty tutorial videos because of demeanor and their positive association with the products they are using. The nature of the blogger helps to resonate with their followers because the beauty tutorials that are posting on YouTube are achievable for a consumer at home (Kontu & Vecchi, 2016). The assessment of these six beauty tutorial videos demonstrated that three beauty vloggers (see Appendix for detailed codebooks) explained in their videos where to find and buy the products used in the video. This is helpful for followers because the vlogger has provided them with the option to purchase the product or conduct more research on the products used before they buy. The beauty vlogger also acts as an unbiased sales representative for the emerging cosmetics brands that they use in their tutorials. The analysis of these six beauty tutorials on

24

YouTube, none of the online personalities disclosed that Nudestix sponsored their videos. In order stay transparent, beauty vloggers are to abide by a code of ethics to disclose any sponsorships or ads within their video in the title or in the description box (Gensler et al, 2013). In these studies, each beauty vlogger had a bright, cozy backdrop in a space in their home for their video to appear minimalist and unrehearsed. The backgrounds featured helped to set the tone of the video as the beauty vlogger was seated in their homes and in cozy spaces such as the living room or a converted office. Additionally, each beauty vlogger had proper lighting to ensure their face was bright, illuminated and base make-up for an even complexion before beginning the beauty tutorial. The nature of each blogger analyzed for this research study demonstrated that they were committed to their fan base as they continue to upload new beauty tutorials for their fans. These beauty vloggers thanked their viewers for watching their latest beauty tutorial and reminded new viewers to subscribe to their channel. By having proper lighting, base make-up and a minimalist background serve to generate an intimate atmosphere and honest review of the product. This study also demonstrated that each beauty vlogger wanted to connect with their fans by sharing personal experiences and stories for a closer bond. It is also important to note that each beauty vlogger linked their other social media accounts like Snapchat and Instagram (Yarrow & O'Donnell, 2009). This strategy allows for fans to follow the daily lives of these beauty vloggers and to watch them create their YouTube videos, open PR packages from various cosmetics companies and when they attend special events. The beauty vloggers analyzed in this study were enthusiastic about the make-up looks they were creating and aligned with the Nudestix message which is to be an enhanced, natural version of oneself. It is important to note that these beauty tutorial videos were not long; they

25

ranged between fourteen to sixteen minutes each. The make-up looks these vloggers created were not advanced or complicated, which helped to authentically sell the Nudestix brand. Three themes that were pertinent in throughout this study was the level of engagement, the commitment to education and honesty. Each beauty vlogger appeared engaged with their audience in their welcoming message at the beginning of the video to replying to viewer's questions or comments on their videos. Out of the six videos sampled, only one beauty vlogger did not reply to her fans in the comment section beneath their video; this demonstrated that beauty vloggers are committed to acknowledging and engaging with their followers on YouTube. The analysis of these videos demonstrated that each beauty vlogger was committed to teaching their fans how to use each product to achieve the desired look. The beauty vloggers also explained why they loved the products they were using and were authentic about their inspiration for the video. The beauty vloggers were positive about the Nudestix products they used and they did not discuss the indie brand products in a negative context. The beauty vloggers featured in this study were upbeat and positive which is desirable to indie cosmetic brands that want to expose their brand to a larger audience (Kahn, 2013). The final theme that was prominent throughout the analysis of these videos was honesty as each beauty influencer wanted to teach their viewers how to achieve the desired make-up look but also provided insight into their own personal lives. This demonstrated how the beauty industry has benefitted from beauty vloggers and the creation of beauty tutorial videos on YouTube. Traditionally, cosmetics have been sold by third party retailers in store and they feature ads of models or celebrities wearing the products (Kahn, 2013).

26

Although traditional ad campaigns are still used for established brands such as Estée Lauder and Chanel, the YouTube platform has allowed for indie brands like Nudestix to be featured. The YouTube model allows for beauty vloggers to create, edit and expose their beauty tutorials on the site and build a mass following. YouTube also provides the viewer and potential consumer with a choice of what kind of beauty tutorial they want to watch. This research study demonstrated that beauty vloggers are a beneficial marketing strategy for indie cosmetics brands looking to grow their following and exposing their brand. Beauty vloggers are able feature indie brands in their tutorials to help achieve a desired look. As this research study found, beauty vloggers have a large following and they have an informal relationship with their fans. Thus, followers trust the opinion of their favourite beauty blogger because of their commitment to honesty, education and engagement with their followers (Chae et al, 2017). Beauty vloggers are disrupting the cosmetic industry due to the prominence of beauty vloggers uploading tutorials on YouTube. As stated in the analysis portion of this study, there were initially over eleven thousand YouTube videos that featured Nudestix products, which demonstrates that there is demand for beauty tutorials and product reviews. Cosmetics consumers are looking to these online beauty personalities because they trust the opinions of these online personalities (Chae et al, 2017). Alternatively, beauty vloggers are trying new products and new brands on camera, which allows the viewer to see how the products work before purchasing them. These beauty tutorials provide brand education, brand communication and an online cosmetic community. These tutorials are beneficial for consumers wanting to explore make-up and learn how to apply various products themselves because these videos are convenient. Consumers no longer have to leave their house to learn how to apply foundation,

27

concealer or eye shadow. Consumers have a choice in which beauty vloggers they watch on YouTube; what brands they want to see and what kind of make-up look they want to see recreated. Word of mouth marketing campaigns are beneficial to indie beauty brands because they are going to receive a return on their investment (Chae et al, 2017). The assessment of these beauty tutorials demonstrated that word of mouth marketing campaigns are successful because each of the beauty vloggers appear authentic in their discussion about the Nudestix products. Based on the assessment of the six beauty tutorials used for this study, only three beauty vloggers provided links or described where they purchased the products they were using. By providing more information on the products used in the tutorial below the video, the consumer can refer back to the list when looking to buy the product and potentially buy more (Chae et al, 2017). Furthermore, independent cosmetic companies should also try to partner with global beauty influencers. This will help grow the brand and demonstrate the variation of the brand because beauty vloggers around the world can reflect potential customers in their country. Consumers turn to beauty vloggers because they are looking for someone who looks like them and can provide recommendations and a professional opinion on cosmetics products. The videos assessed in this As indie beauty brands partner with beauty vloggers to expose their brand, this study demonstrated that affiliate codes are beneficial to selling the indie cosmetic products featured in the make-up tutorial. Within the scope of the videos analyzed in this study, only three beauty influencers mentioned affiliate codes in their videos. An affiliate code is a discount code

28

provided by the indie beauty brand that features the beauty vloggers name and saves their followers money at checkout. For emerging indie cosmetics brands that are looking to grow their following and gain exposure on social media platforms, it is important for the company to study how their brand is growing online. Indie brands should look for new posts featuring their products in beauty vlogs and monitor if their products are receiving positive comments or negative comments. Emerging brands should also record how the beauty vlog exposure is benefitting their brand in the amount of growth seen on their social media channels and on their e-commerce website. If an indie beauty brand decides to provide affiliate discount codes for beauty vloggers to share, the brand should track how often the code is used on the company website. Based on the data collected from this research study, an important strategy for up and coming beauty brands is to partner with global beauty influencers. YouTube features beauty vloggers from around the world and this is a positive for new brands like Nudestix because they can expose the world to their less known brand via beauty influencers. When independent brands partner with beauty vloggers from different parts of the world, the brand is discussed but is also used to mirror the make-up trends happening in that region. Beauty vloggers from that region can also create educational beauty tutorials featuring the emerging brands in different languages. This allows for emerging brands to be discussed in multiple languages and allows for the brand to grow throughout the world (Muchardie et al, 2016). Newer brands like Nudestix are still growing but have made an effort to be featured in multiple retailers throughout the world such as Sephora, which is a global make-up retailer (Nudestix, 2017). Therefore, global beauty vloggers can provide distinct brand education but can also provide information for their followers about where to the brand is available in their own

29

country. The assessment of the beauty tutorial videos featured in this study found that three videos were created by Canadian beauty vloggers and three of the videos were created by American beauty vloggers. Affiliate codes are productive because it entices consumers to purchase the indie cosmetics products that were used in the beauty vlogger's video and saves the consumer money, which could lead to them buying more of the indie brand cosmetics products. The affiliate code compensates the beauty vlogger as well, which is an incentive for the beauty vlogger to feature more of the indie brand's cosmetics products in their make-up tutorials. Partnering with beauty vloggers is a beneficial marketing strategy for emerging cosmetics brands because it allows for their beauty products to be featured by a make-up professional who has a large online following (Stokinger & Ozeum, 2016). This research study confirmed that Nudestix has been in successful and strategic with their brand strategy and their dedication to marketing their cosmetic products on social media. It is crucial to understand that Nudestix is a Canadian brand that is based in Toronto, Ontario that launched in 2014 and the company has used social media to advertise and market their cosmetic products (Nudestix, 2017). The brand has been strategic and has ensured that their brand has a strong presence on social media channels like YouTube. The findings of this research study demonstrate that the beauty vloggers are creating looks with the products that are consistent with the Nudestix brand message.

30

Figure 1- Jaleesa Moses, American Beauty Vlogger This beauty tutorial featuring Nudestix was posted on February 16, 2017 by Jaleesa Moses and received 146, 326 views, 8000 likes and 50 dislikes. Her natural beauty tutorial used minimal cosmetics products and featured a Nudestix Lip and Cheek pencil which double as a blush and a lipstick. Jaleesa focused on teaching her viewers that they can achieve this look as well without having to use too many cosmetics products. Jaleesa came across as sincere to her followers as she began the video with a welcoming message to her channel. This beauty influencer then discussed her inspiration for the beauty tutorial and explained in depth how to achieve this look. Jaleesa's video was consistent with the themes in this research study as she engaged with her followers through her welcome message and in the comment section. She also educated her viewers on the products she was using by disclosing the name of the product, how to apply the product and linked the product in the description bar below. This make-up tutorial was accessible as well because the influencer created a look that was attainable for viewers and

31

this tutorial was beneficial for the Nudestix brand. Jaleesa used two Nudestix products and provided an affiliate code for her viewers to save money when ordering off their site. Due to the popularity of her video, Jaleesa's vlog helped to expose the Nudestix brand to a worldwide audience.

Figure 2- Eman, American Beauty Vlogger This celebrity inspired make-up tutorial featuring a Nudestix lipstick was uploaded on March 23, 2017. Eman was inspired by the actress, Shay Mitchell and wanted to create a look that featured a red Nudestix lip. This tutorial was still about keeping the look natural but demonstrated the bold colours in the Nudestix collection. This video received 17, 993 likes and 32

444 dislikes as well as 724, 215 views. Eman connected with her viewers by welcoming them to her channel and told her viewers a personal story before starting the make-up tutorial. By telling a story, the beauty vlogger breaks down the fourth wall and can connect with viewers about dayto-day life. Additionally, this vlogger had a soft background with good lighting, which helped to make the video appealing to the viewer's eye. The background of this video also contributed to the video being educational but informal as Eman, the beauty vlogger was conversing with her viewers like they were in the same room. This vlogger contributed to selling the Nudestix brand because she demonstrated how the Nudestix collection could be used for natural or bold make-up looks. Eman explained why she chose the product and how the product felt on her skin. Eman also explained her technique as she applied the make-up to her face and how the products she was using would help her to achieve her desired look. Beauty vloggers like Eman can boost sales for indie beauty brands like Nudestix because of the number of viewers and subscribers that she has on her YouTube channel. Therefore, Eman's channel allows for lesser-known brands like Nudestix to be featured, used and exposed to Eman's large fan base.

33

Figure 3- Jamie Paige, Canadian Beauty Vlogger This beauty vlog was posted by Jamie Paige who is a Canadian beauty vlogger based in Montreal, Quebec. Jamie received 61, 501 views, 2000 likes and 75 dislikes on this video where she discusses Nudestix lipstick and why the formula amazed her. Jamie began her video welcoming her viewers back to her channel and stated the topic of her video. Jamie was excited to share her new obsession with the Nudestix lipstick and provided a background story about what she was looking for in matte lipstick. Jamie discussed the packaging of the Nudesitx product and went in depth about the formula of the lipstick. Jamie was honest and excited about the quality of the Nudestix brand and showcased the various shades of the lipstick. Jamie was honest about the negatives about the product, which was helpful for a consumer considering buying the product. It was apparent that Jamie understood her following

34

because she was very detailed in her review of the video, swatches and provided a demonstration showcasing the versatility of the product. The space in which Jamie filmed the video is bright and cozy and flowed with the informal conversation she was engaging with her viewers. Since this video was dedicated to discussing only one product, her viewers were exposed to the Nudestix brand and were educated on the quality of the products, how to use them and also why Jamie approved of them.

Figure 4- Samantha Ravndahl #1, Canadian Beauty Vlogger Samantha Ravndahl posted this video on March 29, 2017 and the video received 97, 622 views, 3000 likes and 149 dislikes. This beauty tutorial featured Taylor Frankel, the co-founder of Nudestix and featured Nudestix products exclusively. Taylor created a natural, every day

35

make-up look while Samantha used Nudestix products to create a bolder look that could be worn day or night. Samantha did not disclose if the video was an advertisement and did not provide an affiliate code to her viewers to save money on Nudesix products. The video demonstrated Samantha's authenticity, as she was honest and casual in her conversation with Taylor as they applied Nudestix products to their face. The women discussed past make-up trends that they admitted to trying such as over plucking their eyebrows, which demonstrated to the viewer that these beauty personalities make mistakes as well. This video was focused on audience engagement and heavily on Nudestix brand education. This was beneficial for the Nudestix brand because Samantha has built a large following on her Nudestix channel and the video did not appear to be overproduced. The setting was natural and the lighting was bright and neutral which helped to make it casual and appealing to the viewer. When applying their make-up, Samantha and Taylor would explain which Nudestix product they were using, the shade they were using and how to use the product, which was a great selling feature. Since Samantha was applying more make-up than Taylor was; Taylor would explain the benefits of the Nudestix product they were using and why she loves them. This beauty tutorial was beneficial for Nudestix because Samantha's viewers were able to meet a co-founder of the company and understand why Nudestix products were created. The video was authentic to Samantha's brand and to the Nudestix brand while educating the viewers and demonstrating the different looks that Nudestix products can create.

36

Figure 5- Samantha Ravndahl #2, Canadian Beauty Vlogger This beauty tutorial featuring Nudestix products was posted on YouTube on April 4, 2017. Samantha Ravndahl is a Vancouver based beauty vlogger and she received 195, 512 views on this video as well as 9000 likes and 103 dislikes. Samantha had a casual approach to creating this make-up tutorial as she talks to her audience in a very informal manner and discusses her life with them as she applies her make-up while dressed in a sweater. This is an important aspect to engaging with her audience because she can connect with viewers, as she is very natural and casual on screen. Her backdrop for the video is natural and contemporary as she is set up in her home and in a comfortable living space. Samantha engaged with her viewers through a step-bystep natural, everyday beauty tutorial that aligns with Nudestix brand concept of natural looking make-up. After analyzing this beauty tutorial, it was clear that Samantha wants to be transparent 37

with her audience because she discusses her personal struggles on camera. Samantha was honest about her struggles with acne and called for more natural make-up looks because it is not necessary to use an abundance of cosmetics products every day. Samantha explained in depth why she used the products she did and the why she uses them in her daily routine. Although she did not disclose where she got the products or provide a affiliate code for a discount, Samantha demonstrated that she is passionate about make-up tutorials. This vlog can boost sales for Nudestix because the vlogger has a large following YouTube due to her open and honest demeanor, which makes Samantha more relatable to her viewers.

38

Figure 6-Mariah Leonard, American Beauty Vlogger This beauty tutorial featuring Nudestix was posted on April 25, 2017 by Mariah Leonard and received 72, 720 views, 3000 likes and 40 dislikes. This tutorial was inspired by the upcoming summer season and Mariah wanted to teach her viewers how to achieve long lasting make-up during a heatwave. Mariah was very detailed in her introduction about her inspiration for this video and wanted to use products that have lasted in the heat for her. Mariah was engaged with her audience, as she understood the struggle of trying to have a full face of make-up last in hot weather. Mariah also explained her own struggle with long lasting products herself due to her own struggle with dry skin.

39

Throughout this beauty tutorial, Mariah provided meticulous tips for her viewers about the application of each product. This education was a positive for Nudestix because she put a positive spin on the Nudestix product featured and demonstrated how versatile Nudestix products since they are long lasting and waterproof which is necessary for the summer. Mariah was engaged, educational and especially honest when she provided affiliate codes to her viewers so that they could save money on the products featured in her video. She provided a disclaimer stating that the company would compensate her for the number of people who used her code at checkout. This demonstrated how Mariah was committed to being transparent with her fans and viewers about the business and partnership opportunities that beauty vlogging has provided her. Conclusion To conclude, the YouTube platform has been a positive platform and productive platform for independent beauty brands to enhance their following and has used the popularity of beauty influencers to help establish a thriving beauty community. The change in advertising, brand education and brand communications on YouTube has helped to expand the reach of indie beauty brands like Nudestix to demonstrate the versatility and quality of their beauty products. Beauty influencers and beauty vloggers continue to gain prominence because fans and viewers resonate with someone who shares own interests, is similar in age, and reflects the viewers' images of themselves. Nudestix understands the disruption that is happening in the cosmetic industry due to the popular of beauty vloggers. Therefore, this young company has created their marketing strategy to be completely online and digital because of the prominence of social media platforms. YouTube is a platform that allows companies like Nudestix to be showcased by influential make-

40

up artists who have built their fan base on their creative content and reviews of cosmetics products. Since beauty vloggers are informal with their audience, their followers do not understand that the product is being sold to them via the creation of beauty tutorials. This allows for emerging brands like Nudestix to partner with beauty vloggers and have their products exposed to globally rather than running a traditional print campaign. The results of this study are applicable to emerging cosmetics brands aiming to build an online presence through digital media channels, instead of traditional print media. By partnering with beauty influencers, these growing brands can be showcased and used in beauty tutorial videos featuring various looks. Second, this builds credibility for the emerging beauty brand because the bigger the following of the beauty influencer, the more potential customers for the indie cosmetics brand. Thus, YouTube and beauty vloggers have added dimension to the beauty industry because consumers can now interact with the beauty industry via beauty influencers. By paying attention to who and how consumers engage with online media, Indie beauty brands demonstrate the revolutionary potential for e-commerce and the ongoing diversification of the cosmetics industry.

41

Appendix ­Codebook A1-Jaleesa Moses
Influencer Name
Jaleesa Moses Posted: Feb 16, 2017

Category
Viewer Interaction

Definition

Sub-Category
1.Beauty influencer responds to the viewer comments on their tutorial video. 2. Beauty influencer does not engage with fan comments

Example
1. Thank you so much for the support! 2. No reply or response

Sub-Category Used

The Beauty Influencer engages with fans by replying to their comments on their makeup tutorial video. Audience Engagement The reaction that audience members and viewers are having towards the video. Disclosure The Beauty Influencer states to their audience if a cosmetics company sponsored the video.

1. Number of Likes on the video 2. Number of Dislikes on the video 3. Number of Views 1. The Beauty Influencer discloses that the video is an ad 2. The Beauy Influencer does not disclose if the video is an or not

1. The Beauty Influencer replied to comments and answered questions in the comment section of the video. 1. "25,000 Likes" 1. 8000 Likes 2. "314 Dislikes" 2. 50 Dislikes 3. The number of people 3. 146, 234 Views who have watched the video 1. "This video is in collaboration with CoverGirl!" 2. " Today I will be showing you how to achieve this flawless skin look." 2. The Beauty Influencer did not disclose if the video was sponsored or not.

Product Identification (Word of Mouth Marketing Campaigns)

Seed Marketing PR Products

1. Provided information about the product (ie: where they purchased the product, how they discovered it) 2. Did not provide information about the product or where they purchased it The Beauty Influencer 1. When showing the mentions that the product, the influencer products they are using discloses that the product were sent to them by the was sent to them. cosmetics company 2. The influencer does not brand. diclose where the products used in the video came from.

The Beauty Influencer identifies the product they are using and provide information on the product before applying it to their face.

Affiliate Code

The Beauty Influencer entices fans and viewers that they can save money on a product featured using their discount code.

1. The Influencer provides information on their affiliate code. 2. The Influencer does not provide an affiliate code.

1. "Next, I will be using the Maybelline blush in 009. I bought this at the drugstore." 2. To complete this look, I will be applying this Smashbox setting spray." 1. "Today I wanted to review some products that were sent to me and I want to record a first impressions video to share with all of you!" 2. " Here are drugstore store make-up products that I have been loving lately." 1.The Beauty Influencer mentioned affiliate codes in the video or in the description box of the video. 2. The Beauty Influencer did not mention an affiliate code.

1. The Beauty Influencer did provide information about where to buy the products used in the make-up tutorial.

2. The Beauty Influencer did not dislcose where the products used came from.

1.The Beauty Influencer mentioned affiliate codes in the video or in the description box of the video.

42

A2- Eman

43

A3- Jamie Paige
Influencer Name
Jamie Paige Posted: March 13, 2017

Category
Viewer Interaction

Definition

Sub-Category
1.Beauty influencer responds to the viewer comments on their tutorial video. 2. Beauty influencer does not engage with fan comments

Example
1. Thank you so much for the support! 2. No reply or response

Sub-Category Used

The Beauty Influencer engages with fans by replying to their comments on their makeup tutorial video. Audience Engagement The reaction that audience members and viewers are having towards the video. Disclosure The Beauty Influencer states to their audience if a cosmetics company sponsored the video.

1. Number of Likes on the video 2. Number of Dislikes on the video 3. Number of Views 1. The Beauty Influencer discloses that the video is an ad 2. The Beauy Influencer does not disclose if the video is an or not

1. The Beauty Influencer replied to comments and answered questions in the comment section of the video. 1. "25,000 Likes" 1. 2000 Likes 2. "314 Dislikes" 2. 75 Dislikes 3. The number of people 3. 61, 448 Views who have watched the video 1. "This video is in collaboration with CoverGirl!" 2. " Today I will be showing you how to achieve this flawless skin look." 2. The Beauty Influencer did not disclose if the video was sponsored or not.

Product Identification (Word of Mouth Marketing Campaigns)

Seed Marketing PR Products

1. Provided information about the product (ie: where they purchased the product, how they discovered it) 2. Did not provide information about the product or where they purchased it The Beauty Influencer 1. When showing the mentions that the product, the influencer products they are using discloses that the product were sent to them by the was sent to them. cosmetics company 2. The influencer does not brand. diclose where the products used in the video came from.

The Beauty Influencer identifies the product they are using and provide information on the product before applying it to their face.

Affiliate Code

The Beauty Influencer entices fans and viewers that they can save money on a product featured using their discount code.

1. The Influencer provides information on their affiliate code. 2. The Influencer does not provide an affiliate code.

1. "Next, I will be using the Maybelline blush in 009. I bought this at the drugstore." 2. To complete this look, I will be applying this Smashbox setting spray." 1. "Today I wanted to review some products that were sent to me and I want to record a first impressions video to share with all of you!" 2. " Here are drugstore store make-up products that I have been loving lately." 1.The Beauty Influencer mentioned affiliate codes in the video or in the description box of the video. 2. The Beauty Influencer did not mention an affiliate code.

1. The Beauty Influencer did provide information about where to buy the products used in the make-up tutorial.

2. The Beauty Influencer did not dislcose where the products used came from.

1.The Beauty Influencer mentioned affiliate codes in the video or in the description box of the video.

44

A4- Samantha Ravndahl #1
Influencer Name
Samantha Ravndahl 1 Posted: March 29, 2017

Category
Viewer Interaction

Definition

Sub-Category

Example

Sub-Category Used

The Beauty Influencer engages with fans by replying to their comments on their makeup tutorial video. Audience Engagement The reaction that audience members and viewers are having towards the video. Disclosure The Beauty Influencer states to their audience if a cosmetics company sponsored the video.

1.Beauty influencer responds 1. Thank you so much to the viewer comments on for the support! their tutorial video. 2. No reply or response 2. Beauty influencer does not engage with fan comments

1. Number of Likes on the video 2. Number of Dislikes on the video 3. Number of Views 1. The Beauty Influencer discloses that the video is an ad 2. The Beauy Influencer does not disclose if the video is an or not

1. The Beauty Influencer replied to comments and answered questions in the comment section of the video. 1. "25,000 Likes" 1. 3000 Likes 2. "314 Dislikes" 2. 148 Dislikes 3. The number of people 3. 97, 567 Views who have watched the video 2. The Beauty Influencer did not disclose if the video was sponsored or not.

1. "This video is in collaboration with CoverGirl!" 2. " Today I will be showing you how to achieve this flawless skin look."

Product Identification (Word of Mouth Marketing Campaigns)

Seed Marketing PR Products

1. Provided information about the product (ie: where they purchased the product, how they discovered it) 2. Did not provide information about the product or where they purchased it The Beauty Influencer 1. When showing the mentions that the product, the influencer products they are using discloses that the product were sent to them by the was sent to them. cosmetics company 2. The influencer does not brand. diclose where the products used in the video came from.

The Beauty Influencer identifies the product they are using and provide information on the product before applying it to their face.

Affiliate Code

The Beauty Influencer entices fans and viewers that they can save money on a product featured using their discount code.

1. The Influencer provides information on their affiliate code. 2. The Influencer does not provide an affiliate code.

1. "Next, I will be using the Maybelline blush in 009. I bought this at the drugstore." 2. To complete this look, I will be applying this Smashbox setting spray." 1. "Today I wanted to review some products that were sent to me and I want to record a first impressions video to share with all of you!" 2. " Here are drugstore store make-up products that I have been loving lately." 1.The Beauty Influencer mentioned affiliate codes in the video or in the description box of the video. 2. The Beauty Influencer did not mention an affiliate code.

2. The Beauty Influencer did not provide information about where to buy the products used in the make-up tutorial.

2. The Beauty Influencer did not dislcose where the products used came from.

2.The Beauty Influencer did not mention affiliate codes in the video or in the description box of the video.

45

A5-Samantha Ravndahl #2
Influencer Name
Samantha Ravndahl 2 Posted: April 4, 2017

Category
Viewer Interaction

Definition

Sub-Category

Example

Sub-Category Used

The Beauty Influencer engages with fans by replying to their comments on their makeup tutorial video. Audience Engagement The reaction that audience members and viewers are having towards the video. Disclosure The Beauty Influencer states to their audience if a cosmetics company sponsored the video.

1.Beauty influencer responds 1. Thank you so much to the viewer comments on for the support! their tutorial video. 2. No reply or response 2. Beauty influencer does not engage with fan comments

1. Number of Likes on the video 2. Number of Dislikes on the video 3. Number of Views 1. The Beauty Influencer discloses that the video is an ad 2. The Beauy Influencer does not disclose if the video is an or not

1. The Beauty Influencer replied to comments and answered questions in the comment section of the video. 1. "25,000 Likes" 1. 9000 Likes 2. "314 Dislikes" 2. 103 Dislikes 3. The number of people 3. 195, 290 Views who have watched the video 2. The Beauty Influencer did not disclose if the video was sponsored or not.

1. "This video is in collaboration with CoverGirl!" 2. " Today I will be showing you how to achieve this flawless skin look."

Product Identification (Word of Mouth Marketing Campaigns)

Seed Marketing PR Products

1. Provided information about the product (ie: where they purchased the product, how they discovered it) 2. Did not provide information about the product or where they purchased it The Beauty Influencer 1. When showing the mentions that the product, the influencer products they are using discloses that the product were sent to them by the was sent to them. cosmetics company 2. The influencer does not brand. diclose where the products used in the video came from.

The Beauty Influencer identifies the product they are using and provide information on the product before applying it to their face.

Affiliate Code

The Beauty Influencer entices fans and viewers that they can save money on a product featured using their discount code.

1. The Influencer provides information on their affiliate code. 2. The Influencer does not provide an affiliate code.

1. "Next, I will be using the Maybelline blush in 009. I bought this at the drugstore." 2. To complete this look, I will be applying this Smashbox setting spray." 1. "Today I wanted to review some products that were sent to me and I want to record a first impressions video to share with all of you!" 2. " Here are drugstore store make-up products that I have been loving lately." 1.The Beauty Influencer mentioned affiliate codes in the video or in the description box of the video. 2. The Beauty Influencer did not mention an affiliate code.

2. The Beauty Influencer did not provide information about where to buy the products used in the make-up tutorial.

2. The Beauty Influencer did not dislcose where the products used came from.

2.The Beauty Influencer did not mention affiliate codes in the video or in the description box of the video.

46

A6- Mariah Leonard
Influencer Name
Mariah Leonard Posted: April 25, 2017

Category
Viewer Interaction

Definition

Sub-Category
1.Beauty influencer responds to the viewer comments on their tutorial video. 2. Beauty influencer does not engage with fan comments

Example
1. Thank you so much for the support! 2. No reply or response

Sub-Category Used

The Beauty Influencer engages with fans by replying to their comments on their makeup tutorial video. Audience Engagement The reaction that audience members and viewers are having towards the video. Disclosure The Beauty Influencer states to their audience if a cosmetics company sponsored the video.

1. Number of Likes on the video 2. Number of Dislikes on the video 3. Number of Views 1. The Beauty Influencer discloses that the video is an ad 2. The Beauy Influencer does not disclose if the video is an or not

1. The Beauty Influencer replied to comments and answered questions in the comment section of the video. 1. "25,000 Likes" 1. 3000 Likes 2. "314 Dislikes" 2. 40 Dislikes 3. The number of people 3. 72, 634 Views who have watched the video 1. "This video is in collaboration with CoverGirl!" 2. " Today I will be showing you how to achieve this flawless skin look." 2. The Beauty Influencer did not disclose if the video was sponsored or not.

Product Identification (Word of Mouth Marketing Campaigns)

Seed Marketing PR Products

1. Provided information about the product (ie: where they purchased the product, how they discovered it) 2. Did not provide information about the product or where they purchased it The Beauty Influencer 1. When showing the mentions that the product, the influencer products they are using discloses that the product were sent to them by the was sent to them. cosmetics company 2. The influencer does not brand. diclose where the products used in the video came from.

The Beauty Influencer identifies the product they are using and provide information on the product before applying it to their face.

Affiliate Code

The Beauty Influencer entices fans and viewers that they can save money on a product featured using their discount code.

1. The Influencer provides information on their affiliate code. 2. The Influencer does not provide an affiliate code.

1. "Next, I will be using the Maybelline blush in 009. I bought this at the drugstore." 2. To complete this look, I will be applying this Smashbox setting spray." 1. "Today I wanted to review some products that were sent to me and I want to record a first impressions video to share with all of you!" 2. " Here are drugstore store make-up products that I have been loving lately." 1.The Beauty Influencer mentioned affiliate codes in the video or in the description box of the video. 2. The Beauty Influencer did not mention an affiliate code.

2. The Beauty Influencer did not provide information about where to buy the products used in the make-up tutorial.

2. The Beauty Influencer did not dislcose where the products used came from.

1.The Beauty Influencer mentioned affiliate codes in the video or in the description box of the video.

47

References Aaker, D.A. (1996). Building strong brands. Free Press. Aaker, D.A., & Joachismsthaler, E. (2000). Brand leadership. Free Press. Barthes, R. (1990). The fashion system. University of California Press. Batchelor, D. (2000). chromophobia. Reaktion. Bryman, A., Bell, E., Teevan, J. J. (2012). Social research methods. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Chae, I., Stephen, A., Bart, Y., & Yao, D. (2017). Spillover effects in seeded word-of-mouth marketing campaigns. Marketing Science, 36 (1), 89-104. Eldridge, L. (2015). Face paint: The story of makeup. Abrams Image. Faust,W.,& Householder, L. (2009). Get real and prosper: Why social media demands authentic brands. Design Management Review, 20(1), 45-51. doi:10.1111/j.19487169.2009,tb00224.x Gardner, A. (2008). The 30 second seduction: How advertisers lure women through flattery, flirtation, and manipulation. Seal Press. Gensler, S., Volckner, F., Liu-Thompkins, Y. & Wiertz, C. (2013). Managing brands in the social media environment. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 27 (4), 242-256. doi: 10.1016/j.intmar.2013.09.004 Kahn, B.E. (2013). Global brand power: Leveraging branding for long-term growth (1st ed.). Wharton Press. Kapferer, J., & Bastien, V. (2009). The specificity of luxury management: Turn marketing upside down. Journal of Brand Management, 16(5-6), 311-322. doi:10.1057/bm.2008.51

48

Khamis, S., Ang, L., & Welling, R. (2017; 2016;). Self-branding, `micro-celebrity' and the rise of social media influencers. Celebrity Studies, 8(2), 191-218. doi:10.1080/19392397.2016.1218292. Khelladi, I., & Castellano, S. (2016). Reputation, image, and social media as determinants of ereputation: The case of the digital natives and luxury brands. International Journal of Technology and Human Interaction, 12 (4), 1053-1076. Kontu, H., & Vecchi, A. (2014). The strategic use of social media in the fashion industry. IGI Global, 1053-1076. doi. 10.4018/978-1-46666-8614-4. Nudestix (2017, May 22). Meet the Founders. Retrieved from https://nudestix.ca/pages/about Muchardie, B. G., Yudiana, N. H., & Gunawan, A. (2016). Effect of Social Media Marketing on Customer Engagement and its Impact on Brand Loyalty in Caring Colours Cosmetics, Martha Tilaar. Binus Business Review, 7, 1, 74. Stokinger, E., & Ozuem, W. (2016). The intersection of social media and customer retention in the luxury beauty industry. In W. Ozuem, & G. Bown (Eds.), Competitive Social Media Marketing Strategies (pp. 235-258). Yarrow, K., & O'Donnell, J. (2009). Gen buY: How tweens, teens, and twenty-somethings are revolutionizing retail (1st ed.). Joessey-Bass. Zhang, X., Baker, K., Pember, S., & Bissell, K (2017). Persuading me to eat healthy: A content analysis of YouTube public service announcements grounded in the health belief model. Southern Communication Journal, 82(1), 38-51.

49

50


