THE JOURNEY OF REFUGEE WOMEN'S HEALTH IN THE CITY OF TORONTO

by

Maryline Badalian, BSW, Ryerson University, 2012

An MRP presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Social Work in the Program of Social Work

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2016

© Maryline Badalian 2016

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION FOR ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF A MRP I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this MRP. This is a true copy of the MRP, including any required final revisions. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this MRP to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this MRP by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my MRP may be made electronically available to the public.

ii

To my very dear Uncle Victor `jan', who did not live to see me graduate from this program thank you for all that you continue to do for us. I dedicate this to all the little girls having lived and survived trauma, and whom have grown into beautiful, caring and compassionate souls. Your story is not an insignificant one. You are worthy. You too can use your adversities as a stepping stool to heighten your achievements. Never ever give up on life sisters. This is my prayer. In addition, as this year marked the centenary of the Armenian Genocide of April 24th, 1915, I dedicate this to the 1.5 million plus people who were killed at the hands of the Ottoman Turks. As a descendant of survivors of this very genocide, I stand proud to be surviving to tell my truth, and for being able to stand up and be an ally for all truth, rights and justice.

iii

Acknowledgments I want to thank the Almighty for never leaving my side. Even at the lowest points throughout the last two years of writing this, you have never left my side. I am humbled by your everlasting and continual presence in my life Lord. Thank you for making me realize I am never alone as long as you are in my heart. Giving thanks for your grace, guidance and protection. I owe my successes in Canada to the fact that my family fled here to Toronto, because of the long lasting Iranian Islamic Revolution of 1979. Thus, I am thankful to Canada with providing me with a space for such opportunities to educate myself and demonstrate my critical thoughts, without having my freedoms be compromised. As much as I am aware and critical about the social inequities that exist here, I am thankful to live in such a nation overall. The last two years of my life have been a wake up call with many ups and downs, and I would not have been able to overcome it without the support of my loving parents. I recognize the different life I would have, had my parents not moved our family here. This enabled me to grow into who I am as a person and as a social worker. They made many sacrifices for my siblings and I, and for this I am ever grateful. My parents played a huge role in my ability to successfully enrol and finish this program and paper, and for that I am truly grateful to them. Many thanks to my sister and brother for their sweet words of encouragement and huge confidence in me throughout all my years of educating myself, but especially the last two years. Regardless of how far my sister Liza has been from me, she continues to offer her support and a shoulder to lean on. Love you lots Liza. To all my wonderful and caring soul sistars and friends alike (near and far)­ you made this journey so much more bearable with some light-hearted fun, silliness, encouragement, long talks and moments of enlightenment which helped the journey. Thanks to Sam, Alma, Mel, Dalo, Megan, Lesley, and Amy for supporting me throughout this journey. A special shout out to a woman I have counted on since day one - Nathalie thank you for being who you are. To my late grandparents and uncle Victor `jan'. Your support from day one is what it took to bring me here. My grandmother would often tell my mother that she thought I could govern a village back home. She truly saw in me some wonderful things and I sure hope I do not ever let her down. Victor jan, we are missing you so much. Hope you are resting in paradise. Cheers! Countless thanks to all the ladies at the YWCA Canada office, where I conducted my student placement. I am thankful for my supervisor Ann Dector, who was very supportive and always accommodated me during my most difficult of times in life. Your support made it possible for me to continue and not give up. I learned things from you I could never learn from a textbook. The wonderful women in this office made me realize why I chose this field to work in and how inspiring and inspirational women truly are. Thank you ladies! It is with the utmost appreciation and thanks to all the faculty and staff at Ryerson University over the last 8 years of my undergraduate and graduate careers in the School of Social Work. I am especially thankful to Dr. Samantha Wehbi who has been a huge mentor in my life, not to mention an amazing professor, social worker and woman. Thank you for our one on one chats over the years, and accepting all of me in my different stages of life and learning ­ you are my inspiration. To Jeff Edmunds who is no longer with us, social work misses you! We hope you are doing well. Thank you for your dedication to the student body. Thank you as well to Milene Fereira, for supporting me in some of the hardest moments in my life. Your support was immeasurable and had a huge impact on my completing this MRP and this program - I told you we would "pop bottles"! I would also like to thank my research iv

supervisor, Dr. Henry Parada, for his ongoing support throughout my entire MSW career. Thank you for your understanding, guidance and patience. To Dr. Jennifer Poole, I am forever grateful for your one on one support, guidance and encouragement in the last few months. Without your understanding ears and real life talks, I would not have been able to complete this research paper. I am forever grateful and will always remember you! With great emphasis, I wish to acknowledge the four brave and courageous women of this study; it would not be possible at all without you! I give all thanks to the women who gave their time, to voice their opinions and experiences of their lived realities. May we learn from them and let them be an inspiration! Lastly, but definitely not least, I want to give a sincere shout out to myself! Although there have been so many wonderful supports and people I was able to lean on in these last couple of years, the true strength to keep going and to persevere came from deep within my own being and soul. Sometimes we have to stop and realize we are worth every effort and step up to better ourselves both physically and mentally. I myself found so many challenges while in this program, hitting rock bottom, but as the saying goes, there is no better place to climb then up. I am thankful to myself for not giving up on my education and life!

v

ABSTRACT The Journey of Refugee Women's Health in the City of Toronto Master of Social Work, 2016 Maryline Badalian Program of Social Work, Ryerson University This exploratory, qualitative research study is based on the stories of four refugee women living in the city of Toronto, and looks at their first hand experiences of living without health insurance or coverage, since the 2012 cuts to the Interim Federal Health Program (IFHP). This study ultimately sought to explore how refugees' lived experience of barriers to healthcare impacted their overall health and the health of their families. A social constructionist framework was used for analysis, along with the utilization of a gender and race analysis, taking into account an overall anti-oppressive lens. This research was ultimately concerned with learning about the experiences of this group of people, who, at the time of the research, were being prevented from accessing free health care. A number of conclusions were reached about the impacts of the 2012 cuts to the IFHP and about the need for future research on refugee access to healthcare. Finally, the narratives of the four women refugees in this study revealed 1) pre-existing barriers to health care , 2) the worsening or onset of mental health conditions 3) negative sentiments around program coverage and 4) that the women still displayed cites of resilience and resourcefulness despite their health care coverage being cut off.

vi

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Chapter 1: Introduction Chapter 2: Literature Review Chapter 3: Theoretical Framework Chapter 4: Research Methodologies Chapter 5: Findings/Analysis Chapter 6: Discussionn/Implications Chapter 7: Conclusions Appendices References

Page 1 Page 4 Page 13 Page 18 Page 22 Page 37 Page 43 Page 46 Page 55

vii

LIST OF APPENDICES Appendix A ­ Recruitment Poster Appendix B ­ Telephone Script Appendix C ­ Consent Form Appendix D ­ Dialogue Guide Appendix E ­ Contact Referrals for Participants Appendix F ­ IFHP Changes Summary Page 46 Page 47 Page 48 Page 51 Page 53 Page 53

viii

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION Over the last twenty years, Canada's immigration system has seen many exclusionary changes in policy that do not reflect the ideals of a so-called kind and benevolent state (BonillaSilva, 2000; Plecash, 2012; Thobani, 2000; Zeigler & Stewart, 2009). More recently, policies that provide and administer refugee health care within Canada were radically changed and cut, stripping support from one of the most marginalized groups in society. These cuts took place in the summer of 2012 to the Interim Federal Health Program (IFHP1), which provided health insurance coverage to refugees. The importance of accessing health care is vital to an individual's wellbeing, particularly within marginalized groups. Barnes (2012), Hyman (2011), Mckeary & Newbold (2010), Thobani (2000), and Spitzer (2011) all explain in detail that refugees, as a group, experience poorer levels of health after settling in Canada. The IFHP cuts created barriers for refugees attempting to access health care services, and particularly affected women who became unable to access services such as prenatal care, birth control or mental health resources (Barnes, 2012). This exploratory, qualitative research study is based on the stories of four refugee women from the city of Toronto, and looks at their first hand experiences of accessing health care since these policy cuts took effect in the summer of 2012. These stories were understood and interpreted through a social constructionist framework with an additional race and gender interpretation, taking into account an overall anti-oppressive lens. As Spitzer (2011) identifies,
IFHP is a program set up by the federal government which provides health care coverage to protected persons (including resettled refugees), refugee claimants and other groups who cannot receive provincial or territorial coverage. This includes basic coverage, supplementary care and prescription care in most cases. After being cut in 2012, this program was reinstated on November 5th, 2014, pending a federal court appeal. For more information on specific coverage, please visit: http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/refugees/outside/arriving-healthcare.asp and APPENDIX F
1

1

gender interacts with other locations of identity such as ethnicity/'race' and migration status "to form hierarchies of inclusion and exclusion that crisscross our social landscape" (p.17). How one's identity is constructed in society ­ and which community an individual happens to belong to ­ will unfortunately determine if a person will be given or restricted access to social and material goods. What transpires when such identities combine, can affect the unique lived experiences of the community it is affecting ­ in this case refugee women. This research is concerned with learning about the experiences of this group of people, who, at the time of the research, were being prevented from accessing free health care. Social Location As a social worker conducting research related to my lived experience, it is imperative that I acknowledge and respect the premise of my own subjectivity. Social Constructionist research is concerned with the `researcher' and `researched' social locations of power. My social location situates me as a newcomer, part of a family fleeing from war, but our status was never `refugee'. In some ways, however, I am also an insider. My family has faced discrimination and exclusion through other aspects of society such as migration policy, and the experience of being Othered. There have been instances where I have felt my identity socially constructed by others, with assumptions about my character or values. Migrating from Iran has significant pre-set constructs within society, in terms of what that means for me as woman from that part of the world, now living in the west. This being said, it was my responsibility as an AOP2 researcher, and both

I understand AOP to be an umbrella term for a range of critical approaches to understanding oppression (Baines, 2011). Anti-Oppressive research promotes social justice and community empowerment for marginalized groups (refugees), and ultimately hopes to uncover stigma, discrimination, and systemic forms of oppression (policy changes in this case). AOP brings to surface the struggles of social justice and power inequality, which I will further expand on in my theory section. 2

2

`insider' and `outsider', to make sure the dialogue was driven by the women, instead of from myself. My job simply consisted of keeping track of the time and probing and clarifying. Social constructionist research is connected to how interactions shape and affect knowledge (Walsh, 2012). I am included in these processes of coming to know, and already being in a place of `knowing' a `truth', both as a woman and as someone who has lived the newcomer experience and faced barriers to care myself. Ultimately, my responsibility is to follow social constructionism and not my own understandings of the issues for refugee women in Canada. In addition, as is discussed by Potts & Brown (2005), in AOP research, constant attention should be given to the relationship between the researcher and the participants, and extra care and attention should be given to shifting my power as the `outside researcher' to those that hold the most important source of knowledge ­ the women themselves. The participants, those who have lived experience and epistemic privilege will be the ones revealing the knowledge they hold through their interviews. In summary, my work centres the voices and understandings of women who have experienced the adverse effects of service and funding cuts. Through social constructionist and AOP lenses, my work seeks to highlight these women's experiences as products of construction and as they construct them. One of the central findings is that there is no one single experience of being a refugee, of being a woman and of being caught in funding cuts.

CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW History of Racist Immigration Policies in Canada 3

Canada is generally seen as a nation that is welcoming to all people, identities and values. The Canadian immigration system, however, has increasingly created racist and inequitable policies that serve the neoliberal `white' agenda and ideology (Allahar, 1998; Barnes, 2012; Bonilla-Silva, 2000; McCalla & Satzewich, 2002; Thobani, 2000). Historically, groups that were non-white in Canada were required, through formal legislation, to do and pay for things that the dominant white population did not have to. For example, McCalla & Satzewich (2002) state "head taxes, continuous passage stipulations, and theories about the relationship between `race' and climate were used to try to sustain Canada as a White person's country" (p. 38). Racist policies such as these deliberately render exclusive the construction of what it means to be a `true' Canadian based on race and status. The government since that time has been strategicwally picking and choosing who can enter Canada (based on a variety of factors) and under what tiered status. Allahar (1998) adds to the literature on racist immigration policies with the example that in 1947, Asians were not seen as `preferred' immigrants and were thought to be a social and economic problem. Policies targeted at certain ethnic and racial groups have been central in much of Canadian immigration policy throughout history. As the numbers of refugees grew, their racialization was reflected through numerous racist and sexist policies that intensified throughout the 1990's (Allahar, 1998; Bonilla-Silva, 2000; McCalla & Satzewich, 2002; McKeary & Newbold, 2010; Thobani, 2000). Bonilla-Silva (2000) adds to the discussion of racist policy through his critique on `whiteness', arguing that attacks are, indeed, made on racial minorities and newcomers through the use of racist immigration policy within Canada. For example, there is social backlash on affirmative action type policies, which are meant to equalize normally unequal work environments. Canada continues to demonstrate levels of intolerance 4

towards refugees, even though it has obligations under international and federal law to provide support for refugees upon their resettlement (Thobani, 2000; Omidvar & Richmond, 2000). `Whiteness' and `Canadian National Identity' Ahmed (2007) defines concept of whiteness as "an ongoing an unfinished history, which orientates bodies in specific direction, affecting how they `take up' space and what they `can do'" (as cited in Todd, 2011, p. 150). Pon (2009), Todd (2011) and Lozanski (2007) take up whiteness and discuss its concerns with holding their colonial positions of power in order to keep subordinate groups (Others) on the margins. This is a larger effort to preserve the neoliberal and capitalist principles and values that has kept Canada's refugee policies very oppressive and exclusive of white bodies and minds. Immigration policies have constructed terms such as `visible minority' to engage the community and set the tone describing racialized, often newcomer communities, against the dominant `white' group in society (Bannerji, 2000 & Lozanski, 2007). This automatically sets them apart from the `Canadian identity' and creates a dichotomous standard. The word in itself has racist connotations as `visible' clearly states that you can `see' their difference and `minority' sets the tone that they are not part of the official hegemonic dominant white group. Bonilla-Silva (2000) adds that the superiority felt by whites is then an effort to distinguish them against the Other, reinforcing distinct Canadian traits and principles. The Canadian government has endorsed policies that have constructed race in terms of diversity and traditional customs such as food, dance and clothing (Lozanski, 2007). This will always stand along with the idea of whiteness, as it is merely a way of `addressing' and naming the Other and making them a part of a practice that is not in actuality equal or value free. The

5

Other includes refugees and newcomers in general, all who are seen to be sitting outside of the white, hegemonic identity of who is and who is not included in Canadian `white' identity. We Are Not Just `Refugees' Even though refugees are considered a vulnerable group in society that encounter systemic barriers for health, it is important to remember that not all refugees fit the constructed images and notions of what a refugee `is' and what they are like. There are a lot negative sentiments with the term `refugee' and the images that come along with it. When discussing the criminalization of immigrant populations and refugee fraud, Barnes (2012), Giles (2008), Kumsa (2006), McKay, Thomas & Kneebone (2011), Spitzer (2011), Thobani (2000) and Zine (2006) discuss the negative images that are constructed about refugee communities and the perceptions and attitudes towards them. Thobani (2000) discusses how Canadians are defined as respecting `the rule of law', `honest', `hardworking' and `fair', whereas refugees are defined as trespassers and those conducting illegal activity, for example. In addition to these constructs of the refugee identity, McKay, Thomas & Kneebone (2011) discuss how refugees are depicted as the `queue' jumpers and `boat people'. Here we see how the refugee is constructed as the delinquent Other who is seen to be preying on the `deserving tax-payers' system. This negative portrayal and depiction of the refugee identity is also constructed by those with privilege, such as members of parliament and politicians. The neoliberal, capitalist ideology in Canada prevails with individuals in our current federal government. Former Minister of Citizenship and Immigration Canada Jason Kenney has been quoted as stating most Canadians believe that "we have no obligation to provide...publicly funded health insurance to bogus asylum claimants, whose claims have been rejected by our fair legal system [or] to provide supplementary benefits to asylum claimants which are not available to Canadian taxpayers" 6

(Plecash, 2012, 3). The images set forth by Mr. Kenney's words of `bogus' asylum seekers and `our fair legal system' clearly supports the notion of Othering and deviant identity constructs for the refugee community in Canada. Mr. Kenney's closed-door policy for refugees is an attempt to sustain the hegemonic image of Canada's identity and cluster refugees as individuals that are not to be trusted or `deserving' of health care. The literature agrees that such perceptions of refugees are also evident within mainstream society and the media, perhaps based on influence from political parties and affiliates (McKay, Thomas & Kneebone, 2011). Interim Federal Health Program (IFHP) The IFHP began in 1957 with the recognition and premise that certain vulnerable groups in society (such as refugees) still require access to health care even though they were not Canadian citizens. Many were not eligible for coverage under provincial insurance plans, could not make claims through private health insurance plans and lacked the financial resources in general to take care of their health needs (Barnes, 2013; Jackson, 2012). Cuts to the IFHP took place as of June 30th 2012, reducing or eliminating coverage for Refugee Claimants, Refugee Claimant from a Designated Country of Origin (DCO) and Failed Refugee Claimants (Jackson, 2012; Barnes, 2012; Barnes 2013; Plecash, 2012). The few pieces of literature that have been published since the IFHP cuts took place, all advocate for the reinstatement of the original policy, which did not offer a tiered health care system based on status or country of origin (Access Alliance Multicultural Health and Community Services, 2012; Barnes, 2012; Barnes 2013; Jackson, 2012). Jackson (2012) outlines that Canadian and International evidence suggests that people who "lack health insurance: delay or forgo seeking health care, including emergency services, prenatal care and treatment for infectious disease; are often denied care when it is sought; and are sometimes discriminated 7

against when care is sought" (p. 6). The literature assumes negative consequences as a result of these cuts. Receiving uniform health care coverage for all categories of refugees under the IFHP, as it once was, recognizes the initial premises that refugee claimants may have experienced persecution in their home country and therefore puts them at particular risk for poorer health, as well as being an important factor towards good health and inclusion within Canadian society (Barnes, 2013). The cuts to the IFHP demonstrate how governments stray away from this type of compassionate model towards a strict, hierarchy of who is and who is not a `genuine' refugee, ultimately rejecting the unique experiences of migration that refugees face (Barnes, 2013),. The Health and Well-Being of Refugees During 2011, Canada accepted 12, 983 refugee applications, only 38% of the total number submitted for consideration that year (Barnes, 2012). Many of the refugees that are accepted into Canada are fleeing from situations of war, persecution, torture, genocide, violence against women and under other humanitarian and/or compassionate considerations (Barnes, 2013; Collins et al., 2011; Hong Fook Mental Health Association, 2012; Huth, 2012; Hyman, 2011; Spitzer, 2011; Thobani, 2000). Refugees are usually coming from very stressful environments, into completely new ones with different cultures and customs. This is, without a doubt, a shock to the senses. Literature discusses that leaving such harmful situations just to reach what appears to be a `safe' country comes at a price. Migratory stress is an added factor associated with refugees due to a new environment, new language, new customs, new geography and many other foreign factors that would be considered stressful (Collins et al., 2011; Hong Fook Mental Health Association, 2012; McKeary & Newbold, 2010; Spitzer, 2011). There are clear barriers within 8

any new environment, but this compounded with an inability to navigate and access health care services that may already be available for refugee populations, creates a different impact (McKeary & Newbold, 2010). Some research has been conducted in areas of refugee health care needs in Canada and internationally. The findings have concluded that refugee health needs are far greater and more complex than other immigrant groups (Barnes, 2012; Barnes 2013; Craig, Jajua & Warfa, 2009; Hong Fook Mental Health Association, 2012; McKeary & Newbold, 2010; Newbold, 2009; Spitzer, 2011). The experiences of war and trauma make it more likely that refugees' experience negative health effects, not only in their home country, but which come with them upon arrival to Canada. Many health care practitioners across Canada have voiced their concerns regarding the IFHP cuts. Barnes (2012) suggests that the Canadian government should set out a list of indicators to evaluate whether the cuts to health care were affecting this community and marginalizing them even further. Some examples of what can be measured include: the ability to access a physician or nurse, prevalence of chronic conditions such as mental health issues, and the amount of refugees who need to fill a prescription for a medical condition. The little amount of research that does exist on health care needs for refugees generally focuses on mental health as it has been identified as a primary concern for this community. Research and reports by Barnes (2012), Barnes (2013), Craig, Jajua & Warfa (2009), Hong Fook Mental Health Association (2012), Hyman (2011), Psychiatry, University of Toronto (2012) and Wilson, Murtaza & Shakya (2010), all discuss that the most common diagnoses are those characterized by anxiety and depression such as Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and major depression. These can all be attributed to a variety of pre-migration experiences such as 9

trauma and loss. On a global average, it is found that "refugees are approximately ten times more likely to have PTSD than-age matched native populations in the countries surveyed" (Craig et al., 2009, p. 352). The research illustrates that refugee populations experience poorer levels of health and mental health, and therefore are in greater need of access to services. The IFHP cuts, however, have now have created a significant barrier to health care services. Existing Lack of Access In their research concerning health care access for refugees, Donnelly, Hwang, Este, Ewashen, Adair & Clinton (2011), McKeary & Newbold (2009), Spitzer (2011) and Wahoush (2009) found significant pre-existing barriers in accessing health services for refugees. Some examples of barriers included no access to interpreter supports, no means of transportation, cultural and social differences, discrimination, being unaware of certain programs or services that were already available because of a lack of outreach, power imbalances between care provider and receiver, fear of deportation and lack of adequate insurance plans. These examples all demonstrate the challenges faced by refugees (and immigrant populations as well) even prior to any potential cuts to health care taking place. Further, women refugees in particular faced a greater lack of existing access to health services (Donnelly et al., 2011, Spitzer, 2011; Wahoush, 2009). In some cases, mothers had even been turned away from receiving care for their children, even though they had IFHP benefits (Wahoush, 2009). Already coping with pre-existing stressors as previously explained, the literature warns that declines in health post-migration may be representative of systemic barriers to accessing health care for refugees. Women refugees are then seen as having more stressors and barriers in accessing health care, both for themselves and for their children. The literature also states that there is lack of research with respect to how refugee children and youth are accessing health care 10

(Hyman, 2011 & Wahoush, 2009). The need to explore refugee children's access to health care is a gap which should be considered further. The Health of Women Refugees The literature that has been explored on refugee health has partially considered gender when critiquing refugee policy. Writings by Barnes (2012), Collins, Zimmerman & Howard (2011), Craig et al. (2009), Donnelly et al. (2011), Ghorashi (2007), Hajdukowski-Ahmed (2008), Hyman (2011), Lacroix (2004), Spitzer (2011), Thobani (2000) and Zeigler & Stewart (2009) all discuss the importance of engendering the refugee experience, because women are generally silenced and the effects of migration are compounded with the power imbalances based on gender. For example, Hajdukowski-Ahmed (2008) discusses that women who are constructed to be always attached to the image of a safe `home' are particularly effected by migration, as they are now stateless (p. 41). Women are still domesticated and therefore may feel more of a strain and anxiety when away from their homeland and roots. This `non-belonging' is compounded by the many pre-existing health concerns that refugee women may already be facing. Rape, torture and sexual violence are life-altering traumas that can have a tremendous negative impact on women's health and well-being. Refugee women are at greater risk of experiencing such incidences as they are brought on by war, persecution and political instability, which they may be fleeing from (Collins et al., 2011; Craig et al., 2009). Women may also be facing cases of sexual assault and domestic violence in their new home (Barnes, 2013). Further, literature discusses that women struggle more to cope with leaving family and friends, struggle with gendered roles, are uncertain of their future, have difficulty adapting to new values and lifestyles and face discrimination due to language barriers and racism (Collins et al., 2011). The 11

lack of ability to share their experiences due to stigma, conditioned silencing, lack of social supports and family and language barriers can all contribute to harbouring emotions and trauma for longer than necessary (Dossa, 2011 & Ghorashi, 2007). This can impact women's health in a much more substantial way than that of men. The health and well-being of refugee women is compromised due to their pre-migration experiences and oftentimes can create psychological health risks. Collins et al. (2011) research on Postnatal Depression (PND) rates amongst migrant women states that, "risk factors associated with PND, such as low social support, stressful life events, a previous history of depression and depression during pregnancy, are particularly common among refugee women with PND symptoms" (p.5). Hyman (2011) adds that rates for depression, Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and suicide are much more common for refugee women than that of refugee men and the local population. Barnes (2012) explains "women face particular risks if they are unable to access health care services, especially in cases of domestic violence and sexual assault" (p. 7). Accessing health care is of great need to refugee women, and without the ability to do so, may pose a harsher migratory experience and put a strain on women's health and well-being. Women are marginalized based on their gender, race and immigration status here for a completely complex scenario. The literature warns that the IFHP cuts to health care, may potentially have significant health impacts on the health and mental health of refugee women in Canada.

CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

12

Social Construction of the Refugee The main theoretical framework that will guide this study is Social Constructionism introduced by Berger and Luckmann (1991, cited in Andrews, 2012). Creswell (2013), Crotty (1998), Lincoln and Guba (2000) and Shwandt (2007) are also central writers of Social Constructionist theory. Social constructionist research concerns itself with interpreting the social world through not having single, absolute truths, but rather an understanding that people's realities are constructed by interpersonal relationships and interactions, and can be changed according to context and time (Andrews, 2012; Creswell, 2013; Ore, 2014; Turnball, 2002; Witkin, 2011). Social Constructionist theory concerns itself with asking a variety of questions, but never assumes the answer (Ore, 2014). The social relationships that produce our beliefs and feelings, ultimately guide our thoughts, actions and behaviours are because of how we construct them rather than how we discover them in our minds (Andrews, 2012; Ore, 2014; Witkin, 2011). Ore (2014) describes how, through this theory, we are not born with what it is to be a certain identity but rather we learn what it means through our interactions. In the case of refugee claimants in Toronto, the IFHP policy cut was justified based on certain assumptions about the refugee `identity'. Pre-existing definitions have constructed the refugee as an outsider, an identity construct that is not included into the white, dominant, hegemonic identity of being `Canadian' and thus `entitling' them to `tax-payer paid' health care coverage (McCalla & Satzewich, 2002; Plecash, 2012). Social constructionists understand that society has preconceived notions of `subjects' that ultimately shape their social realities. Canadian society, the government, media, and dominant neoliberal discourse has constructed refugees as the Other, and has ultimately painted a picture of dependence, refusing them their 13

basic human rights as persons living within Canada. Refugees have more recently become the topic of increased political debate because of ongoing war and genocide in Syria. The founders of Social Construction theory, Berger & Luckman (1966) state that, "a sociology of knowledge will have to deal not only with the empirical variety of knowledge in human societies, but also the processes by which any body of knowledge comes to be socially established as `reality' " (as cited in Turnball, 2002, p. 15). It is this exact process of how something becomes `reality' that can have harmful and negative consequences on how one can experience their social world, or where they are situated in it (Ore, 2014). Anti-Oppressive Practice As mentioned in my introduction, my social work research is also guided by antioppressive theory and understandings of social equality. Through my research with refugee women, I have strived to achieve some of the premises that AOP holds high. Firstly, using the reflexive self throughout the process has helped alleviate to some of the power imbalances that a research study with community members can create (Baines, 2011). By allowing the participants to tell their unique stories and only allowing for probing and clarification, the researcher (me) has shifted some of their own power in an attempt to understand and allow for new ways of understanding and prioritizing lived experience (Miehls & Moffat, 2000). Given that social work is shaped by colonial influences, both in the past and the present, an AOP researcher such as myself must be concerned with shedding light on systemic barriers of oppression faced by marginalized groups (Baines, 2011). Focusing on bottom-up, collaborative processes in uncovering oppression, this research aims to redistribute justice and dignity by giving voice to the voiceless and creating a platform where refugees can discuss their concerns with respects to oppressive systemic policies. Having such dialogical processes allows the 14

researcher to not only understand the "other's" experience, but also to change one's own understanding of self (Miehls & Moffatt, 2000). Thinking Through Race Building on this, understanding the social and racialized construct of the `refugee' in Canada is critical. Allahar (1998) discusses how the non-biological concept of race "stresses the idea of social construction" and argues that even though the biological concept of race has no real use, society still holds onto its defined ascriptions to racial constructs in order to serve their own political and economic interests (p. 337). This is representative of the ways in which refugees are perceived and constructed by policy makers in Canada. Ultimately, we can see that it is critical to utilize race interpretation in this study as a way to call attention to the power imbalances and `realities' that play out in a society which is built on social ranking and racial categorization (Allahar, 1998; Hyman, 2011; Ore, 2014). Making these connections with race and policy is needed as, "racism is the practice of including and excluding individuals and groups from participating fully in the social economy on the basis of imputed racial similarities or differences, and their denial of access to certain services and resources on these same bases" (Allahar, 1998, p. 337). Such constructs of who is closest to a true `Canadian' and more deserving versus an `Other', is what sustains the white, hegemonic Canadian discourse, that is currently guiding immigration policy (Bonilla-Silva, 2000; McKeary & Newbold, 2010; McKay & Thomas & Kneebone, 2011). As Moosa-Mitha (2005) points out, deconstructing representations of the `Other' in mainstream society is a concept which has been discussed by individuals such as Michel Foucault (1979, 1980) and Edward Said (1986) as necessary to debunk the power

15

struggles of superiority vs. inferiority. By thinking through race in my work, this study attempts to do this. Thinking through Gender Incorporating a gendered lens on top of a social constructionist, AOP and race lens will further deepen this work. Within this research, each women's narrative is seen as `reality' for that participant as will how they have interacted with their social environment. Although there may exist similarities in how they are accessing health care as a result of a lack of health insurance coverage, racism and other social identity markers mean that each woman may experience different encounters and outcomes in general. Lacroix (2004) adds to this discussion by pointing out that because refugee women exist within a space of power imbalances, similarities in their experiences can stand out, as they remind us of the relationships of power between people, power and sovereignty of nation states. Literature states that women are faced with poorer health outcomes upon arrival into a host country due to systemic factors that consistently holds them without any power (Craig et al., 2009; Hyman, 2011; Lacroix, 2004; Thobani, 2000). Further, refugee women experience silencing in life more so than refugee men, because as women, they are socially trained to silence their own needs, their own experiences and their own pain in order to prioritize others (Ghorashi, 2007; Hajduhiwski-Ahmed, 2008; Lorber, 2014). Even post-migration, refugee women are further silenced due to "language barriers, racism, discrimination, isolation and fear of deportation" (Hajduhiwski-Ahmed, 2008, p.47). The fact that the voices of refugee women will be heard with respect to a current policy cut that they are affected by, will increase refugee

16

women's political participation and have their narratives heard in an attempt to break down some of the barriers to their inclusion in the creation of policy. Narrative Inquiry The voices of the marginalized and oppressed have always been silenced and kept away from knowledge creation (Creswell, 2013; Dean, 2012). Through a focus on each woman's narrative, the learner comes to know the phenomenon they have experienced through a person's personal testimony or stories of lived experience relating to a particular topic (Creswell, 2013). One must not take the voice out of the one who has the lived experience (Creswell, 2013; Dean, 2012). This researcher wanted to hear the voices of women who were experiencing marginalization due to a lack of health care access. The women's narratives breaks the silence they had experienced and adds to our understandings of what it means to be a refugee or `other' in this land.

17

CHAPTER 4. METHODOLOGY The purpose of this study was to explore refugee women's experiences in accessing health care services and to explore whether the cuts had any impact on their lives. I conducted qualitative, semi-structured interviews to gather women's personal narratives of accessing health care. The main research question I asked was: how do the cuts to the IFHP change the realities of access to health for refugee women in the city of Toronto? The questions in the dialogue guide (Appendix D) were drafted in such a way as to allow the participant to answer freely based on their encounters with health care settings and to understand their (and their families) general health and well-being. The questions were about health care needs and issues in general, as a means to understand any unique experiences that may have transpired. I probed and clarified where it was necessary but allowed participants to guide their own stories. In keeping with the Narrative research design, I made every attempt to work collaboratively with participants as they told their stories. The participant profiles (next section) and themes were established together through e-mail and phone consultation until the participant was satisfied. The discussions that transpired during the one hour private interviews were transcribed verbatim using the audio recordings. In line with Narrative methodology, a thematic analysis of the interviews took place (Riessman, 2008). As Braun & Clarke (2006), Creswell (2013) and Riessman (2008) outline, thematic analysis is a form of data analysis used within qualitative research. In my work, common recurring themes or patterns were identified through analyzing the narratives of the four women, and themes and loose codes were generated. It is important to acknowledge that a social constructionist epistemology informed the thematic analysis, in that the patterns were identified as socially produced (Clarke & Braun, 2006). Best efforts were made, however, not to without fracture the narratives and stories (Riessman, 2008). 18

I wanted to recruit refugees who currently do not have access to health care coverage. Professionals working in agencies serving refugees across Toronto were contacted in order to post flyers, including at transitional housing centers for refugees. E-mails were also sent out to agencies' private list-serves, where most of the responses came through. A total number of four participants were interviewed overall. Some of the women interviewed had taken part in previous refugee-related focus groups, which helped because their oral English skills were strong and they were more familiar with research. The following are each of the women's profiles (with pseudonyms): Faeze is a 29-year-old refugee claimant from Iran, divorced with no children, currently attending an intermediate level of English as a Second Language (ESL) classes at a local community center. She is also attending free yoga and other community development classes. She is a personal support worker (PSW) back home. Some words she uses to describe herself are depressed, loving and family-oriented. Leila is a 39-year-old refugee claimant from Iran, married with two children, currently enrolled in ESL classes, and has a degree in general arts from Iran. Her Son Reza is 13, and her daughter Lilly is 10. Some words she uses to describe herself are sad, stressed and worried. She keeps busy with her children and is looking for employment. Maria is a 40-year-old Colombian refugee claimant who is married with two children and also attends ESL classes. Her daughter Daniella is 15, her son Mario is 10 and she is currently three months pregnant. She was a hairdresser back home and wants her hairdressing license. Words she uses to describe herself are depressed, nervous and smart. Yan from China is a 30 year old divorced female with one small girl who is 8 years old, and attending a local public school. She is a current volunteer at a local community center and is quite fluent in English. She is women claimant who is eager to join the employment arena in Canada. She considers herself a quick-learner, a bit nervous and adaptive. The primary method of recruitment included e-mail and telephone correspondence with various agencies that served refugees in the city of Toronto. Participation criteria included being 18 years or older, willingness to be audio-recorded, and no health insurance coverage. These were all listed in the recruitment flyer (Appendix A) and reconfirmed over the telephone prior to

19

the interview. Once the flyer was placed in the agency and circulated to clients, the researcher's contact information was available for any voluntary and interested participants to contact. Once e-mails were sent, a phone contact was established and qualifying questions were asked. Out of the responses I received (eight e-mails of interest in the study), only half (four) qualified. All necessary measures were taken to ensure that confidentiality was maintained. Firstly, all participants were kept anonymous and all measures were taken to keep their identities private. If any e-mails or voicemails were left for the primary investigator, they were deleted after all the necessary information was used. The interviews were conducted in private and confidential facilities that were located in physically accessible locations. The only other individual that had access to the women's narratives was Dr. Henry Parada who was, at the time, the graduate program director at Ryerson University. The interviews were audio-recorded on a telephone voice recorder, and once the audio-recording was transcribed by the primary investigator, the recording was erased to ensure no one would be able to access it. The transcripts were kept in a locker in the graduate school social work lounge at Ryerson University, where they were protected by a pad-lock and key. After the final draft of the MRP was submitted, a shredder destroyed all of the transcripts. Participants were required to fill out a consent form (Appendix C) with regards to being audio recorded, which was administered at the same time of the larger consent form, prior to the interviews taking place. All participants who contacted the primary investigator had the opportunity to accept or decline their own participation within the study, through a consent form (Appendix C). During the time of the scheduled interview, each participant that chose to be a part of the study was asked if they had read and understood the consent and if there were any additional questions or concerns that needed to be clarified before commencing the interview. The women were notified 20

that participation in this study was entirely voluntary and that their decision to take part or not take part in the study would not affect their current or future relationship either with the agency they were recruited from nor with Ryerson University, or with any future interaction with the primary investigator. If they accepted the consent and chose to participate in the interview process, they were free to withdraw if they wanted without any consequences. However, if they chose to withdraw their stories, they had to do so before May 1st, 2015. This was done in order to ensure that there was still data to be analyzed for the findings section, without compromising the research study. Participants could also choose not to answer a particular question and still remain in the study. Participants were notified prior to beginning the interview and within the consent form that they will not be compensated for participation, however, two bus tokens were provided to each participant at the start of the interview in order to ensure transportation costs were covered for participants. The main method of data collection in this study was the interview process itself in which eight questions were asked. Please refer to Appendix D for a copy of the dialogue guide that was used during the interview. These questions were chosen to gain a better understanding of the experiences of refugee women's access to health care services in the city of Toronto, to understand their current health care needs and to understand if any of this data is related to the IFHP cuts. An example of a broader question included, `Can you talk about your experience in accessing health care in the last six months'? Another question, which was more specific, asked `Have you ever had a specific problem accessing health care services? For example, not feeling taken care of or long wait times etc...'? These questions were selected specifically based on the original goal of this study: to explore refugee women's experiences in accessing health care services and to explore whether the cuts had any impact on their lives. 21

CHAPTER 5. FINDINGS & ANALYSIS Pre Existing Barriers Pre IFHP Cuts: "Sometimes I couldn't call" I was interested in learning about any affects resulting from the IFHP policy changes to refugee health care. What surprised me was learning about many pre-existing barriers in accessing health care. Prior to June 2012, all of the women in the study reported language barriers, discrimination and confusion about their coverage, and an increase in health concerns, as issues in accessing health care one way or another. Language Barriers In my interviews, three out of the four women experienced language barriers (in this case, a lack of fluent English) upon arrival into Canada (and prior to the cuts). All women with the exception of Yan, who had studied English in China, had experienced this phenomenon. Stepping foot in a new country is not easy, and the women expressed how language barriers affected their everyday lives and their ability to navigate the health care system. Faeze explained how when she first arrived in Canada, her English was very poor, and she had a hard time doing the most basic things like shopping for groceries, or even making a doctor's appointment. She is grateful because: Now at least with my improved English skills, I am able to communicate what it is that I am feeling and want to say, it is a wonderful thing you know. Without the proper language skills to communicate your wants and needs, it is very easy to be excluded from aspects of taking care of one's health. Making appointments to see the doctor when the women were ill became a challenge. Maria stated: When I first came to Canada, I could not speak well so you know, I didn't have a doctor for a long time. It just was not easy. When you want to see the doctor, making appointment was hard, so sometimes I would not call.

22

In addition, Leila and Maria also felt barriers in communication because of their lack of English skills upon arrival into Canada. They described feelings of awkward moments and embarrassment when they were in public health settings and could not pronounce certain words properly. Maria describes a time at the health clinic where she felt embarrassed because of her English and accent: They were just staring at me waiting, waiting for my answer, but I was reading and needed more time, I was feeling in a rush. Even though these three women have since taken English as a second language (ESL) classes at the local community center, they still expressed concerns about their accents forming a barrier in communication. Further, even though Yan did not cite language barriers as a concern for herself, she did express people's reaction to her speaking English so well. She said people would often be shocked to find out how well she spoke "especially because I'm a refugee". Here, we find that society socially constructs a refugee as someone who cannot speak "proper English". The women cited issues of language and accents, and where they felt a sort of uncomfortable feeling. Discrimination All of the participants in this study continually expressed these types of experiences and thus, the next sub-theme was experiencing forms of discrimination that already existed. When probed about experiences of being discriminated against because of their language, Leila expressed: Sometimes in the past, and still now sometime, I feel that I am treated differently from others because of my Iranian accent...and you know they know I am Muslim... I don't think people like Muslims too much in Toronto.

23

When opening up about their previous experiences in health care settings, all four women cited feelings of what was established as discrimination based on language barriers (as seen above), ethnicity, possessing `different' names, race and clothing. Maria gave an example of when she was at the Ontario Works office in her neighbourhood. She explains how she had approached the main counter to deal with some documents and the lady was being very rude with her. She explains how she felt discriminated by the employee because she heard her make a comment about her "long Latina" name. As the researcher, I clarified to see if any actions were taken to make any complaints, and Maria responded: My English was not very good then, you know and I was kind of scared too. So I never said anything. Nothing was done to address this worker's comments and Maria was supposed to go about her time at Ontario Works as if nothing had happened. In this example, Maria experienced discrimination in a public government setting because she was constructed as the "other". Although both Faeze and Leila identify as Muslim, only Leila officially wears the `hijab', which is the Islamic headscarf. In Iran where they are from, all women must dress this way. However, in Toronto, as `multicultural' as it proclaims it is, Leila explains: There are times you know, when I'm walking around the city with my children or husband, and I get women, usually Canadian women looking funny at me ­ maybe they are looking at what I am wearing, I do not know, but it's not nice and they just keep staring and do not smile or anything like that. The words `mean' or `rude' came up frequently when describing interactions with the public, such as in government offices or doctor's waiting rooms. Leila's interview revealed that the discrimination she felt in public she attributed to her wearing her hijab, as already mentioned, but in addition took place in doctor office settings. She voiced:

24

Before when I went to the doctor a few times, I felt that the receptionist she didn't like me because of my hijab, and she was rude to me sometimes too. I felt uncomfortable and didn't like to go to that doctor office. Coverage Confusion Within these very same doctor's waiting rooms is where all the women were denied service even before the policy cuts occurred. Faeze, Leila, Maria and Yan all described being denied health care coverage (at least once) because there was uncertainty and confusion about what the IFHP actually covered for health services. Leila describes that she had made an appointment to see the doctor and this was her experience, I walked into the doctor's office and I went to the counter and quietly making the receptionist understand I don't have OHIP card and gave her my refugee documents. She was just looking at me. And I was waiting and waiting, the receptionist lady she was looking things up on the computer. She even left her seat to go talk to the other ladies working in the office. She came back and told me that I had to pay for the visit. I was very shocked and confused and I was just telling her again and again to make sure. I left the office cause I knew I could not pay for the visit. That would be a lot. Yan and Maria expressed their own confusion as they found it hard to access information about the coverage they received from the original system of benefits. Yan cited: You know it's not very easy to understand, there are so many sections and things are constantly changing ­ the coverage I mean. And now it's even worse! I can only use the program if I'm practically dying! The current changes have made it so that all refugee claimants that are not from a "Designated Country of Origin" (a list of countries deemed as safe by CIC) can only seek benefits if their condition is of `an urgent or essential nature'.

25

Existing Mental Health Concerns Within my research, I discovered that participants experienced general health concerns such as diabetes within the family and high blood pressure as reported by two of the four participants. However, more evident than physical health concerns pre-dating the cuts to the IFHP, were that all four women expressed concerns of mental health setbacks in their lives. The findings also suggest the worsening of mental health conditions post cuts, which will be explored later on in this section. All four women expressed that they were coming from very stressful and oftentimes unmanageable circumstances. When they first arrived in Canada, Leila explains that: It was very hard for me to adjust to this culture and people. People are so different here, I did not feel safe going out ­ so I would stay home so I would not get angry or sad. Leila explained that back home, she felt she had a purpose, that she knew what to do ­ here she explains: Nothing is easy ­ everything is hard to do and sometimes I just want to give up ­ but I just remember my family. My kids they need me. During her interview, Leila continued to disclose about her self-identified ongoing depression, which developed upon arrival into Canada. Maria adds to this discussion by explaining that when she arrived in Canada from Colombia, she began feeling `depressed'. She explains that she would go to her doctor often, but that because her English was not strong, she could not fully express how she was feeling inside. She had been put on medication to help with the depression.

26

Faeze, although currently in great physical shape, did discuss with me her need for health care when she arrived in Canada. For her, the IFHP was a very crucial necessity for her resettlement within Canada. She explains: My mental health was getting bad, and even now, but then I needed to speak with someone, my doctor gave me some medication to calm me ­ it helped me feel better too. Here, we can establish through the women's anecdotes, that mental health concerns were not only self-diagnosed, but confirmed by medical practitioners treating them for mental health concerns through prescription medication. Clearly, the women's narratives speak to pre-existing barriers to accessing health care. Some of these pre-existing barriers were the same barriers faced post IFHP cuts. Although the above outlined that the four women interviewed were experiencing mental health concerns, I additionally found that the children of these women are also experiencing negative mental health setbacks. Child and Youth Health Three of the four women interviewed (Leila, Maria and Yan), all suggested that the mental health care needs of their children were not being met at the time. This was considered a barrier to being able to fully resettle in the city and easily adjust. Yan expressed: I feel my daughter would do much better with more supports for her emotional health. Maria added: I worry for my children, I love them so much, and I think having no doctor to go to is no good for my children health ­ they are depressed. Leila furthers this sentiment when she discussed concerns with her oldest boy Reza, 13, who is currently having a difficult time in his grade 8 class. She also disclosed that he is 27

diagnosed with Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). This study suggests that the lack of accessible health care services is detrimental to the mental health of refugee children and youth. Leila describes her son's mood, stating that: Sometimes, he comes home from school, you know and he is not happy. He does not talk to me much, he just goes to his room, and shuts the door. And if we fight, wow, he is like a ball or fire! When Leila arrived in Canada, the entire family was connected to a family doctor, and Leila would often seek his attention for behavioural concerns about Reza. Since the IFHP cuts, Leila has not been able to address Reza's behavioural problems with a doctor, because of the lack of coverage, and she feels Reza's problem has worsened in the past months. Leila added: I can see that because of the cuts, it is affecting his health and his happiness ­ everybody needs a good doctor! It can be stated that when we do not take care of pre-existing health problems, it is very possible that they will worsen and cause more of a burden on the person and those around them. Leila added to this discussion: There has been a few times I needed the doctor's help, but I could not pay anymore. Things are getting very expensive you know ­ So I feel he is worse. Not being able to bring Reza to the doctor when he needed to receive mental health attention seemed to worsen his symptoms even within the past six months, Leila reports. In Maria's case, it was her daughter Daniella (15 years old) who was now unable to access her teen psychologist. She had been going to see this person for counselling to help her deal with stress and anxiety, brought on by conflicts at school but was now unable to access this level of care. Maria is now worried that her daughter's behaviour might get worse: She hasn't really changed her mood, she still crying everyday after school, and we don't have the money to pay for any supports ­ so I tell her to become more social and join some teen groups at the community center. 28

Here, we see two concrete anecdotes of refugee children who are experiencing worsening mental health concerns, due to an inability to access the health services they once had access to. Furthermore, taking care of one's mental health is not a one stop `quick-fix', it can take a lot of time to overcome some of the mental health concerns these teens are faced with. Cutting health care access at a crucial time in a child's life can be very detrimental to their overall health and development. In Yan's interview, we learn that her 8-year-old year old daughter is having a hard time participating and being active in school. Resettlement is not only an issue for Yan, but Yan explains how her daughter is affected by it as well: My daughter has opened up to me about how she feels worried about us and how we will survive, because I haven't found employment yet. I tell her that I will find something soon. But you know, she's nearly getting to that age, and she's asking for things I cannot provide, and sometimes I get angry and we get into arguments. For an 8-year-old young girl to be so wrapped up in their guardian's responsibilities can be a stressful burden on a young child, which may lead to withdrawal from school and negative health consequences. In these explorations of testimony, it is evident that the women's children are experiencing stress in some way, and are not being afforded the appropriate health care channels to address their problems. Ultimately, not being able to access the health care system may create or worsen pre-existing health conditions. As minors, children are already disadvantaged and silenced, and thus experience further marginalization, affecting their overall health and integration in Canadian society.

29

Deteriorating Women's Health Falling under the theme of worsening health conditions, the participants themselves have confirmed the worsening of their health concerns, primarily in regards to mental health issues. Since the cuts they have all needed to see doctors and have not been able to. It is not difficult to imagine that the lack of health care can cause tremendous stress on a family already experiencing resettlement issues. Especially if your children are not doing well, for a mother this can be quite stressful. For example, in the interview, Leila discussed her need for ambulance services to the emergency room (ER) one night. Leila states, Since the cuts I am not cover anymore for my medication that I was taking for my mood. I started not feeling well again after I stop taking them. I even went to the hospital once night, cause I was not feeling good, we call an ambulance and they gave me a bill for the visit and the ambulance ­ we have not paid because we are short on money. Leila adds that her responsibility as a mother is also having a huge impact on her children ­ that if they see her suffering and her health declining it affects them too. In this case, the findings suggests that Reza may be partly affected by his mother's mental health concerns and lack of appropriate care. In Faeze's case, she had been prescribed medication in order to treat her depression before the cuts took place. She is now paying out of pocket for the medication, but cannot afford to see a psychotherapist as she had been hoping. She stated: I want to speak to someone sometimes. I am alone here you know. Just some distant family friends I know here, but actually I have no one close to me.

30

Here, Faeze demonstrates that she is isolated and lonely. Having a doctor to reach out to would curb some of the stress she is experiencing. Factors such as these contribute to further stress for refugee women if they are not looked after accordingly. Speaking with Maria, we came to learn she was three months pregnant during the interview. She really wanted to partake in this research study so she could voice her concerns as she discovered she would no longer be able to access the same prenatal care as before. She expressed: We're worried now cause of our baby, me and my husband... We visited a free clinic once, but I'm not sure how many time I can go. I think it is without question that we recognize the importance of prenatal care for an unborn baby, such that it would benefit the child's health and future development in some way. Maria being denied this care may put her unborn child's life and her own life at risk for any health complications that may arise during the pregnancy. This mother and child are not going to be given the same level of health care as `others' in society are being afforded. Here we have found that access for prenatal care is of concern, and could potentially marginalize and oppress them further. Yan describes that her understanding of her health has changed, in that recently she is feeling a lot of stress and pressure. She expressed: Not finding a job is really starting to have a burden on my daughter and I. I really hope I can find employment soon and you know I will not be able to pay for the doctor if Jade gets sick. Here, we see how Yan is stressed from other factors that affect the resettlement experience, such as finding and securing employment (Jackson, 2012). This study suggests that not having access to a family doctor for Yan has increased her need for external health supports, as her stress levels

31

are rising. As Yan is a single parent, Jade relies solely on her mother for care and guidance, and it is suggested this could also negatively affect Jade's development or experience as a child. Overall Negative Health Care Service Experiences When the IFHP cuts to health care were made, all of the women expressed feelings of being confused about coverage and experiencing service denial in health care settings. As discussed, confusion of coverage and discrimination was something that these women specifically experienced even before the policy cuts took place. However, what this study discovered is that this confusion and negative service experience has worsened. Specifically, these women focused on feeling unimportant, feeling discriminated against, having general coverage confusion and having financial hardship. Feelings of Unimportance When we began to explore participant feelings towards the realization that they were no longer covered for health care services, it brought about feelings of `not being important' in themselves. Yan stated that when trying to access health care services in the last six months there was this : Very quick understanding of who we were ­ refugees you know ­ and that we were no longer covered, that we didn't matter ­ the nurses in the doctor office were trying not to make a big deal but I cannot help to feel unimportant. The findings here suggests that cuts to the IFHP have perpetuated the notion and construction that refugees are `second class' or not as important with respect to healthcare. As she is being constructed as `less deserving', she may also be constructing herself in this way. Similarly, after finding out from her Iranian friend that the changes were taking place, Faeze expressed how she did not understand why it was happening. She explained:

32

When my friend Marjan told me, I could not believe! I started to talk with it with everybody, and people were surprised, why now? The government thinks we are not important for health care? A few months ago I was important... I do not know what they want us to do now. These sentiments of not being important enough were expressed by two of the four women in this study. Discrimination For all four participants in the study, discrimination has been present throughout their time spent here in Canada. For Leila and Maria, they described more concrete examples of feeling discriminated against within health care settings (post cuts), based on wearing hijab and having culturally `different' names. For Leila, wearing her hijab in public has had a negative consequence for her, especially within already tense environments. It seems she felt most `Othered' in a doctor's office where she was rejected for service. The receptionist there, I don't think she likes me, she always speaks to me rudely and looks at me funny. I don't feel welcome in the office and I think it is cause I am Muslim. Based on Leila's account, this finding suggests that discrimination makes people feel even worse about their own selves. It may also be the reason that their access to health care was cut. Maria also expressed, for a second time, her experience of discrimination when it came to her long name and how she always felt uncomfortable when she would be called out. Sometimes, the receptionist would give up on saying her name completely. It's not a nice feeling you know, she doesn't want to learn it ­ I know it can be hard but you know. Feeling discriminated against in health care settings is a reality faced by all of the participants and has longstanding detrimental effects.

33

As previously stated, all participants explained that they continue to be confused as to what they are and are not covered for under the new changes. Please refer to Appendix F, which outlines the different categories and what each group was covered for before the cuts, and what they are currently covered for under the new program. A copy of this coverage was also provided to my participants for their future referral in case they needed any general clarification. Financial Hardship All four participants complained of difficult financial times, and a hard time finding `good' employment, and maintaining it. This was true for their husbands, as well (if applicable). Refugees who are already facing difficult economic circumstances are now finding it even worse, as they are being asked to pay out of pocket for health care costs, when they are already lacking employment (Jackson, 2012). Maria went on to explain how her husband might lose his job, or have to change it, because he is no longer covered by health insurance. Maria added: My husband, he might have to find another job for now, cause his job is dangerous and if he gets hurt, we cant go to hospital like before. Here, we can see that in order to secure certain types of employment, health care coverage is crucial as without it, his construction job could be in jeopardy. Yan discusses the challenges of being a single mother, with an 8-year-old girl to take care of and not having a job. The stresses of not being able to afford everything she would like for her daughter, plus now having to find ways of paying for things like medication and doctor visits if her daughter gets sick, are of particular concern. Yan stated: I was a medical admin receptionist back home, ironic I know! I can do many different things and am very skilled....I need to find work, we can't go on for much longer this way.

34

Being present for the interview, the desperation in her tone really established for me what a burden this policy cut truly was. It pushed the individual even further to the margins, by not giving them access to basic resources. Yan added: It does not feel good either, when you can't find work, you feel kind of worthless, compare to others in Toronto, I want to work and take-part in my society, this is hard without a job. Displaying Resilience and Resourcefulness Despite all of these negative consequences due ti changes to the IFHP, I also recognized that these women exemplified resilience and resourcefulness in many ways. Specifically, the women discussed community participation, language instruction, and self-empowerment as means of survival. Community Participation Despite their challenges, all four of the women participated in some type of community development group or activity, voluntary work, or made connections with external personal supports (ie. Iranian women's groups). As mentioned, Yan is a volunteer in a Chinese women's community kitchen group that meets weekly to cook meals for the surrounding neighbours in the Toronto Community Housing complex where her and her daughter currently live. Yan stated: We meet every week and it really gives me happiness to be there ­ to be cooking with the women and planning our daily meals. Even on PA days I bring Jade with me, she loves going too. I'm trying to get involved you know, so I can find a job and meet people. In addition, Faeze discussed joining free community yoga classes. On yoga, she said: I love exercising so much, but I cannot afford to pay for the expensive gym. I go for walks, but I am very happy with my yoga class that I go to every week. It really helps me, when I am not feeling good, it really helps me to calm my nerves and relax.

35

Here we see Faeze trying to balance out her stresses by building community connections and reaching out to other members of the community. Seeking Language Instruction In regards to their English language skills, Yan was the only participant who was a fluent English speaker. Faeze, Leila and Maria, however, are all currently enrolled in advanced ESL classes. They have all been taking them for approximately three years. This finding suggests that all women took a proactive stance to enrol in the ESL classes and to learn the language. Maria further stated: I try to listen as much English radio as I can, my husband only want to listen to the Latino radio and I tell him no so he can learn too. Empowerment All of the women actively participated in this study. They reached out by contacting me and volunteering to share their experiences. They also made clear that their children were a source of empowerment. For Leila, Maria and Yan, their care giving responsibilities gave them faith in themselves and strength to take "a firm command of their life and agency" (Hajdukowski-Ahmed, 2008, p. 49). Maria was pregnant at the time of the interview and felt compelled to participate in this research so that her opinions about her and her baby's access to health care could be heard. Leila did not want to give up, citing her children's dependence on her strength as well. Yan and Faeze also both expressed a desire to keep connecting by participating in their community. In summary, although they are being adversely affected by lack of access to health care and discrimination based on race, the women I met are not allowing that to stop them from living their lives and having their voices heard. They are not giving up and giving into the powerful and negative constructions of what it is to be a `refugee' in Toronto.

36

CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION & IMPLICATIONS Summary of Findings Although limited, my research demonstrates there have been, and continue to be, many issues facing refugee women and their families in Toronto. Refugee women have been constructed through `Othering', racism and sexism. This is reflected in marginalizing policy changes to the IFHP. Through the interviews I found the following: 1) That barriers in accessing health care services existed prior to the cuts 2) that there exists a worsening or onset of health conditions post-cuts 3) that there is discrimination and lack of access to health care services 4) that despite the challenges, these women are resilient, resourceful and connected. Pre-existing and Current barriers to Health Care Wilson, Murtaza & Shakya (2010), report that, "...many of the newly arrived refugees in Toronto have undergone difficult and traumatic pre-migration experiences that constitute salient risks and stressors to their mental health" (p.46). I found that these risks grow with any restriction in health care. The literature already reports that refugees face language barriers and discrimination as a result of migrating to Canada, but further, the refugee in Canada has been constructed by the lens of the `Other' (McKay, Thomas & Kneebone, 2010). My work substantiates this finding and the idea that `Othering' can take place in multiple ways. With confusion of coverage, we learn that many participants were turned away before and after the cuts took place as a result of poor administration and a lack of education on the program. This is in line with McKeary & Newbold (2010) who discuss that "the fact that IFH is a complex system that is often misunderstood or unknown to clients and providers alike. Many general practitioners and dentists do not wish to deal with the bureaucracy, payment delays, preapproval process for some procedures, and lower financial compensation, and will turn clients 37

away" (p. 535). I suggest that a more organized and well informed system be put in place for delivering any updates to the system and in regards to coverage primarily to service providers, but also to recipients themselves. Ultimately, the `Othering' of this community as less than their `Canadian' counterparts is responsible for the creation of the negative experiences they face in Toronto. Further, their lack of access to health insurance and coverage is particularly concerning in light of their already precarious conditions. The Worsening or Onset of Health Conditions In this study, women expressed a worsening, or resultant negative consequence, of their and their family's general health, and more specifically mental health, conditions and symptoms. This study suggests that the mental health of women and their children worsened because they could no longer seek basic health care services through the Interim Federal Health Program, and could not afford to pay for them either. A new finding that I could not locate in the literature, was the effects of cuts on children's and youth mental health. Another finding of this study was that the children of the women interviewed all experienced some sort of mental health issue, and that this mental health issue worsened post IFHP cuts. For example, Leila's son Reza, who is living with PTSD, was seeing a doctor prior to the cuts, but is no longer able to access this support. His PTSD has not resolved and it leads one to query where this condition would take him and his family? I suggest that as an already vulnerable group, the health of refugee children in Toronto is being compromised because of these cuts. While many other people (Canadian citizens and government assisted refugees for example) are having their health care needs met by provincial or territorial plans (Barnes, 2012), certain refugees in Canada are now being cut off from such `privileges' it seems. 38

As women who migrate are already faced with more extreme circumstances of rape, torture, female genital mutilation, domestic violence, sex trafficking and other forms of gendered violence (Spitzer, 2013), I suggest that women's mental health worsens upon arrival in Toronto and is therefore a risk for refugees who come here. Women requiring more attention to their health and mental state can be seen as incurring more trauma and not healing, when in reality they have not had their basic health care needs met. This puts refugee women in Toronto at a much greater risk for worsening their state of mental, and even physical, health. Overall Negative Health Care Sentiments and Experiences Feelings of unimportance, experiences of discrimination, general coverage confusion and financial hardship were all identified by the participants with respect to the lack of health care coverage. This study suggests that these experiences are connected to `Othering', racism and sexism encountered here in `progressive' Toronto. On `Othering', Kumsa (2008) explores the idea of the self and the `Other' within young refugees living in Toronto and states, "I am a refugee! Others look at me and see a refugee. I look at my Self through Others' eyes and become a refugee. The notorious cycle of Self is complete" (p. 230). Refugees who are constructed as the `Other' in this way may keenly feel the term and the negative connotations that come with it, such as `'not being important'. In addition to feeling less important, I found a lot of confusion with respect to coverage. Having to pay out of pocket in order to access health care is creating a further negative burden on families who are barely making ends meet in the city. Participants did not know where to get service and how to access free clinics. There is just too much confusion and bureaucracy that is standing in the way of this community and their right to accessing health care.

39

Demonstrating Resilience and Resourcefulness It is the intent of this paper to shed light on women who are brave and courageous, and who, despite their odds in life, have found ways to better their lives and the lives of their families. Ghorashi (2007) contributes to this point when she discusses that the necessary space must be created for refugee women to speak and have their voices heard, and that this can be a great source of empowerment and a new way of expressing emotions. I see this in my research as well. Coming forward and participating in this study is one step that these women took that showed their resilience and resourcefulness. They do not allow negative constructs to stop them. Community participation, seeking language instruction and overall self-empowerment were all strategies of resourcefulness and resilience that the women used to challenge their marginalization through the cuts. Limits of the Study Within this study, there were also risks for participants. Some of the risks involved included the chance of re-traumatization through the retelling of personal and traumatic experiences. In order to address this, participants were provided with a contact list of agencies to refer to if the situation needed extra attention or additional supports. Yet I do not know if they were used or if they were able to access the support. Another limitation is that this was evidently a very small study, consisting of only 4 participants. Additionally, the time frame was short and made it harder to establish a strong rapport with the participants. If there was more time available for the research, more participants may have been interviewed to gain richer data.

40

The third limitation is my own research experience, for this research process was unfamiliar to me. Although rich in learning, there is much we do not know until the end, such as the study's theoretical and methodological implications. Coming Back to Theory After having completed the study and findings, I can say that social constructionist theory may not have been the best theory in which to ground my work. It certainly helped me to see how refugees are constructed in the literature, as well as by policies. However, I wonder if using critical race theory may have been more productive. In line with Thobani (2000), `Whiteness' and racism have both played a significant role in exclusionary immigration policies for refugees and other immigrant groups. Perhaps critical race theory would have been a better fit with what I sought to do. Looking at AOP, I came to realize that this study tried to center how the changes to IFHP affected four claimants and their families living in the city of Toronto. It also sought to recognize the oppression, discrimination and power relations that take place in this process. Taking an AOP stance helped bring the voices and issues that would normally be unheard to the forefront of the research. It also taught me about the process of finding my own voice in the process and working reflexively. Coming Back to Methodology When I look at the methodology used, narrative was a good tool to learn and to utilize for this research, however, as a new researcher, I was unsure if I truly told a story within the findings. Were the themes right? Were there other stories that could have been told? Given the time limits, had I had more time with participants, I would have liked to have them review the

41

findings and make sure their stories were seen within the text. But would this be at odds with social constructionism and again, more appropriate for critical race theory, perhaps? Questions aside, the execution of this study was a learning experience and a journey for me, and an invaluable one. I learned to read critically, recruit locally, analyze thematically and draw conclusions, and I am grateful for the opportunity.

42

CHAPTER 7. IMPLICATIONS & CONCLUSION The implications of this study are broad. I sought to gain a better understanding of the experiences of refugee women's access to health care services in the city of Toronto, to understand their current health care needs and to understand if any of it was related to the IFHP cuts. As a person who has experienced migration and exclusionary Canadian immigration policies, and as a social worker who has worked with refugee communities and conducted research with this community, I want to conclude by stating that it is critical that I and other service providers think carefully about the experiences of refugee women. I am also going to suggest that we specifically use an anti-racist lens whether it be in front-line practice, policy work or research. Omidvar & Richmond (2003) and Dei (2005) discuss how in order to eradicate exclusionary immigration policies and research, an anti-racist perspective must be taken into consideration because there are realities of systemic racial discrimination occurring within Canada towards racialized people, including refugees. As a woman who does not identity with a western white identity but is granted unearned privilege based on my fair skin, it is critical that I recognize the power imbalances that are at play within the immigration system and all it encompasses when working with this community. Todd (2011) adds that Whiteness within government policies in Canada is also evident in community development type work, which includes settlement services. Being aware and reflective of white privilege within these settings is crucial for anti-oppressive social work practice to occur. Further, anti-racist research is needed with respects to the impact of racism on refugee health care access in Canada, as only a few empirical studies have taken place on this topic (Hyman, 2011; McKeary & Newbold, 2010; Wahoush, 2009). 43

In addition to using an anti-racist lens, it is crucial that we incorporate a gendered lens in which to take into account one's experiences of migration and the consequences of lack of services. To better understand the unique needs of refugee women's health in Toronto, Donnelly et al. (2011) and Spitzer (2011) recommend using a gendered lens when evaluating or forming migrant health policy. Those of us who will be entering policy recommendation work cannot continue to formulate health policy without taking into account the factor that gender plays. Recommendations for Future Research The planning of refugee policy and research should always involve refuges themselves (Barnes, 2013; Ghorashi, 2007; Spitzer, 2011). Without the voices of those being affected being included in regard to decisions affecting their own health care, the Canadian government will continue to fail with respect to meeting and addressing their unique and special needs. In addition, as this study recognizes the engendering of migrant health, we cannot begin to understand research pertaining to refugees if we do not take into account the unique circumstances for women in this community (Donnelley et al., 2011; Spitzer, 2011). This study recommends that there always be a gender interpretation in any future research studies concerning refugee women's health, because as the literature and this study points out, they may be faced with a greater burden when seeking refuge. This study also suggests we need more Canadian research on how a lack of health care can dangerously affect refugees (McKeary & Newbold, 2010). There needs to be more local study, and given our current focus on refugees from Syria, the time is now. Lastly, we need more research on refugee children and youth and their access to health care services. This was a gap in the literature, so I recommend further research in this area. If ignored, there may be far more problems for this community in the future. 44

Conclusion Considering that the number of refugees in Canada has significantly increased over the last few decades (Donnelly et al., 2011) and will continue to do so, it is with great importance that we as social researchers concern ourselves with the well-being of this community. The narratives of the four women refugees in this study revealed 1) pre-existing barriers to health care 2) the worsening or onset of mental health conditions 3) negative sentiments around program coverage and 4) that the women still displayed cites of resilience and resourcefulness despite their health care coverage being cut off. Even though this study cannot be completely generalized to all refugees cut off from the Interim Federal Health Program, the results still speak to challenges for those needing to seek mental health services and health care in general. For women, the challenges are even greater as they are faced with an intersection of oppressions, which create an entirely new form of constructed life. This study also creates a platform for women's narratives to be heard with respects to their health care needs and to further the process of inclusion in Canadian immigration policy consideration. I argue that healthcare in Canada should be provided to refugees regardless of status. Further, I hope my work will contribute to the literature on refugee women's mental health needs in relation to policy implementation and the affects of cut backs. Those that hold positions of power and benefit from the marginalization and `Othering' of refugees, will uphold absolute truths in order to promote their agenda and continue to sustain their privilege within society. Perhaps research is one small act of resistance.

45

Appendix A ­ Recruitment Poster

46

Appendix B ­ Telephone Script Telephone>> Researcher: Hello, my name is Mary Badalian, I got your number from the e-mail you replied to about the research study I'm conducting. Thank you for your e-mail and interest in the research study. I need to better understand if you are a good fit for the research study. Can you please answer the following questions. Participant: Wait for answer and address and further questions or concerns Researcher: Are you 18 years of age and older? YES/NO Participant: YES >> Do you identify as a refugee woman who has had no health insurance because of the cuts to refugee health care? YES >> arrange to speak on the telephone regarding interview and more NO>> Thank them for their time, but the study is seeking to interview women who self identify as `conventional' refugees, with no federal health insurance plan NO >>Thank them for their time, but the study is seeking to interview adults 18 and older

(NB. As the researcher has experience working, speaking and conducting research with persons who's first language is not English, has taught English, is an interpreter/translator, and speaks 6 languages, this script is a tentative one, which based on the level of English of the participant was altered depending on comprehension)

47

Appendix C ­ Consent Form

CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN RESEARCH Study Title: The Journey of Refugee Women's Health in the City of Toronto You are being invited to participate in a research study. If you agree to participate you will be asked a series of questions. Please read this Consent Form so that you understand what your participation will involve. Before you consent to participate, please ask any questions to be sure you understand what your participation will involve. RESEARCHERS This research study is being conducted myself, Mary Badalian a student from the Graduate School of Social Work at Ryerson University, and is part of my Master of Social Work degree. Dr. Henry Parada is my supervisor for this study, also the Director of the Graduate School of Social Work. If you have any QUESTIONS or concerns about the research, please feel free to contact: Mary Badalian at mbadalia@ryerson.ca or 416-705-8561 or Dr. Henry Parada at hparada@ryerson.ca or 416-979-5000, ext. 6223 PURPOSE OF THE STUDY This research wants to explore issues around access to refugee health care by sharing the experiences and stories of women in this community. This study wants to learn about real life experiences with accessing health care. This research also aims to bring attention to refugee rights within policy in Canada. DESCRIPTION OF THE STUDY AND YOUR PARTICIPATION If you volunteer to participate in this study, you will be asked to do the following things: During your interviews you will be asked to talk about your experiences accessing health care and your own health care concerns. You may share what you want, but do not have to share anything you do not want to. We will conduct the interviews in private bookable meeting rooms that are available at Ryerson University or other libraries such as the Toronto Reference library. The interview will take place once, and will be a minimum of 1 hour to 1.5 hours. You will be audio recorded and can refuse to answer any questions that you do not want to. Part of this consent will include your approval to be audio recorded, which will be your signature at the end of this form, if you agree. You the participant will be given a copy of the final research study if you choose to. You can tell me at the beginning of the interview if you wish to have one, and I will provide you with a copy once the study is done. Part of my recruitment criteria is for you (the participant) to be AUDIO RECORDED. POTENTIAL RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS There may be some small risks with you sharing your story. Feelings of anger, sadness and frustration might arise. You can take a break at any time during the interview and you can refuse to answer any question. I will provide you

48

with a list of community resources at the start of our interview session. This community resource list is attached to the end of this consent form. You can stop the interview at any time should you wish to do so. POTENTIAL BENEFITS TO PARTICIPANTS AND/OR TO SOCIETY You will be able to tell your story and have your story heard from Ryerson University staff. This study is about policy changes and budget cuts to health care and may inform policy makers. Having women's stories heard will inform society about the struggles (if any) that refugee women face when accessing health care services. I cannot guarantee, however, that you will receive any benefits from participating in this study. PAYMENT FOR PARTICIPATION You will not be paid to participate in this study. However, you will be provided with 2 TTC tokens at the time of the interview. CONFIDENTIALITY The interview that we do will be held in privacy. Any information that you give to me may be used within the research study. Again, the only other person that will have access to your stories is my supervisor from Ryerson University, Dr. Henry Parada. A Smartphone with a voice recorder will be used to do the audio recording. The primary researcher will do the transcribing right after the interview, and will erase the audio recording right after. The transcriptions will then be kept in locker in the graduate school of social work lounge at Ryerson University, protected by a lock and key. After the final draft of the MRP is submitted, all of the transcriptions will be destroyed in a shredder. Participants will be required to fill out a separate consent form with regards to being audio recorded as mentioned previously. VOLUNTARY PARTICIPATION AND WITHDRAWAL Participation in this study is voluntary. You can choose whether to be in this study or not. If you volunteer to be in this study, you may withdraw at any time without consequences of any kind. If you choose to withdraw from this study you may also choose to withdraw your data from the study but only before June 1 st, 2015, and do not need to give a reason. You may also choose not to answer any question(s) and still remain in the study. Your choice of whether or not to participate will not influence your future relations with Ryerson University or any other agency involved. BENEFITS FROM PARTICIPATINGS Your participation in this study will bring awareness to the very important issues faced by refugee women in our city and how to better offer support. Social workers can learn from your stories as a way to advocate and affirm your experiences to policy makers. You might not receive any direct benefits for participating in this study. QUESTIONS ABOUT THE STUDY If you have any questions about the research now, please ask. If you have questions later about the research, you may contact: Mary Badalian at mbadalia@ryerson.ca or 416-705-8561

49

This study has been reviewed by the Ryerson University Research Ethics Board, and if you have questions regarding your rights as a research participant in this study, please contact: Toni Fletcher, Research Ethics Coordinator Research Ethics Board Office of the Vice President, Research and Innovation Ryerson University 350 Victoria Street Toronto, Ontario M5B 2K3 416-979-5042 or toni.fletcher@ryerson.ca SIGNATURE OF RESEARCH PARTICIPANT Your signature below indicates that you have read the information in this agreement and have had a chance to ask any questions you have about the study "The Journey of Refugee Women's Health in the City of Toronto" as described. Your questions have been answered to your satisfaction, and you agree to participate in this study. You have been given a copy of this form. ______________________________________ Name of Participant (please print) _____________________________________ Signature of Participant ______________________________________ Name of Legal Representative (if applicable) ______________________ Date

Your signature below indicates that you are aware and okay with being audio-recorded during your interview session. ______________________________________ Name of Participant (please print) _____________________________________ Signature of Participant ______________________________________ Name of Legal Representative (if applicable) ________________________ Date

Appendix D ­ Dialogue Guide 50

       

Do you know about a recent change in health care for refugees? How do you feel the current cutbacks on refugee health care services will affect you, and those in your family (if applicable)? Can you talk about your experience in accessing health care in the last 6 months? What were some of the reasons you were in need of health care? Did you seek healthcare for yourself or your child (if applicable)? Can you describe how you feel, either with your body, mind, nerves and/or stress levels? Have you ever had a specific problem accessing health care services? For example, not feeling taken care of or long wait times etc... Do you have or are you aware of any alternative social/health supports in your community?

Appendix E ­ Contact Referrals for Research Participants

51

COMMUNITY RESOURCE LIST FOR SUPPORT IN TORONTO Access Alliance Multicultural Health and Community Services 340 College St., Toronto 416 324 8677 www.accessalliance.ca General information. Host program. Counseling. Housing information. Health information. Health services. Programs for youth. Programs for refugees. Women Programs for Newcomers. Nutrition Programs for Newcomers LGBTQ. Services for Newcomers Adults. Health Education Workshops for Newcomers. Resource centre (computers, fax and so on). Access Alliance provides services in more than 60 languages through their Interpretation Services. OTHER LOCATIONS: 761 Jane St. 2nd floor, Toronto and 3079 Danforth Ave., Toronto Canadian Centre for Women's Education and Development 2296 Eglinton Ave. E. #4 Scarborough 416 285 6881 www.ccwed.org General information. Counseling. Health information. Health services. Programs for youth. Cultural programs. Support and outreach to women. Information on domestic violence. Individual or group workshops Seminars. Christie Refugee Welcome Centre 43 Christie St. Toronto 416 588 9277 www.christiestreetrc.com General information. Counseling. Housing services. Health information. Legal information. Programs for refugees.

Appendix F ­ IFHP Changes Summary

52

53

54

REFERENCES

Access Alliance Multicultural Health and Community Services (2012). Open letter to the Hon. Jason Kenney. Retrieved from http://accessalliance.ca/sites/accessalliance/files.access%20alliance%20MHCS20Letter %20Re%20IFHP%20changes%2005%2010%202012.pdf Allahar, A. (1998). Race and Racism: Strategies of Resistance. In Vic Satzewich, Racism & Social Inequality in Canada (Eds.), (pp. 335-354). Toronto: Thompson Educational publishing Inc. Andrews, T. (2012). What is social constructionism? The Grounded Theory Review 11(9), 3946. Bannerji, H. (2000). The paradox of diversity: The construction of a multicultural Canada and `women of color'. Women's Studies International Forum, 23(5), 537-560. Barnes, S. (2012). The real cost of cutting refugee health benefits: A health equity impact assessment. Toronto: Wellesley Institute Advancing Urban Health. Barnes, S. (2013). The real cost of cutting the Interim Federal Health Program. Toronto: Wellesley Institute Advancing Urban Health. Bonilla-Silva, E. (2000). "This is a white country": The racial ideology of the western nations of the world-system. Sociological Inquiry, 70(2), 188-214. Collins, C. H., Zimmerman, C., & Howard, L. M. (2011). Refugee, asylum seeker, immigrant women and postnatal depression: Rates and risk factors. Archives of Women's Mental Health, 14(1), 3-11. doi: 10.1007/s00737-010-0198-7 Craig, T., Jajua, P. M., & Warfa, N. (2009). Mental health care needs of refugees. Psychiatry, 8(9), 351-354. doi: 10.1016/j.mppsy.2009.06.007

55

Creswell, J. (2013). Qualitative inquiry & research design: Choosing among five approaches. Los Angeles: SAGE Publications, Inc. Dean, R. (2012). Becoming a social constructionist: From Freudian beginnings to Narrative ends In Stanley L. Witkin (Ed.), Social Construction and Social Work Practice (pp. 72-102). New York: Columbia University Press. Dei, G. S. (2005). Critical issues in anti-racist methodologies: an introduction. In George J. S. Dei & G. S. Johal. Anti-Racist Research Methodologies, p. 1-27. Donnelly, T., Hwang, J., Este, D., Ewashen, C., Adair, C. & Clinton, M. (2011). If I was going to kill myself, I wouldn't be calling you. I am asking for help: Challenges influencing immigrant and refugee women's mental health. Issues in Mental Health Nursing, 32, 279290. doi: 10. 3109/01612840.2010.550383 Dossa, P. (2011). Social suffering and witnessing: Exploring the interface between policy and testimonial narratives of Canadian Afghan women. In D. Spitzer (Ed.), Engendering Migrant Health (pp. 147-166). Toronto: University of Toronto Press. Giles, W. (2008). The gender relations of home, security, and transveral feminism: Refugee women reclaiming their identity. In M. Hajduhiwski-Ahmed, N. Khanlou & H. Moussa (Eds.), Not Born a Refugee Women: Contesting Identities, Rethinking Practices (pp. 55-66). New York: Berghahn Books. Ghorashi, H. (2007). Refugee voice: Giving silence a chance: The importance of life stories for research on refugees. Journal of Refugee Studies, 21(1), 117-132. Hajduhiwski-Ahmed, M. (2008). A dialogical approach to identity: Implications for refugee women. In M. Hajduhiwski-Ahmed, N. Khanlou & H. Moussa (Eds.), Not Born a Refugee Women: Contesting Identities, Rethinking Practices (pp. 28-54). New York: Berghahn 56

Books. Hong Fook Mental Health Association and Ontario Council of Agencies Serving Immigrants. (2012). Journey to promote mental health: A training series for community service workers (2nd Edition). Huth, K. (2012, June, 13). Stand up for refugees, oppose federal budget. The Midweek Banner. Retrieved from http://www.midweekbanner.com Hyman, I. (2011). The mental health and well-being of immigrant and refugee women in Canada. In D. Spitzer (Ed.), Engendering Migrant Health (pp. 99-117). Toronto: University of Toronto Press. Jackson, S. (2012). The new interim federal health care program: How reduced coverage adversely affects refugee claimant's employment (Report No. 2012/1). Toronto: Ryerson Centre for Immigration & Settlement. Kumsa, M. K. (2006). `No! I'm not a refugee!' the poetics of be-longing among young Oromos in Toronto. Journal of Refugee Studies, 19(2), 230-255. doi:10.1093/jrs/fel001 Lacroix, M. (2004). Canadian refugee policy and the social construction of the refugee claimant subjectivity: Understanding refugeeness. Journal of Refugee Studies, 17(2), 147-166. Lorber, J. (2014). The social construction of gender. In T. Ore (Ed.), The Social Construction of Difference & Inequality: Race, Class, Gender and Sexuality (pp. 112-120). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education. Lozanski, K. (2007). Memory and the impossibility of whiteness in colonial Canada. Feminist Theory, 8, 223-225. doi: 10.1177/1464700107078144

McCalla, A., & Satzewich, V. (2002). Settler capitalism and the construction of immigrants and 57

"Indians" and racialized Others. In Chan, W., & Mirchandani, K. in Crimes of Colour: Racialization and the Criminal Justice Systems of Canada. Peterborough: Broadview Press Ltd., 25-44. McKay, F., Thomas, S., & Kneebone, S. (2011). `It would be okay if they came through the proper channels': Community perceptions and attitudes toward asylum seekers in Austrailia. Journal of Refugee Studies, 25(1), 113-133. doi: 10.1093/jrs/fer010 Mckeary, M. & Newbold, B. (2010). Barriers to care: The challenges for Canadian refugees and their health care providers. Journal of Refugee Studies, 23(4), 523-545. doi:10:1093/jrs/feq038 Miehls, D. & Moffat, K. (2000). Constructing social work identity based on the reflexive self. British Journal of Social Work, 30, 339-348. Moosa-Mitha, M. (2005). Situating anti-oppressive theories within critical and differencecentered perspectives. In. L. Brown & S. Strega (Eds.), Research as Resistance: Critical, Indigenous, and Anti-oppressive Approaches (pp. 37-72). Toronto: Canadian Scholars' Press. Newbold, B. (2009). The short-term health of Canada's new immigrant arrivals: Evidence from LSIC. Ethnicity & Health, 14(3), 315-336. doi: 10.1080/13557850802609956 O'Mahony, J., & Donnelly, T. (2010). A postcolonial feminist perspective inquiry into immigrant women's mental health care experiences. Issues in Mental Health Nursing, 31(7), 440-449. doi:10.3109/01612840903521971 Omidvar, R. & Richmond, T. (2003). Perspectives on social inclusion: immigrant settlement and social inclusion in Canada. Pp. 1-23. Retrieved from: http://www.laidlawfnd.org/files/children/richmond.pdf 58

Plecash, C. (2012, July, 3). Doctors protesting refugee health cuts claim small victory, as CIC appears to backpedal on some reforms. The Hill Times. Retrieved from http://www.thehilltimes.com Pon, G. (2009). Cultural competency as new racism: An ontology of forgetting. Journal of Progressive Human Services, 20, 59-71. doi: 10/1080/10428230902871173 Potts, K. & Brown, L. (2005). Becoming an anti-oppressive researcher. In. L. Brown & S. Strega (Eds.), Research as Resistance: Critical, Indigenous, and Anti-oppressive Approaches (pp. 255-286). Toronto: Canadian Scholars' Press. Psychiatry, University of Toronto. (2012). Retrieved from http://www.utpsychiatry.ca/bill-c31uoft-psychiatry-position-statement/ Spitzer, D. (2011). Introduction. In D. Spitzer (Ed.), Engendering Migrant Health (pp. 3-20). Toronto: University of Toronto Press. Spitzer, D. (2011). Work, Worries, and Weariness: Towards an embodied and Engendered migrant Health. In D. Spitzer (Ed.), Engendering Migrant Health (pp. 23-39). Toronto: University of Toronto Press. Thobani, S. (2000). Closing ranks: racism and sexism in Canada's immigration policy. Race & Class, 42(1), 35-55. Todd, S. (2011). "That power and privilege thing": Securing whiteness in community work. Journal of Progressive Human Services, 22, 117-134. doi: 10:1080/10428232.2011.606528 Turnball, S. (2002). Social construction research and theory building. Advances in Developing Human Resources, 4(3), 317-334. Wahoush, E. (2009). Equitable health care access: the experiences of refugee and refugee claimant mothers with ill preschooler. CJNR, 41(3), 186-206. 59

Walsh, T. (2012). Shedding light on the expert witness role in child welfare work: The value of social constructionism. In S. Witkin (Ed.), Social Construction and Social Work Practice (pp. 188-210). New York, NY: Columbia University Press. Wilson, R., Murtaza, R. & Shakya, Y. (2010). Pre-migration and post-migration determinants of mental health for newly arrived refugees in Toronto. Canadian Issues, 45-49. Witkin, S. (2011). Beginning the journey. In S. Witkin (Ed.), Social Construction and Social Work Practice (pp. 1-12). New York, NY: Columbia University Press. Zeigler, S. L., & Stewart, K. B. (2009). Positioning women's rights within asylum policy. Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies, 30(2), 115-142. Zine, J. (2006). Unveiled sentiments: Gendered Islamophobia and experiences of veiling among Muslim girls in a Canadian Islamic school. Equity & Excellence in Education, 39, 239-252. doi:10.1080/10665680600788503

60

