CEx1 3

2013 Collaborative Exercise

AN ARCHITECTURE OF CIVILITY

George Thomas Kapelos, editor A record of student design outcomes of the 2013 Collaborative Exercise held at the Department of Architectural Science,Ryerson University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada January 2013.
ISBN (ppk)  978-1-926769-67-7 ISBN (PDF)978-1-926769-68-4

AN ARCHITECTURE OF CIVILITY

George Thomas Kapelos, editor

CEx1 3

AN ARCHITECTURE OF CIVILITY

i 2013 Collaborative Exercise

AN ARCHITECTURE OF CIVILITY

George Thomas Kapelos, editor

ii Department of Architectural Science Faculty of Engineering & Architectural Science Ryerson University 325 Church Street, Toronto, ON, Canada M5B 2K3 416-979-5360www.arch.ryerson.ca

CEx1 3
George Thomas Kapelos, Editor
ISBN (ppk)  ISBN (pdf)  CEx13 cover image: 978-1-926769-67-7 978-1-926769-68-4

An Architecture of Civility
A record of student design outcomes of the 2013 Collaborative Exercise held at the Department of Architectural Science, Ryerson University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, January 2013.

Ivan Efremov

CEx13 book production team: Alanna Sheehan (Coordinator)

Ivan Efremov Jacob Deir

CEx book design & production coordinator:

Saman Soleimani-Deilamani

For further information regarding the 2013 Collaborative Exercise and student work contained in this publication, please contact the Department of Architectural Science or the editor, George Thomas Kapelos at gkapelos@ryerson.ca. The PDF copy of this book is available for download at http://ryerson.ca/gkapelos 2017 © Ryerson University, Toronto

1

Table Of Content
The Department of  Collaborative Exercise An Architecture of Civility 3 3 5 17 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46

8.2 Da New Parq 9.1 tDOTtalks 9.2 Adaptive Forest 10.1 CON[vert] 10.2The Beacon 11.1 interACTION 11.2 Integrated Threshold 12.1 Civic Exchange 12.2Discovery Bike Hub 13.1 The Living Room 13.2Elevate 14.1 Speaker's Corner 14.2interACTIVE 15.1 SHARD 15.2Social Cycle 16.1 Modules of Cultural Connectivity 16.2Nexus

48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 76 78 80 82 84 86 88

student projects
1.1 Intermedia 1.2 Exchange Park 2.1 MultipliCity 2.2 Community Node 3.1 HUB: Holistic Urban Bean 3.2 Civic Intermission 4.1 Transit Commons 4.2 rAmpitheater 5.1 The Green Line 5.2 Open House 6.1 Symbiosis 6.2 The S.I.T. Hub 7.1 Play 7.2 Illume 8.1 The Green Escape

Aknowledgements 91 Afterword 93

2

3

The Department of Architectural Science Collaborative Exercise
Each year, at the start of the winter semester, undergraduate and graduate students, faculty and staff, and invited guests come together to take part in the annual Collaborative Exercise (CEx) held at the Department of Architectural Science at Ryerson University. The five-day event challenges students to address an important contemporary issue. The intention of the exercise is to engage students to collaborate, think and design, while investigating a topic related to architecture and the built environment. Through this experience, students have the opportunity to work with students from other years in the Department's program, to achieve a common design goal. The Collaborative Exercise ends with an exhibition at the Paul H. Cocker Gallery in the Ryerson University's Architecture Building. This book showcases the outcomes of the 2013 Collaborative Exercise, entitled An Architecture of Civility. I congratulate the students and faculty on their great work. George Thomas Kapelos, OAA FRAIC RPP OPPI MCIP Professor, Department of Architectural Sciene Instructor, Collaborative Exercise 2013

4

5

An Architecture of Civility
"A civil society is a society of civility in the conduct of the members of the society towards each other. Civility enters into conduct between individuals and between individuals and the state; it regulates the conduct of individuals towards society. It likewise regulates the relations of collectivities towards each other, the relations between collectivities and the state and the relations of individuals within the state." Edward Shils, The Virtue of Civil Society. 4 "At no time in our history has the need been greater for connecting the work of the academy to the social and environmental challenges beyond the campus. ... It seems clear that while research is crucial, we need a renewed commitment to service, too." Ernest Boyer, Scholarship Reconsidered, Promises of the Profession, 1990

"No, the first rule of architect should be to preserve, honour, and promote life on earth through the shaping the material world. Shaping the material world so as to preserve, honour, and promote-- so as to protect, enhance, and enrich--all forms and instances of life is the only "rule" that deserves architects' committed following. Call it the architect's Hippocratic Oath. Its challenge to us is both aesthetic and ethical. If it doesn't look like we can live up to this first rule, I say, pass up the job." Michael Benedikt, The first rule of the architect. 6.

"If you understand that the practice of architecture--the practice of synthesis that generates coherent unity from massively complex and diverse inputs--just might be the operating system that we need to solve the challenges that we face in meeting the needs of the next generation, then join the movement. If you get the fact that architecture, and the design methodologies at its core, could be central to the future of cities, governments, ecologies, and businesses, then please raise your voice in the chorus of potential. Get into the discussion and leave your worries about the fence that separates you from the rest of the world behind you. Stop the complaining--and join the revolution of possibility." Bruce Mau. You can do better. Architect 100 (1). 2011. 164.

6

Introduction
Collaborative Exercise 2013 invited participants to consider the idea of civility and the role that architecture may play in nurturing a civil society. According to sociologist Edward Shils, the notion of civility has changed over time and has multiple interpretations (Shils 1991). In governance, civility differentiates democracies from non-structured states. Philosophically it has been labelled as the antithesis to the natural or `barbaric' condition of human existence. Shil contends that civil society exists apart from the state and social institutions, but remains framed by these same institutions. Civility refers to the conduct of members in society to each other and embraces diversity and different ways of thinking and interacting. Implicit in the idea of civility is that each individual has a stake in his / her society and the rights and obligations to participate fully in society. Further, principles of social justice allow for the cooperation of various competing interests to share equally in a basic system of common liberties and to ensure that those less advantaged have access to the greatest benefits (Rawls 1971). Architects have long embraced the social agency of their discipline, but the demands of the profession have frequently trumped ethical values. As Michael Benedikt admonishes, "... the first rule of the architect should be to preserve, honour and promote life on earth" through the enhancement and enrichment of all forms and instances of life (Benedikt 2009, 106). Recently, greater attention has been paid to the role of architect as servant of society and the importance of the discipline to advance innovation and knowledge, rather than simply problem-solving. As Michael Speaks argues, such an approach has become a significant imperative especially in a changing world where traditional dogmas have been battered down as diverse global issues and concerns rapidly change. With these challenges and conditions, the 2013 Collaborative Exercise invited participants to enter into an experiment. It asked students to consider the following questions. What is an architecture of civility? How can it be constructed? What

7

are the opportunities that may arise when architecture, new technologies, public space and the rights of individuals to a civil society converge?

intent, meaning and use of nascent technology. "In addition to typological and programmatic aspirations, the project strives to achieve a number of design ambitions. It hopes to achieve high level architectonic qualities and demonstrate innovative design approaches / parameters including the incorporation of sustainable features and materials, use of innovative technologies, be resilient to potential vandalism and urban abuse, present opportunities for modularity and replication in a variety of locations in the City, be economical to maintain and operate, and become a beacon in the community. It is by necessity designed for universal access for people both with and without disabilities, irrespective of age, gender or ability. Further it is to respond to Toronto's culturally diverse citizenry, allowing for variety in response to local neighbourhood conditions. As technology advances, the City also hopes that these new facilities will make full use of advanced technologies for communications, information exchange and way-finding." `Citizen Architects' and their assigned sites for design interventions For the 2013 Collaborative Exercise, participants were divided into teams of `citizen architects' consisting of 12 ­ 14 students, drawn from across the four-year Department of Architectural Science undergraduate degree program. Teams were paired into sections and each section was under the leadership of a Team Facilitator, who was a graduate student in one of the Department's Master's programs. Every section was given a specific site within the City of Toronto, so that there would be two teams (one section) each designing a separate facility on the same site. Sites varied depending on their size and location, but were considered to be adequate to provide for the amenity proposed. Selected sites are adjacent to major public streets, parks and/or transportation interchanges. Sites are publicly accessible and are located on what is believed to be publicly-owned property. Each team was responsible for the design of a facility on the selected site. Students may have wished to visit their site; however, sufficient information was provided on each site on the course BlackBoard site.

A design experiment
The proposed project was experimental by design and was presented with the following premise. "The City of Toronto is seeking to introduce public facilities on City-owned properties or public spaces adjacent to major transportation interchanges that provide civic amenities to the population of the City. The City has been working with a number of community groups who have been advocating for the creation of amenities which would support their interests and in turn promote civility and engender a civil society in Toronto. It is proposed that such facilities be integrated into the City's public infrastructure and that these amenities be envisioned as opportunities to create important civic spaces which would include components that would enhance the everyday life of Toronto's citizens and visitors. Further, these spaces would support cultural, social, community activities and answer basic needs of the public. Diversity, equity and inclusion are the watchword of these new facilities.

Aspirations
"The City of Toronto has certain aspirations for these new facilities, which are to respond to basic human needs and aspire to address specific, universal human desires. Among these are refuge, comfort, safety, security, social interaction and connectivity. Further, the facilities are to allow for the diversity of Toronto's multi-cultural population, while promoting equity and inclusion for all citizens, no matter what their means or ability may be. They are to address the varieties and vagaries of the Toronto climate in all seasons and function twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week. It is hoped they will become meeting places, beacons and places of identity within their own locales, a sort of `clean, well-lighted place' within a sea of urban activity. The City sees these facilities as a new type of structure / place / building / infrastructure that will be visionary in form, content,

8

All proposed structures were required to be visible from the street and be accessible by at least one public sidewalk. Sites were selected so that free-standing facilities could be created, and there was also the requirement that there be ample room adjacent for the inclusion of seasonal public activities. Students could decide that sites would be occupied by a vendor or support person, although in some instances there may have been particular site conditions that would impact the design that need to be taken into consideration. This information was conveyed to students by Team Facilitators. The following were the sites assigned for the Collaborative Exercise:
Section Section 1 Section 2 Section 3 Section 4 Section 5 Section 6 Section 7 Section 8 Section 9 Section 10 Section 11 Section 12 Section 13 Section 14 Section 15 Section 16 Site Bathurst Station Berczy Park (near King TTC Station) Bloor-Bedford Park (near St. George Station) Broadview Station Chester Station Christie Station Downsview Station St. Patrick Station (Dundas and University) Eglinton West Station Harbour Square Park High Park Lawrence Station Main St. Station Queen's Park Station Rosedale Station Runnymede Station Site Area 1311 sq. m. 3571 sq. m. 907 sq. m. 1167 sq. m. 858 sq. m. 929 sq. m. 1305 sq. m. 2246 sq. m. 1075 sq. m 16 114 sq. m. 1073 sq. m. 629 sq. m. 973 sq. m. 2234 sq. m. 902 sq. m. 3037 sq. m.

Program
The Collaborative Exercise invited students acting as `citizen architects' to consider the design of a facility which promotes `an architecture of civility.' Within the program for the site, there were a range of elements that would support the idea of civility and civic amenity. Program elements to be incorporated into this civic amenity were to create a free-standing structure, which could be designed as an integrated system of components, and have the capacity to vary in the number of elements contained (required versus optional), depending on the site and community needs. In addition, a larger area of the site could have been considered as an `area of influence' on which may be located a number of activities that could be seasonal, temporary or spaceconsumptive in nature. The intent was to include required elements in all locations and as much as possible to create a common civic amenity facility across the city. The required elements were to be integrated into one structure on every site; however, optional elements could be included depending on the group's deliberations and findings and a larger site area could be identified as the `area of influence.' The elements introduced below set the basic parameters for each team's final design. These elements and their design parameters established dimensional and operational requirements. The decisions to include some of the design elements could have the potential to create conflict with other elements, and therefore teams were reminded to consider desired outcomes when locating these elements within the facility or on the site. These elements could further be customized while meeting City of Toronto standards. As appropriate, the element design was to be code compliant. Each facility was to contain a number of required elements as well as a number of optional / additional elements. All required elements were to be included and at least five additional elements were required.. The elements are listed, as follows. Full design and dimensional information for all elements was found on the course BlackBoard site.

9

Required Elements The mandatory elements and recommended dimensions were as follows: · Automated Public Washroom (one or two toilets) 3.5m x 3.5m x 3.5m · Clock (visible in at least two directions) clock face maximum diameter .5 m. Clock supporting structure may be 3.0m x 3.0m x maximum 10.0m in height · Water fountain (one or two required) 0.5m x 0.5m x 1.0m · Information / Way-finding (potential to be an interactive element) 1.5m x 0.5m x 3.0m · Wireless Hotspot, maximum coverage: `area of influence' · Electronic weather information including UV forecasting 0.5m x 0.5m x 0.5m · Litter/Recycling Receptacle 2.0m x 0.5m x 1.5m · Public pay telephone (one or two required) 0.5m x 0.5m x 1.5m · Cell Phone Charging Station 0.7m x 0.5m x 2.0m · Bike service station with bicycle pump and 3 bike rings · Service Room for storage of cleaning equipment for the facility 1.0m x 1.0m x 3.0m · Heated / cooling sheltered space 3.5m x 3.5m x 3.5m · Protected Seating 1.5m x 0.5m x 0.5m · Security monitors (provide at least 3 in highly visible areas) · Appropriate space for mechanical / electrical equipment and systems · Teams must demonstrate that the facility incorporates adequate security features through design and considerations including personnel, lighting and / or technology. Additional Elements (minimum of five elements) The following were all the optional elements and recommended dimensions: · Space for street musicians and performances 2.0m x 2.0m x 5.0m

10

· Contained area for smokers with air exchange / exhaust 2.0m x 2.0m x 3.0m · Electric vehicle charging station (VCS) (provide minimum 2) 0.25m x 0.5m x 1.5m (area not inclusive of space for vehicle) · Bike rental / lock-up (provide space for 7 rentals at 6.5m x 1.0m x 1.0m, and 4 bike lockers in total) · Bulletin board 1.5m x 0.5m x 3.0m · Snack vending machine 1.5m x 1.5m x 2.5m · Food vendor carts (no more than 2 carts) 1.5m x 1.0m x 3.0m · Wireless interactive TV screen / Internet screen 5.0m x 0.5m x 5.0m · Single occupancy room with facilities for showering, grooming, baby changing area and other personal needs 3.0m x 5.0m x 3.0m · Parking for up to three zip cars · Dog washing area 1.5m x 1.5m x 1.5m · Multi-publication stand for newspaper / magazine sales 3.0m x 0.5m x 1.0m · Hot water dispenser 1.0m x 1.0m x 1.0m · Canada Post mail drop box 1.0m x 1.0m x 1.5m · Combination lockers/ lockboxes · Donation collection box 2.0m x 2.0m x 2.0m · Planters 1.5m x 0.5m x 0.5m · Food warming station 0.5m x 0.5m x 1.5m · Temporary resting areas (self cleaning) 2.5m x 1.0m x 0.5m · Cash dispensing machine (ATM) · Storage for movable chairs and tables for use on the site. · Booth for facility operator / vendor (24 hour use) In addition, this Collaborative Exercise invited teams to propose inventive strategies not included in the above lists that would contribute to civic amenity. Footprint and Area of Influence For each team's design proposal, students were to identify the

footprint of the architectural element / building as well as the area of influence or support for the facility. The architectural element / building referred to those program elements that were required to have protected spaces (e.g. baby changing area). Some elements such as the heated / cooling sheltered space could be considered outdoor spaces that belong in the area of influence. Students were invited to determine which elements should be included within a building and which should be located within the area of influence, the open outdoor space. Some of these elements might be included in both indoor and outdoor spaces such as the wireless hotspot. On certain sites, the selected indoor elements could be combined within existing facilities / buildings on the site, so long as they are publicly accessible. It was recommended that the maximum building footprint for the entire enclosed facility be no more than 100 square metres and the maximum footprint for the area of influence be no more than the entire area of the site or a portion thereof. This would include the required and additional elements. These areas were approximate. Some sites might have had ample room for both a structure of the suggested size and the area of influence, while others might have been quite a bit smaller. Team Facilitators and Student Citizen design teams were invited to make a determination as to how to address this question and propose revisions accordingly.

11

Project Deliverables, Submission Requirements and Deadlines
Students had four days to complete their work, during the period of 7 ­ 10 January 2013. All designs were submitted digitally and posters were printed for public display in the Paul H. Cocker Gallery. A public exhibition of the student designs was mounted in the Gallery for a three-week period following the Collaborative Exercise. Students were invited to give their project, as a type, a name The 2013 Collaborative Exercise was experimental in that it proposed a new type of civic amenity for the citizens of Toronto. In conceiving of this project, the instructor considered a number of names for this new amenity, but came up short. So, he challenged each team to propose a name for what this new place/ structure/use could be. Citizen Architects, Design Champions and Team Facilitators For the Collaborative Exercise, distinct roles were defined for all participants. Department students took on the role of `Citizen Architects.' Architectural Science faculty members along with some guests acted as `Design Champions.' Graduate students assumed two roles: 'Team Facilitators' and `Community Voices,' advocating for `an architecture of civility' from specific perspectives. It was the intention that participants would be able to undertake these roles to support and encourage civility, civic interaction and public engagement, and work towards the objectives of the Collaborative Exercise ­ the development of an architecture of civility. Citizen Architects Students participating in the Exercise assumed the role of `citizen architects' whose task was to formulate `an architecture of civility' in response to the design brief. Students were assigned to teams comprising approximately 12 students, and two teams were paired into one Section and assigned to a specific site. While the design work of each team was distinct, the work

12

of the section was facilitated by graduate students from the Department's Masters' programs, who stayed with their teams for the entire week. Each team of Citizen Architects was to identify a team leader who would be the primary contact during the Collaborative Exercise and also had a small administrative role. To receive credit for participating in the Collaborative Exercise each student was expected to be present for the entire week and participate fully. Each student was required to complete a peer evaluation of team members at the completion of the Collaborative Exercise. Design Champions Participating faculty members from the Department of Architectural Science were paired up and assigned to one or more Sections. The role of the faculty members was to act as `design champions.' As a `design champion' they were tasked to make themselves available to their assigned teams as much as possible during the week to encourage / challenge / provoke / critique student designs. Given the range of faculty members in the Department, their critiques represented the multiple perspectives of architecture, building science and project management that faculty members possess and were to be directed to encouraging design excellence. It was expected that all participating faculty meet with their assigned teams throughout the exercise and it was suggested they try to meet with their sections at least once each day, if not more often, as schedules permitted. Team Facilitators The work of each section of two teams was facilitated by a graduate student, whose responsibility was to work with the `citizen architects' in order to address issues, formulate questions and facilitate the realization of design solutions. It was anticipated that design work would be undertaken by the `citizen architects' working collaboratively within their team; however, facilitators were available to ensure progress and support students in the completion of their work. Facilitators also had a minor administrative role in ensuring there is a flow of information and effecting communications with other participants in the Collaborative Exercise. They were responsible for ensuring that peer evaluations are completed.

13

Community Voices A number of graduate students took on the role of `community voices' and were active throughout the exercise advocating for specific issues they believed to be important to `an architecture of civility.' The role of these `community voices' was to ensure that there was a high degree of issue awareness and collaboration among the citizen architects that could impact the creation of an architecture of civility in Toronto. Community voices presented their positions at a town hall meeting which took place on the first day of the Collaborative Exercise. In addition, they were be available as resources to individual teams throughout the exercise and at an advocates' fair held on the second day of the exercise.

Recognitions:
The following pages present the varied takes by students on the question of Civility in their own words. Following its completion, the project received national recognition:

Award for student work Royal Institute of Canada / Canadian Institute of Planners / Canadian Society of Landscape Architects 2014 National Urban Design Awards, "An Architecture of Civility" , awarded May 2014

City of Toronto Urban Design Awards, 2013 ­ Award of Merit, "An Architecture of Civility" Awarded September 2013

14 Endnotes 1. Benedikt, M. (2009). The first rule of the architect. Architecture, Ethics and Globalization, G. Owen (Ed.), (1st ed., pp. 105) Routledge. 2. Mau, B. (2011). You can do better. Architect, 100(1), 164-164. Retrieved from http://ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/login?url=http:// search.proquest.com/docview/868916009?accountid=13631. 3. Rawls, J. (1971). A theory of justice. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. 4. Shils, E. (1991). The virtue of civil society. Government and Opposition, Athenaeum Club. 5. Speaks, M. (2006). Intelligence after Theory. Perspecta: The Yale Architectural Journal, no 38: Architecture After All, pp. 103-108. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/40482421. Sources Benedikt, M. (2009). "The first rule of the architect." Architecture, Ethics and Globalization, G. Owen (Ed.), (1st ed., pp. 105) Routledge. Mau, B. (2011). "You can do better." Architect, 100(1), 164-164. Retrieved from http://ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/login?url=http:// search.proquest.com/docview/868916009?accountid=13631. Rawls, J. (1971). A Theory Of Justice. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. Shils, E. (1991). The Virtue of Civil Society. Government and Opposition, Athenaeum Club. Speaks, M. (2006). "Intelligence after Theory." Perspecta: The Yale Architectural Journal, no 38: Architecture After All, pp. 103-108. http://www.jstor.org/stable/40482421.

15

16

17

student projects

18

Intermedia
1.1
Marie Antonette Arcayos, Fernando Arce, Catalina Ardila Bernal, Alvin Yonatan Tanoko Marin Agostini, Omar Ahmed, Haya Alnibari, Nicholas Ager, Asem Alhadrab, Leila Amiri, Neveen Abdel-Aal, Zarina Ateig.

Our design encourages civility through public engagement. It promotes self expression through a variety of media. The "soapbox" and the digital graffiti wall are the central features of the park that encourage passers-by to share their views and ideas. A video and audio recording device offers an opportunity for citizens to voice their thoughts on issues that impact either themselves on a personal level, or society as a whole. In the same way, the interactive wall allows artists to express their thoughts through digital art. Pleasant and comfortable seating is also provided to invite an audience for illustrations and performances. Basic amenities such as washrooms, bike racks and water fountains are also offered to sustain the needs of the public. Given these facilities, the project addresses the issue of civility by giving the community a safe platform for them to express and exhibit their thoughts.

Interactive  Wall  
        

Interactive  Wall  
        

The  Interactive  wall  is  a  multi  functional  element  of  the  project.  It  has  a  digital  navigation,   digital  clock,  electronic  weather  information,  a  TV,  and  module  to  play  games.  It  has  two  sides   that  interact.  The  above  image  shows  the  side  of  the  wall  that  faces  the  subway.  And  the  image   blow  shows  the  interior  of  the  side  where  the  screen  is  doubled  allocated  to  paly  games.    

   The  Interactive  wall  is  a  multi  functional  element  of  the  project.  It  has  a  digital  navigation,   digital  clock,  electronic  weather  information,  a  TV,  and  module  to  play  games.  It  has  two  sides   that  interact.  The  above  image  shows  the  side  of  the  wall  that  faces  the  subway.  And  the  image  

19

20

Exchange Park
1.2
Saroush Arabi, Sivan Arbel, Michelle Ashurov, Nicola Augustin, Abdul Aziz, Najlasadat Azizi, Louis Bae, Zahra Bagheri, Jennifer (Hao Yue) Bai, Douglas Belanger

Creating architecture that promotes civility requires addressing the diversity of an area and creating opportunity for co-operation and interaction between all individuals. Our goal is to develop a park that will promote interaction between citizens by creating opportunities to exchange information, news, art and goods. The site location in the Annex offers a strong culture that can be pulled into our park. The proximity to Bathurst Station and heavily commercialized Bloor Street will create potential for all individuals to access and interact with the park and with each other. Our design incorporates a large canopied zone for vendors and artists to set up stations to showcase or sell products, while enclosed structures at the base of the canopy act as global gateways offering wireless internet connections and access to news sources, as well as rest and service spaces. The design remains open to allow pedestrians quick access to the amenities and clear circulation paths through the site, while encouraging resting in the seating areas. By designing with flexible materials and forms, the park itself can be replicated in other locations and adapted to various contexts. By promoting interaction of individuals as well as offering connection on a local and global scale, the Exchange Park brings civility and social interaction to its location.

21

22

MultipliCity
2.1
Daniel Carey, Tara Castator, Jae Chahng, Artyom Savin, Chelsea Cambell, Remi Carreiro, Michael Mazurkiewicz , Christopher Chown, Hoang Chu, Madison Dozzi-Perry, Sunmi Choi, Shanelle Currie, Heather Breeze

Does current urban design address common issues of diversity and equity within city life? In today's fast-paced and digitized society, architecture can both influence and be influenced by technology in order to create a new architecture of civility that serves all citizens. Berczy Park, located between two different and highly frequented districts, provides an excellent opportunity for an innovative streetscape and green space design. By sloping the corners of the park upwards, an extended area of influence is created that subtly includes passersby and draws in new visitors. Each end of soft landscape houses sheltered areas that include both vendor stations and electronic amenities. The centre valley contains vital elements for city living such as protected seating and water fountains. The provision of these details can be integrated and connected to other city spots, creating a network of smaller communities in which people can interact. The community of Berczy Park extends over the street and beyond, becoming a spot for relaxation, congregation, and relief that is available to everyone.

23

3

1

2 3

4

24

Community Node
2.2
Youhyun Chang, Timothy Tsz Ho Cheng, Alden Ching, John Michael Dalafu Sosa, Jaehyun Chun, Alessia Commisso, Ariel Cooke, Catherine Cohen, Laurel Shoshana Dayan, Jonathan Clarke , Karina Davydova, Ryan William Dixon, Michael Weng Sang Tai

To have civility is to feel citizenship. Citizenship is to be a part of a community. A civil community is one that shares and cares. To achieve this, the community needs to get to know one another. The Community Node allows citizens to shape the public spaces of the city; their backyard. The ribbons provide opportunities for diverse paths that people take in the city. The circles are enabling moments for citizen interaction: information poles, tables, and cell-phone charging. Sloped ribbons and seating areas face a screen and delineate a space for performers. On a number of ribbons are ways for citizens to affect their spaces and play. Design that enables play, happiness, and collaboration creates a sense of community that leads to a more civil society.

25

26

HUB: Holistic Urban Bean
3.1
Sara Duffin, Ramoncito Espino, Andrew Falls, Jessa Sy, Marina Elmova, Kenan Elsasser, Mark Eyk, Corey Gorewicz, Carrie Groskopf, Anthony Gugliotta, Jeonghoon Han, Benyi Hu, Ericka Song

The Bloor-Bedford Parkette occupies an elemental position within boundaries of a University neighbourhood, an affluent shopping district, a mecca of tourist destinations and select residential structures. Rather than designing with a stance that creates a prominent destination entity within an already busy locale, the Bloor-Bedford Parkette will act as an intersection on one's journey throughout the city. In keeping the essence of the neighbourhood, The HUB (Holistic Urban Bean) will speak to the natural elements of the existing park while fusing an interactive and technological installation for the public. In understanding the term civility as encompassing a fundamental awareness of interaction, HUB is designed to bring people together through interactions with one another, but also through interactions with the site and ultimately through the city.

27

28

Civic Intermission
3.2
Ivan Culjak, Mathhew Ferguson, Ryan Fernandes, Dylon Feyen, Michael Fik, Jacqueline Foott, James Heusser-Kowoll, Danqing Huang, Ilda Hysa, Fahmida Jannat, Nicholas Jone, Jefrey Szeto

Civility in design requires the resolution of what is being opened, to whom it is being opened, and in which manner it is opened. This design proposal considers civility as the antithesis to the hostile condition of human existence. In this sense we seek to renew and make easier urban life, as the city represents the pinnacle of human achievement and civility. The integration of services to inclusively serve multiple demographics acts to increase the individual's right to the city. Through the introduction of a pavilion and integrated park, the proposed intervention serves as a place of refuge, place of service and place of communication. The physical articulation consists of modular elements that can be adjusted to serve specific demographic groups at varying sites throughout the city. In the case of Bedford & Bloor, the intervention serves tourists, students, commuters, professionals and the disenfranchised.

29

30

Transit Commons
4.1
Vlash Gjeka, Karen Grubb, John Grezeda, Samual Iun, Lily Jeon, Gerald Karaguni, Minwook Kim, Shane Keepence, Elena Khanlarkhani, Jamie Kwan, Hyoung Lee

Civility can be linked with many different words: politeness, courtesy, consideration and many more. Transit Commons has interpreted civility through the act of showing regard for others by means of its design. The site has been designed to be accessible to multiple users such as kids, dog owners, cyclists, seniors, the blind, and homeless. The existing site was a small park that has been neglected due to the lack of connection between the site and Broadview station. This has not only made the park an underutilized space, but has also created unsafe circulation for pedestrians. The goal of the design is to create a park which is related to the neighborhood. Through the creation of the central and flexible space, the site is able to be used for multiple functions and creates a safer entrance to the transit station for traffic coming from the north. 40% of the local community uses transit to get to work. By creating this flexible, open space, there is more space for waiting areas as well as programmable space that will attract the community to the site. Transit Commons has revitalized how transit infrastructure can be integrated with a neighborhood as a whole.

31

NORTH PERSPECTIVE

info board + playspace

seating + bike rack

flexible seating

bike rack + seating

seating + playspace + drinking fountain

32

rAmpitheater
4.2
Andrew Dixon, Dana Gurevich, Eyad Hachimi, John Han, Minkyu Jung, Alirezza Kabiri, Hovag Kara- Yacoubian, Anna Kobeleva, Malgorazata Kolbe, Ryan Lee, Meng Lei, Karson Linton

BIKE RENTAL/ STORAGE M/E

SPLASH PAD ARTISTS' STUDIO

REPAIR STATION PAYPHONE

GALLERY

The Broadview site is located on Danforth Avenue and connects part of the Bloor-Danforth subway line of Toronto. On the northwest corner of station property, an 1167 sq. m parkette is located. To provide a civic amenity to the people of the Broadview and Danforth area, the concept of interaction was explored in order to create architecture that revives the space and opens it up for the potential to connect people. The designed structure considers the needs of the various constituents that make up the surrounding area. The elements of interaction that were crucial in providing a sense of inclusion and civility include technology, accessibility, a place of rest, and art. Ramps and stairs create an accessible way towards the stage area, which will be the site of various musical performances to attract people to the site. A digital touch screen media wall is located on the lower level of the structure, and will provide information and announcements to the public. The structure itself houses various civic amenities, such as washrooms, bike rentals, and an artist's studio, which are all free of cost and available to everyone in the community.

LIFT

RECEIPTION

33

34

The Green Line
5.1
Jeffery Mitchell, Mandala Mitton, Julia Mozheyko, Jason Varandas, Nikita Yakushev, David Kotewicz, Yekaterina Korotayeva, Cornelia Kong, Ruslan Ivanytskyy, Mashroor Ishraque

An architecture of civility is one which constantly improves upon itself and reaches for a modern definition of civility. The scheme for Chester Station builds upon the consequences of a previous infrastructure project, presenting the reorganization of the present corridor of parking lots created by the development of the Bloor Subway Line. The project, running parallel to the subway line, provides a linear park based on alternative modes of transit: The Green Line. The project represents a deconstruction of the car and its infrastructure, which have governed the structure of the city. The traditional size parking spot remains the modular organizing feature, providing an organizational grid for the project. Modules form singular elements (seating, planting, etc), and combine to form larger program elements (washrooms, pavilions, etc). Multiple grids, overlaid on the site, create a scheme which can be extended down the corridor as parking lots fall into disuse. The corridor, which develops into a linear park as the phases of the project progress, reinterprets the steel, glass and wood material palette of the "luxury" car into a public infrastructure which provides a new kind of luxury for the community. The project is a comment on the culture of the car, and how it can be reconfigured into an architecture of civility.

35

2600mm

ING PARK
5200mm

= = =

OOR S OUTD ULE MOD

D BUIL

ES SPAC

36

Open House
5.2
Min Jang, Alecis Johansen, Benjamin Joyce, Rachel Law, Kavosh Maleki, Eric Lachance, Jeffrey Kwong, Advita Madan, Kyle Marern, Alec Manojlovich, Cassandra Murphy, Ben Murphy, Hilary Neal

"The first rule of the architect is to preserve, honor, and promote life on earth through the shaping of the material world."
Thus architecture, according to Michael Benedikt, has the power to stimulate change and inspire civility. A civil society functions primarily on the will of its citizens and their understanding of improvements needed within the community. The individual loss for communal gain is one of the primary definitions of the term "civility". In 1958, the Bloor and Danforth TTC subway line was built, requiring the demolition of numerous family residencies in order for the citizens of the city to have a better infrastructure system. In the wake of this destruction and creation, empty lots were left behind, presenting the idea of the "Open House" project. The Open House proposes a memorial, compensating for what was lost: a communal service, open concept facility that invites, interacts with, and gives back to the surrounding populace. In order to recreate the sense of what was once destroyed, the proposal engages social interaction through the interpretation of the once existing houses.

T CHES ER AV ENUE

CHESTER STATION

37

38

Symbiosis
6.1
Kimberley Langford, Dana Latimer, Jaehwan Lee, Nathaniel Mendiola, Yong Kang Zhu, Parastoo Mossannen Mozaffary, Saina Motahari, Kayla Patricia Murrell, Alykhan Neky, Patricia Policht, Kevin Chue Ho Pu, Christina Vandeberg, Giovanna Tara Monaco

To create an architecture of civility, it is necessary to understand and apply the meaning of the word to design. Civility is a progressive movement towards positive change. For this to occur, this place must serve as a linkage between people of different cultures, abilities, and interests while functioning as a secure environment. The scheme provides an enticing display for onlookers while encouraging people to be drawn to the area. It is comprised of multiple translucent plastic modules and furnishings that are arranged to retain unobstructed north-south and east-west axes on the site. These function as access points for pedestrians and simultaneously retain views to the adjacent park, Christie subway station, and the commercial thoroughfare, Bloor Street. The form of each module is derived from the protective and ethereal qualities of nature. This is achieved through the implementation of translucent materials and overarching canopies to create a sense of security and the formation of organic shapes to relate to the site surroundings. Interactive screens, vendors and seating are dispersed throughout the site to encourage a positive social environment for users.

39

40

The S.I.T. Hub
6.2
Marco Che Kin Lee, Marta Lehzdyn, Jing Liang, Briana-Nicole Zitella,Teresa Mytkowoski, Mahan Navabi, Carol Nguyen, Angela Yuen- Yan Ng, Krystyna Davis Ng, Courtney Ann Nicholson, Zeev Rajman, Benjemin Reimer

The S.I.T. Hub (synergy, interlude, transition) Creating civil architecture suggests more than just building a physical environment that accommodates the basic needs and rights of people. As Civil Architects, our imperative is to nurture and mold society to create harmonious environments for all walks of life. We promote and inspire citizens by using universal design to express respect and propriety towards each individual that make up a whole community. Christie Station is located in the center of a transportation zone that separates two distinct areas, an urban neighbourhood and a park. The site provides the opportunity to explore the idea of an interlude and a transitional zone. Different paving textures and orientations of the canopies are used to organize human movement through the site and harmonize the relationship between bike and pedestrian traffic. Each pod contains different programmatic elements that accommodate the specific needs of the community and are united by the repeated leaf-like motif expressed across the site. A Light features located in the structural stems illuminates the area to create a safe and well-lit space. The SIT Hub addresses the issue of civility resulting from the conflicting needs of modern society by considering architecture as a tool to organize the relations of human movement, provide a functional program, and manifest a place of identity within the community.

41

42

Play
7.1
Judy Manouk, Stefan Millers, Justin Mitchell, Shahrooz Zayandehroodi, Stuart Vaz, Samuel Vandersluis, Anusha Ramesh, Eric Reid, Nicola Rutherford, Arthur Seko, Setareh Shams, Darrin Sebarasa, Dae Hee Kim

CIVIL SOCIETY began in ancient times in the Greek Agora ­ a gathering space used for a variety of functions, bringing citizens together to share public performance, discourse, commerce and culture. It was a place of recreation, also known as the "third space," separate from home and work. This concept has been adapted to the site with the emphasis of PLAY, open to all citizens of all ages. With the future developments proposed for its surroundings, this site is transformed from a barren slate to vibrant community hub, as well as an extension of the neighbouring Downsview Park.

43

44

Illume
7.2
Modaresi Parisasadat, Muaddi Rawan, Momen Mahin, Rahnamaei Nahal, Mulvey Mike, SHirazie Syed Aamer, Sarner Aviv, Rosati Daniel, Shinya Catherine, Skoniecza Helena, Chiu Wilkey, Schembri Diana, Vastag Sabrina

"What we do for ourselves dies with us. What we do for others and the world remains and is immortal." -Albert Pine Characteristics of openness and clarity in architecture present individuals with an opportunity to intimately engage with the built environment. Such engagement develops an architecture of civility; a focus upon the creation of place. Located at the corner of Sheppard Avenue West and Allen Road, the sliver-shaped site is wedged within a public transit node slated for future expansion along the Yonge-University-Spadina subway line.

45

The sub-grade design proposal addresses issues of connectivity and circulation with respect to the existing transportation services, while sheltering users from the windy and barren landscape conditions. A series of cannons filter natural light through program spaces organized below grade, evoking an architecture of openness and clarity. Vertical circulation occurs through gradual ramping, interconnecting program spaces and public amenities on various floors. The design proposal features an interior public courtyard, functioning as an extension of exterior space, while additional sub-grade levels operate as circulatory connectors, market and retail space. The proposal aims to facilitate and promote social, technological and transportation outlets as architecture of the people, for the people.

46

The Green Escape
8.1
Olga Chepiga, Ali Mohammed Khaja, Marcus Alecander Paris, Ishan Patel, Mina Pavlovic, John Sirdecan, Jonathan Puiming To, Ming Phat Tran, Tiffany Tse, Stephanie Ting, Nicholas Van Niekerk, Sonia Urmee, Amanda Maria Zuliani

Occupying the median on University Avenue between Dundas and Armoury Streets in the heart of downtown Toronto, the assigned site poses a number of unique challenges. After we observed the site, it becomes apparent that, despite the population density and the myriad of activity taking place in the area, the site itself remains underutilized. We plan to create an open, translucent, canopy structure, which will weave itself throughout the site, providing shelter from the elements, while at the same time, maximizing the amount of natural light penetrating the site. Additionally, because University Avenue is a large, fast throughway, we plan to introduce crosswalks on either side of the median, which will encourage people to visit the site, while reducing the speed of automobile traffic around it. Underneath the canopy, we located a variety of amenities designed and placed to serve the occupants of the neighborhood in the best possible manner. These will include bike rentals, food vendors, public washrooms, an art/music space, public seating, and wireless hotspots, among others. Our approach, therefore, is to create a destination space that is an oasis in the city; a space that nurtures streel lifew, and provides users with a variety of civic amenities that contribute to the fabric of the neighborhood and overall health of the city.

47

48

Da New Parq
8.2
Elliot Wajchendler, Meir Shema, Jessica Walker, Lydon Whittle, Danielle Van Ooteghem, Mehrdad Hassani, Tiffany Cheung, Marwa Tawfiq, Daniel Petrocelli, Samantha Turchyn, Yuliya Platko, Jacob Ragetli

With the northern end located at the intersection of University Avenue and Dundas Street West, this site has become a neglected strip of land primarily used as a barrier to separate traffic. The high rise buildings on either side block sunlight and inhibit the growth of vegetation. The proposed design consists of various organic elements that will aid the functionality of the area. Public amenities create an inclusive and sustainable interactive space that is easily accessible. Green roofs unify the structures with the ground, creating a more natural flow without overcrowding the space. The materiality of the structures is not only aesthetically pleasing but also relates to the existing historical monument on the site and contributes to the sustainability of the project. The transparency of the walls allows natural sunlight to enter the facility connected to the Saint Patrick subway station, minimizing the amount of electricity needed to power the park. The design starts from the ground up by improving the urban fabric of the downtown core and responding to all social and economic classes. It reflects the multiculturalism of Toronto and the diversity it encompasses.

49

50

tDOTtalks
9.1
Dana Salama, Daniel Bassakyros, Derek Beattie, Aleks Bis, Pawel Bednarek, Masih Khalili-Pooya, Andrew Chee, Jason Chang, Steven Biersteker, Nicholas Boychuk, Charles Bennett

Civility: a desire of every city dweller. But how can this concept of public good and respect be a uniting force across a large city? TdotTalks is an up-and-coming concept of creating an interactive linkage of `civil' spaces through video within the city. Each of these locations contain a modernized version of the soapbox, an iconic object used in the past to present political and social ideas to the public. These linked structures allow for the public to voice issues and present common public topics. Using Eglinton West Station as a typology to describe how this idea would manifest itself, a digital soapbox was created on the southern edge of the site. Connected to the subway entrance via an overhead canopy, it divides the site into two very different public spaces. To the west is an outdoor theatre, allowing people to express themselves in an open and public setting, whereas the space to the east has intimate seating which is beside a café and under a tree canopy. Overall, TdotTalks displays our central idea that civility and public action come in different scales; the scale of the city, the site, and the people. Communicating at these levels is an important building block in any urban community.

51

52

Adaptive Forest
9.2
Anita Cheng, Brajona Bremachandran, Brandon Bortoluzzi, Dani Bittner, Kiente Sanipe, Lisa Boulatova, Lisa Guann CHien, Nick Callies, Robin Sung-Hyun Cho

The design was driven conceptually by two factors: adaptability and creation of a faux nature. The natural image which became our driving point, after much iteration, was that of a forest. The idea of a forest as something which endures much change over the course of time, while maintaining the same physical presence, is what inspired this design. Borrowing from the waffle grid on the canopy of the existing Eglinton West Station, a sort of canopy mimicking that of a tree's branches forms itself over the central area of the site. The "trunks" are created by pillars, and spaces that ground the canopy providing a structure as well as nodes for various programming. To the site's periphery, both east and west, the manufactured landscape creates spaces for seating, street vendors, and performers. By interspersing water features and providing electric access indicated by the blue and yellow boxes throughout these seats, local entrepreneurs are allowed a sense of adaptive freedom to locate themselves based on changing weather, traffic and congestion of the space throughout the day. As they go about their daily life in the hustle and bustle, people have the opportunity to take a break in the Adaptive Forest!

53

54

CON[vert]
Victoria Chow, Joseph Costanza, Ailsa Craigen, Amanda Crisp, Andreh Custantin, Aubtry Deluca, Sandra Dorozynska, Anastasija Dudnykova, Sarah Gertler, Ryan Giuricich, Melonie Gomes, Greer Stanier

10.1

The main challenge presented by Harbour Square Park is that a majority of its activity is the result of ferry foot traffic. Urban agriculture provides a program and the CON[vert] structures combine the amenities needed in any park or public space with human scale, ergonomics, and civility. The east entrance is the main 'street' of the site which provides infrastructure to support the heavy volumes of ferry traffic into the site. The west entrance attracts pedestrians with an enticing view of the agricultural gardens. The park acts as a backyard for the community and will include a market to attract tourist year-round and generate a desire for the community to maintain the gardens. The structures are made of wooden planks that are converted into the arbours, benches, market stalls, and the Central Hub which create a connectivity, or harmony, throughout the site. The market stalls are collapsible and mobile for storage in the Hub. Interactive walls placed around the site include multi-language and speech capabilities with brail buttons for the visually-impaired to allow all people to learn about the park and its components. The materials of the paths differentiate the type of path and allow full mobility for all people include those with walking assisted devices.

55

56

The Beacon
Jonathan Day, Ivana Digirolamo, Shivathmikha Kumar, Alexandre De Melo, Dimiitiri Delean, Sarah De Vries, Matthew Gelowitz, Arthur Goldstein, Keteban Gonashvili, Michael Good, Seanna Guillemin

10.2

A CIVIL TORONTO describes a city where diverse members of society can come together and interact in various ways in an open communal setting. HARBOUR SQUARE PARK allows for all members of society to fulfill their rights and obligations to participate in citywide activities. Upon entering the site from Queens Quay, pedestrians, cyclists, and ferry goers alike will be met with a densely landscaped open park and two major boulevards to leading to Harbour Square's most exciting activities. The northern entrance of the park peaks pedestrian interest with a view of a winding crystallized canopy. The canopy follows the main hotspot zones providing shelter along the park's main boulevard down to the waterfront's edge. The angular crystallized form of the canopy mimics the lapping waves of the water following the flow of people along the park's path. At the park's central hub, one can see the clock tower or "THE BEACON" marking the key area of congregation. The base of the clock tower contains an interactive digital database and open sitting area where people can easily access weather data, surrounding community events, ferry times, relax, charge their smartphones, or access the public Wi-Fi. The path allows cyclists to stop to refill, repair, and rejuvenate before they continue touring along the beautiful Toronto waterfront. Ferry-goers can find a place to grab a snack, lock up their belongings, wait for their departure time, or wash up after a fulfilling day at the island's beaches. Harbour Square's Beacon boulevard provides equal opportunities for all members of society. Public showers, resting areas, look out points, and a heated shelter incorporated into a fully accessible design ensures that everyone can use and enjoy the site.

57

CANOPY RENDER

58

interACTION
11.1
Alex Fown, Giancarlo Franzoi, Michelle Friesen, Hrishikesh Tailor, Ti Fu, Valerie Gershman, Jaspell Gill, Arian Hussainzada, Victor Huynh, Sarah Ives, Jad Jouli, Channing Julien

Public space allows for an interaction between the physical space and the people who pass through it. The first move made by the architect is to transform a space once ruled by nature into an environment made to meet the needs of humans. In doing so, the new built form must respect the diverse group of people that will give life. As the new entrance to High Park, interACTION, will embrace the existing recreational features of High Park to allow for new ones to form. Approaching the site from the main intersection, Colborne and Bloor, varying forms of energy created by the most sustainable means allow for adaptable space. A large canopy mimicking the park's natural features creates an atmosphere that respects the existing condition. Minimal site impacts are used to enhance the existing natural features on the site to demonstrate to those entering a taste of what lies deep in the park grounds. The site consists of services created to meet the needs of those who visit the park. Realizing that a diverse group of people will use the park in different ways, interACTION creates opportunity for users to interact in many ways. Designing for the future means creating an inclusive design, civility comes with recognizing that every user is connected. This idea speaks to a greater notion that the actions we make today will shape the world of tomorrow.

59

60

Integrated Threshold
Rachel Frizado, Danielle Fuller, Arman Ghafouri-Azar, Jennifer Grant, Natalie Guerra, Dong Kyu Han, Dorothy Johns, Kenneth Kan, Marta Karlova, Mathew Koniuszewski

11.2

Serving as a primary entrance to High Park, Integrated Threshold aims to integrate programmatic elements with the gateway. The gateway is comprised of a folding plane running along the edge of the site adjacent the street. This gateway provides a permeable threshold into the park, delineating a buffer between the street and the site. This ribbon, raised from the ground, creates a canopy spanning over a variety of program elements. Our proposal introduces a flexible auditorium space, which acts as node for public demonstrations and gatherings. The auditorium also expands the realm of a local chess club by introducing large exterior chessboards. Park patrons impact their surroundings through the use of energy producing stepping pads, supplementing the overall electrical demand. Integrated Threshold creates a sense of unity amongst the patrons, providing a plethora of programmatic elements geared towards the unique demands of individuals. Emphasis has been placed on the needs of cyclists and other recreationalists by providing lockers and a bike rack. In addition to the recreational facilities, the proposal aims to ease accessibility for families, establishing nodes for gathering with food vending services and changing stations.

61

62

Civic Exchange
12.1
Jessica Hoang Chen, Andrew Harvey, Stephen Hewitt, Christopher Kayahara, Suk Kim, Luke Kimmerer, Tom Kowalcyk, Agatha Kwiatkowski, Yue Kwok, Andrew Lockhart, Cody Loeffen, Tyler Malone

Contemporary civilization needs more strategies to hold citizens accountable for the consequences of their consumption. To address this, the Civic Exchange is a pilot project for a city-wide network of sustainability monitoring stations which track consumption, effect transportation and urban agriculture in each Toronto neighborhood. City wide, this project creates a connection between each neighbourhood and develops a comparison between each area and the city as a whole, generating awareness and increasing accountability. As an entrance to a subway station, this centre is both a transit hub and a tracking hub that includes a multipurpose indoor and outdoor public space where the neighborhood residents can informally gather. Real time tracking is achieved through digital monitoring of public services as well as tracking consumption, recycling, and other activities at the level of the individual through a city-developed application for smart devices. The Civic Exchange strives to engage the community in an effort to positively impact civic behavior towards sustainability.

63

64

Discovery Bike Hub
Celine Huynh, Hwang Hyunhee, Caeleingh Kinch, Maksym Komyshenko, Diana Konkan, Dami Lee, Taewoo Lee, Jenny Leung, Ruxandra Matei, Sabrina Medeiros, Annu Minhas

12.2

Architectural civility is reflected in the way a site and its structure perform for the people and for society. civic architecture's function is to provide and work for the people living around the site and to present the opportunity for civic interaction. Opportunities for connectivity work for the individuals of the space and define its landscape. The Lawrence Station site is located on the north-east corner of Yonge Street and Lawrence Avenue. The site includes a subway station entrance that currently lacks accessibility, visibility, program and sense of place. Our collaborative team explored the site and created a more interactive junction that provides for workers, children and the elderly within the neighbourhood. In order to do this, we created a bicycle hub that connects the site to the 'Discovery Walk' that connects our site to the inner core of Toronto. The design includes: a main public structure where bike related services are connected to lounging space; a series of interactive walls displaying multilingual information; forums and TV projections that are visible from the interior spaces; and an intimate green space that connects all the activities and provides seating for observation. These combine together to create an enjoyable interactive place that transforms the site into an inclusive space for all types of people, creating a civic environment.

DISCOVE

65

106

110 100 500 2000

Lawrence Station
550

1100

920

3m lk in. b wa i k e, 9 m i n . 4m alk in. bi k e, 1 2 m i n . w
605

131

Existin

g Disc

er

yP
ath

6 mi

n. bike, 18 min. walk

1733 1200

CHILD

TEEN

ADULT

ELDER

ERY PATH SITE PLAN 1:300

STREET YONGE

ov

66

The Living Room
Sena Kaska, Jin Won Kim, Yunhyung Kim, Jue Wang, Yupin Li, Gary Luk, Florence Ma, Ghazal Masteri Farahani, Christopher Mcintosh, Matthew Mcquire, Donald Nyathi, Sarah Obtinalla

13.1

Architecture succeeds in civility when people come first. Our proposal for Main Street's Stanley G. Grizzle Park, opposite Main St. TTC Station, acts as a framework for community living in its larger Danforth Village context. An architect's civic responsibility deals with preserving what is essential to everyday living, protecting the values of the neighbourhood and promoting civic gestures that help improve the community. Though a modest intervention, a extended canopy helps preserve the existing mature trees, and unites two spaces divided by a service lane. The columns are strategically placed to delineate pedestrian paths. At every significant column, there are services such as garbage bins and drinking fountains that act as a wayfinding system for the parkette's amenities. The existing rundown playground and poor pathway system is replaced by surface treatments that facilitate social interaction and reclamation of space. The playground becomes a secure grass area for many dog-walkers. The new hardscape blends into the main sidewalks ­ an extension of the pedestrian realm. There is plenty of opportunity for sitting, as well as small gathering spaces for larger groups. The canopy has electric features through its structure and holds up solar panels that provide supplementary energy. The main feature is the living wall that is an environmentally conscious endeavour to provide identity for the site, while acting as a privacy barrier for the residences. By connecting these smaller civic gestures, a community living room is created.

67

76

Elevate: Shifting Landscapes for Community Development
Anne Kwan, Lauren Kyle, Roger Xu, Michelle Martinez, Mark Melnichuk, Timothy Melnichuk, Amalita Miranda, Amanda Mohamed, Justin Oh, Justin Picone

13.2

We as a human race have been conditioned to believe that we are always evolving and advancing with time. Surely, as a civilization, as the name suggests, civility should be evolving with us. Sadly, the reality is that we have not been evolving in the civil sense as we potentially be. In the world we live, it is much easier to define what is uncivil, but what is considered civil? How can we promote greater civil activity amongst the City of Toronto? Our intervention takes the most universal definition of civility, which can be seen as simply having a mutual respect towards others, and applies it to our site. Our project addresses the uniqueness of the area in and around the Main and Danforth intersection and is inclusive to all in the surrounding neighbourhoods. The design utilizes a sloping landscape to elevate and shelter community activity. The space offers several amenities to promote social interaction, blurring the boundaries between public and private in such a way that, the space is accessible to all.

77

78

Speaker's Corner
14.1
Hao Ming Ling, Sarah Lipsit, Luca Francesco Longo, Negar Pakan, Pritish Jayant Pathak, Aris Peci, Carmen Nieto, Ron Noble, Sehar Nahm Us Nusrat, Elijah Karlo Sabadlan, Sam Salari, Dustin Lee Sauder

We reclaim our site as a political space. The design intent is to transform this peripheral space from a memorial site into a critical place for social interaction, community engagement, and most importantly, political activism. Atop an elevated platform with the Ontario legislative building in the backdrop, one could hear a civil activist voicing their community's concerns, or see a musician perform for a small audience, while people sit and interact leisurely on the surrounding steps. Responding to the design of the new subway entrance to the south, we have reclad the subway exit and incorporated an extruded canopy that performs as a ribbon of information, current events, and breaking news. With a speakers' corner booth, the project invites students, researchers, politicians, health-care workers, and other passers-by to share their though-provoking views, which could be played on the ribbon, or live on-air. A streetcar shelter extends from the subway entrance, addressing the needs of transient users of this neighborhood such as cellphone chargers, way finding information board, water fountain, pay phone, and more. Perpendicular to this space are an air pump station, parking spaces and bixi bike rental station for commuter cyclists to use.

79

80

interACTIVE
Ben Luong, Adrian Man, Bill Macdonald, Pouya Pak, Annie Pavia, James Peirce, Alina Pisetskaya, Nazanin Pourali, James Saunders, Kelsey Saunders, Nick Schumacher

14.2

The development of the Queen's Park Station communicates an environment that has been adapted to incorporate and encourage interactive dialogue in this fast-paced community. The surrounding context is composed of medical, educational and municipal buildings. The site, adjacent to a major transportation hub, is enriched with a dynamic and interactive landscape, creating an array of activities while subtly mimicking the natural curvature and geometry of adjacent roadways and buildings. A variety of levels are generated to create an active space for the community and visitors alike to gather and converse, while being comforted and informed by the amenities provided. It is proposed that the Ontario Firefighter's Memorial in the centre of the existing site be relocated in order to create a space which is a hub of information, interaction and communication that engages in the city's context. In the context of the site, a variety of activities is proposed. Created as an interactive hub, an unofficial performance venue is created as the area is moulded to facilitate a variety of interactions among users. As a waiting area for the TTC, this hub remains the most primal uses of the site while the installation of information browsing and interactive technology constitute the site as interactive, with larger open spaces for dialogue to occur. The site remains accessible as an area of protest in the context of surrounding Parliament buildings, while also being an area of retreat from the bustling street life, a quiet interactive haven is created.

81

82

SHARD
15.1
Irina Solop, Taylor Slade, Michael Stock, Quincy Siu, Radomir Smiljanic, Kristen Smith, Tommy Surya, Emily Mutch, Jamie Tong, Jinsuk Oh, Nivin Nabeel

From a primary structure of curved, illuminated walls, additional public services are interlocked as units that are appropriate for the context of the development. Just as behaving in a civil manner often requires actions more varied than a minimal observance of social conventions, an architecture of civility must be capable of adapting to differing site, social and climatic conditions. In this sense, spaces previously appearing as voids in Toronto's architectural landscape become year round destinations.

83

84

Social Cycle
Lorraine Okungbowa, Kousha Omidi Sahneh, Oluwatoba Omisore, Zachary Topp, Nikolay Tikhovskiy, Kevin Bilics, Glrearda Sokoli, Krisev Stoja, Sahel Tahvildari, Jenna Tario, Marcus Song, Brodi Steinhoff

15.2

Our design promotes social interaction through the use of circulation and innovative structures. We initiated our design by identifying the important features on site, such as the existing circulation routes and mature vegetation. By analyzing the surrounding area we began to determine the site plan and program, such as greater circulation throughout the site itself as well as programming. In doing so, we will draw people into the space while creating various features and activities to maintain a vibrant atmosphere in the area that supports its adjacent neighborhood; more specifically Rosedale station, located to the east, and Ramsden Park, located to the west. Our social-cycle addresses the needs of the site while creating programming that can be used by all citizens. As well it establishes a design process that can apply to various sites across the city of Toronto. Our centre strives to use innovative methods that increase the self-sustainability of its built form. By taking advantage of the heat created through the sewage system beneath the site, geothermal techniques are used to decrease the amount of energy needed to warm the buildings. Using sloped roofs, rain collection will help supply water to the washrooms as well as the central fountain on site. Each year the city collects hundreds of bikes that have been abandoned in our streets and bring them to the works yard across from our site. We will help alleviate the scraps by re-using them for such features as benches and on site installations.

85

1. PUBLIC WASHROOMS 2. CLEANING FACILITY STORAGE 3. DOG WASHING STATION 4. WATER FOUNTAIN WITH CLOCK TOWER AND SURVEILLANCE 5. STORAGE LOCKERS WITH SURVEILLANCE 6. ATM MACHINE 7. VERTICAL BIKE RACKS & SURVEILLANCE 8. BIKE SERVICE STATION 9. HEATED/COOLED WAITING SHELTER 10. SEATING WITH CHARGING ARM RESTS 11. WIRELESS INTERACTIVE INFORMATION BULLETIN WITH WEATHER UPDATES 12. SITE IS A WIRELESS HOTSPOT 13. PAY PHONE 14. LITTER/RECYCLING RECEPTACLE

86

Modules of Cultural Connectivity
Margot De Man, Tiam Rahmani, Rabia Randhawa, Nineveh Rashidzadeh, Tarlan Vaziri Farahani, Sandra Wojtecki, Stephanie Wu, Zuji (Newton) Xian, Yi Fan (Helen) Xie, Anthony Youssef, Milad Zarpak

16.1

Our proposal responds to civility by advocating for the local community and its special attributes. In creating an environment that allows users to both interact and engage with the local community, we are looking to reinforce local identity as it is informed by the everyday users of the park. The park itself is intended to act as a forum for community engagement, where residents can socialize, meet, and get to know one another. When physical engagement is not possible, users are invited to engage with one other through a variety of interactive functions. These functions include a digital community forum, open art canvases for graffiti, semi-permanent pin-up spaces, and a community chalk board where issues can be discussed. Physically, the site accommodates these interactions by providing a variety of social environments within the park, such as casual bench seating to more isolated and centralized seating arrangements. Central to the idea of advocating for local community culture, the idea behind this proposal is one that considers the application of the modular design components at a larger urban scale. The modularity of the walls which define the interactive components of the site, and the forms that create the interior functions can be utilized in any community space. Together, these components dispersed throughout the City of Toronto would act to generate a culture separate from the commercially driven identity that currently exists in these areas.

87

88

Nexus
Steven De Boyrue, Jaiwook Lee, Alborz Razavitousi, Sylvia Rodas, Adam Rosenberg, Victoria Tsang, Ashley Vajda, Doan-Thy Vo, Linda Werab, Michael Yantzi, Michel Zaradic, Christopher Zhu

16.2

Nexus Park is adjacent to the Runnymede TTC station, located in the heart of the Bloor West Village. The site effectively acts as a connection to the fast paced city core. The design of the park is intended to act as a flexible and adaptable space within the city. As a family and commuter-oriented park, the redesigned space provides a calm and relaxing environment for those passing through it on a daily basis and those who choose to use the park as an extension of their own backyard. Three platform spaces dispersed throughout the park not only provide adequate seating for visitors, but also become adaptable for a greater range of uses, including social, performance and play areas for the surrounding neighbourhood. These platforms include interactive elements that allow for change over time to suit the needs of the individuals or groups of the community. The structure will act as a beacon within the community, supporting the needs of the many groups in the neighbourhood, which in turn promotes civility in the area and city. The architecture of Nexus Park embraces the diversity of the neighbourhood and city as a whole.

89

90

91

Acknowledgements
Event Photos
Scott Townsend Ryerson Today Pegah Rategh

pages: 4, 6, 9, 10, 13, 19, 20, 21, 22, 25, 90, 92 pages: 13, 15 pages: 3

Special Thanks
The project could not have been undertaken without the support and encouragement of Elyse Parker, Director, Public Realm Section, City of Toronto Transportation Services.

Master Students
A number of graduate students from the Department assisted with the development of the Collaborative Exercise and others participated as `Community Voices' and `Team Facilitators.' The following assumed leadership roles in the development of the Collaborative Exercise 2013: Lauren Boyer, M. Arch. 1, Project Coordinator David Campbell, M. Arch. 1, Research Team Leader Sebastian Lubczynski, M. Arch. 1, Logistics Team Leader Michael Rosada, M. Arch. 1, Facilitation Team Leader Scott Townsend, M. Arch. 1, Communications Team Leader Hannah Hyder, M. Arch. 1, Administration

92

93

afterword
An Architecture of Civility, A Commentary on Common Themes
George Thomas Kapelos, Instructor David Campbell, M. Arch. 1

Negotiating the concept of civility

While the underlying idea for the collaborative exercise was civility, it was left to participating students to decide how best to address this theme and, in turn, propose an appropriate design response. The students' approach was further complicated given the complexity of the idea of civility. Students were obliged to make physical, a complex and multi-faceted idea, and create an architectural response within a relatively short period of time. Consequently, students drew upon their own personal experiences to identify issues and apply these to the specific locales they were assigned in order to establish a position on the physical form their proposed intervention would take. Students drew upon a variety of sources of information, including their knowledge of the sites (all of which were in the City of Toronto at key transit interchanges), historical research, and their understanding of current issues at play in their assigned locale. Students also had to draw upon their individual skills at negotiation and management. With teams consisting of approximately fourteen students from all four years of the undergraduate program, team members were obliged to engage in debate and discourse in order to achieve consensus on the question of civility and to finalize their design. As a consequence, projects are speculative and represent each team's "best guess" as to how architecture may address the

abstract and complex theme of civility. Students did so, as expected, by drawing on traditional methods of architectural representation developed through model and sketch as well as plan, section, elevation and rendered drawing. In many cases, student work developed through narrative, by visualizing a day in the life of a typical citizen navigating through a proposed intervention. In addition, each group produced a description of the aims of each intervention synthesizing the team's opinions and positions regarding their definition of civility and its architectural form. Drawings of final schemes and project descriptions provided a means to understand the variety of approaches to the idea of an architecture of civility.
What then, is an architecture of civility?

After the conclusion of the exercise, we assessed the design outcomes from two perspectives. First, we analyzed each team's project description to identify common key-words that we believed established linkages and commonalities between ways in which students described how their architectural proposal addressed the idea of civility. We discovered that projects differed through the prioritization of various broad and abstract ideas expressed in words and concepts such as "interaction", "expression", "accessibility", "diversity", "integration", "enable", "opportunity", "safety", "inclusion" and "citizenship". While this approach may appear superficial and does not delve deeper into the project content, the repeated use of these words (and similar or synonymous terms) provides a means of understanding how students approached civility and entered into the question of creating an architecture that would be supportive of civility. Second, we examined the each team's design and the graphic and visual representation of the interventions proposed. We compared drawings with the team's description to address consistency between the final design and what had been

94

written as a statement of intent. In some cases, a team's graphic representation differed from what was described and, in a few cases, the designs appeared questionable in terms of how the key words of ambition were facilitated by the architecture itself. Such is often the case in group design with aspirations and outcomes not exactly aligning. Nevertheless, our analysis was thought provoking. The commonality of language and aspiration emphasizes the fact that many of the teams share the belief that architecture can facilitate civility, support a diversity of users, and offer opportunities for social interaction, especially where it is observed currently not to be present. Again, students' observations and innate responses rather than developed knowledge or findings following significant research, yielded many similar approaches regarding the idea civility within urban public space design. Students implicitly recognize that the physical environment, inclusive of architecture, infrastructure and context, can facilitate or impede civil behaviour. Most groups also observed that assigned sites ­ mostly at TTC interchanges ­ possessed a high degree of potential to support opportunities for social interaction and utility and thereby could participate in creating civil, public spaces and an architecture that would promote civility.
Civility ­ architecture as place-making and architecture as facilitator

local communities, users and citizens in order to democratize underused public space. The methods employed here emerged as "Architecture as a Facilitator of Social and Spatial Interaction through Technological Networking" and "Architecture as a Facilitator for the Expression of Collective Values of Civility". These approaches to an architecture of civility took many forms. Here are a few examples. Place-Making and Civil Architecture
Place making through the Creation and Revitalization of Nodes

Two distinct themes emerged and are presented here through a number of examples. Each thematic area was pursued following distinct methods, as follows. The first theme is premised on the idea of "place-making", and saw architecture as a tool for the reinvigoration of areas that were seen to be underutilized or lacking in potential. Within this theme, two methods emerged: "Place-Making through the Creation and Revitalization of Nodes" and "Place-Making through the Integration of Physical, Historical, and Cultural Ecologies". The second theme envisages architecture as facilitator of particular events and is centered in an understanding of civic actions that could be taken by

The theme of "Place-Making through the Creation and Revitalization of Nodes" sought to renew and regenerate underutilized urban spaces through the creation of a focal point or the design of a singular element. This approach often produced complex programmatic developments contained within a determinate building envelope, as in the case of the HUB: Holistic Urban Bean for Bloor Bedford Park (Project 3.1). The HUB produced an elevated lookout and open seating area on the second level deck of an enclosed service building housing washrooms and water filling stations. Proposals such as the HUB negotiated the difficulties between a group's position to create a singular, enclosed structure that could be secured, while providing a common area that can be accessed during all times of day. Here, civility is addressed in a dual manner through the provision of urban common spaces for social interaction, which is seen to be absent from the area, and through a reading of the site, where the program draws upon the differing and disparate elements surrounding the site for program activity. Conceptually, teams understood the opportunities that arose given adjacencies of different elements with high social value to create a new, lively urban condition. The reading of architecture to act as a social node draws on the idea of architecture's creation of places of refuge. Such places with their enclosed nature, can provide places seen to be safe and secure. These designs draw upon principles defensible space

95

and the use of sight lines, visibility from the street, appropriate lighting and the elimination of hiding spaces. Those projects that pursued this principle, to engage programmatic inclusivity in order to render spaces accessible to the widest variety of users possible. Employing materiality based on a literal understanding of transparency in public space as a means to facilitate "eyes on the street", Civic Intermission (Project 3.2), also located in the Bloor, Bedford Park neighbourhood, sought to harmonize the needs of a multitude of user types.
Place-Making through the Integration of Physical, Historical, and Cultural Ecologies

Distribution of programmatic elements is seen here to be of greater value to facilitating urban growth than the locating of a singular structure to encapsulate all of the required program. In general, such projects address civility through discussions of a collective attitude that promotes the idea that underutilized urban space has the potential for fostering civic value through revitalization. In addition, these projects tend to deal less with social interaction and instead seek to address the shaping of the urban environment through development and growth. Architecture as a Facilitator
Social and Spatial Interaction through Technological Networking

The theme of "Place-Making through the Integration of Physical, Historical, and Cultural Ecologies", emphasizes the notion of manmade and natural urban systems. Projects are envisioned as operating within an urban eco-system that utilizes physical, historical and cultural factors as organizational elements and serve as frameworks for future development for interventions that are capable of continual growth and change. Projects in this category such as the Green Line (Project 5.1), Open House (Project 5.2) and Community Node (Project 2.2) make explicit references to landscape in an infrastructural sense as the basis for urban revitalization. In the case of the Green Line, the historic clearing of housing along the Bloor Danforth subway line through open-cut trenching, serves as a generative principle that makes way for the group's programmatic intervention. Currently occupied by parking lots, the team takes the position that, over time, alternative forms of transportation will incrementally overtake the car as the primary mode of transportation in the immediate area. Utilizing a grid based on parking space dimensions, the historic use of the automobile becomes imprinted on the site's growth plan, with modules now containing "green" program such as sources for biofuels, naturalized park spaces, bicycle racks and recycling receptacles. In this case, civility is therefore grounded in an opinion regarding responsible urban development.

While all projects dealt in some way with facilitating social interaction, several projects engaged this question through the adoption of communicative digital technologies. While sharing similarities with projects focusing on place making, projects highlighted here embraced the social value of technology as a tool for civility. In particular, a number of projects promoted the technological accessibility as a means to democratize information thereby facilitating communication between diverse groups of users. In these cases, architecture as a facilitator is seen to be representative of the role the built environment may play in facilitating communication. As opposed to those projects focusing on place-making, technologically driven projects emphasize the value of new forms of media for social interaction. Several projects demonstrate this approach through the use of interactive wall systems that provide information in a variety of ways ­ tracking and displaying information regarding human usage on site or providing access to technology "as a public service" and serving as a communication node for users. As an example, Transit Commons (Project 4.1) integrates the digital realm within the context of Broadview TTC station, a transportation access point and interchange along the BloorDanforth subway line. This project consists of two components,

96

a distributed arrangement of public installations including information boards and public seating, as well as a singular, multipurpose pavilion that incorporates secured programming. The pavilion doubles as a digital signboard that tracks usage statistics and is primarily related to navigating Toronto's public transportation system. Civic Intermission (Project 3.2), envisions architecture as a digital canvas that is able to present a multitude of information to various users and provides a central focus point that tracks and projects site data and usage statistics such as weather, time, navigation tools, and even energy consumption. Here, the primarily architectural element is the digital, informational screen that serves as the building skin and, in doing so, a singular technological element becomes the focus of an urban enclave. Expression of Collective Values of Civility A number of projects present specific positions addressing how civility can provide opportunities for individual, human expression. Many projects such as Tdot Talks (Project 9.2) and Speaker's Corner (Project 14.1) seek to create self-proclaimed "political" spaces. Both develop from the idea of a "soap box" providing a place and means for groups or individuals to express thoughts and concerns about issues of the day. In these cases the architecture that results is dematerialized, simply providing a place which individuals can record their message. Projects of this type do not rely upon the technological enhancement of a site. Rather, they rely upon the potential of a site to provide a place to for public speaking and discourse, which envisages architectural civility as engagement in the idea of a shared social life. These projects are therefore premised on the expression of a multitude rather than any one singular voice. rRampitheater (Project 4.2), presents an alternative means of engaging with the same idea. In this case, the response is based on the architectural and physical articulation of the intervention and its massing. As the project's name suggests, rRampitheater consists of a sloped surface for seating and having at its apex

a stage for cultural and political expression. Similarly, in the case of Play, (Project 7.1) the project promotes civil expression through the integration of modules conducive to "actions" such as learning, eating, climbing, recreation, singing and relaxing. In this way, Play addresses civility through an understanding of freedom of the free usage of urban space. Civility in both cases is therefore seen as a process in which individuals and communities can express themselves and share ideas as they see fit. Architecture that results is based on ephemeral and abstract ideas of human interaction within areas that are deemed to be social spaces.

97

98

CEx1 3
George Thomas Kapelos, editor © 2017

An Architecture of Civility
A record of student design outcomes of the 2013 Collaborative Exercise held at the Department of Architectural Science, Ryerson University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, January 2013.

