Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2007

Modeling and simulation for a PEM fuel cell with catalyst layers in finite thickness
Jianghui Yin
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Mechanical Engineering Commons Recommended Citation
Yin, Jianghui, "Modeling and simulation for a PEM fuel cell with catalyst layers in finite thickness" (2007). Theses and dissertations. Paper 164.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

MODELING AND SIMULATION FOR A PEM FUEL CELL WITH CATALYST LAYERS IN FINITE THICKNESS

by
Jianghui Yin B.Eng., Nanjiang University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China, 1991

A Thesis presented to Ryerson University

in partially fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master ofApplied Science in Mechanical Engineering

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2007 ©Jianghui Yin, 2007

RYERSON UI~I\lffi.SiTY LlBRARV

PROPERTY OF

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

ii

Ryerson University requires the signatures of all persons using or photocopying this thesis. Please sign below, and give address and date.

iii

Modeling and Simulation for a PEM Fuel Cell with Catalyst Layers in Finite Thickness

A thesis for the degree of Master of Applied Science, 2007 by JianghuiYm Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering Ryerson University

Abstract
A detailed non-isothennal computational fluid dynamics (CFD) model for proton electrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel cells is developed in this thesis. This model consists of the equations of continuity, momentum, energy, species concentrations, and electric potentials in different regions of a PEM fuel cell. In particular, the fairly thin catalyst layers of the fuel cell are assigned a finite thickness instead of being treated as nil thickness interfaces in other PEM fuel cell models. Various source/sink tenns are presented to associate the conservation equations with the electrochemical reaction kinetics. The water balance in the membrane is modeled by coupling diffusion of water, pressure variation, and the electro-osmotic drag. The membrane swelling effect is explicitly considered the newly derived model, leading to a set of novel water and proton transport equations for a membrane under the partial hydration condition. The electron transport in the catalyst layers, gas diffusion layers and bipolar plates are also described. The PEM fuel cell model developed has been implemented into a commercial CFD software package for simulating various flow and transport phenomena arising in operational PEM fuel cells, analyzing the impact of design and operating parameters on the cell performance, and optimizing the PEM fuel cell design.

iv

Acknowledgements

The computational model presented in this thesis is based mainly on Dr. Jun Cao's previous work. I am very grateful to Dr. Jun Cao for giving me the opportunity to work on such an exciting project and for his constant encouragement and valuable guidance throughout this study. This work is funded by the National Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada.

v


