Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2007

An overview of passive optical networks and components
Kanchan Bala
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Electrical and Computer Engineering Commons Recommended Citation
Bala, Kanchan, "An overview of passive optical networks and components" (2007). Theses and dissertations. Paper 160.

This Thesis Project is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

AN OVERVIEW OF PASSIVE OPTICAL NETWORKS AND COMPONENTS
by

Kanchan Bala

A Project presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirement for the degree of Master of Engineering in the Program of Electrical and Computer Engineering. Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2007 © Kanchan Bala, 2007

PROPERTY OF
RYEROO!~ ~Wf-.rt aeRARV

Author's Declaration
I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this report. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this report to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Signature

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this report by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Signature

11

Instructions on Borrowers
Ryerson University requires the signatures of all persons using or photocopying this report. Please sign below, and give address and date.

III

Abstract
An Overview of Passive Optical Networks and Components ©Kanchan Bala, 2007 Master of Engineering Electrical and Computer Engineering Ryerson University

Over the past few years, telecommunication networks have experienced a dramatic shift from traditional voice-dominated traffic to data-oriented, application-based traffic. The access network or the last-mile connecting households or businesses to the internet backbone,have been recognized as a major bottleneck in todays network hierarchy. The ongoing demand for new access networks that support high-speed (greater than 100 Mb/s), symmetric, and guaranteed bandwidths for future video services has been accelerated and the search for a cost-effective optical access solution has yielded a number of possible solutions. To satisfy the required bandwidth over a 20-km transmission distance, single-mode optical fiber is a natural choice. Passive Optical Networks(PONs) are promising access solutions that will open the last-mile bottleneck bringing data rates of 100 Mb/s to 1 Gb/s to the end-users. The goal of this work is to provide a cohesive overview of research done in the area of Fiber In The Loop (FITL) optical access technology. Specifically, it explores the area of Passive Optical Network (PON) : its history, variants, architecture, and standards. Various passive optical components which make a passive optical network work, are also discussed. Some laboratory emulations on RF over PON showing noise, distortion, and fading in the channels are then carried on using the Vector Signal Generator SMIQ03B (Rohde & Schwarz), and the Wireless Communication Analyzer WCA380 (SONY Tektronix).

lV

Acknowledgments
My sincere thanks to my supervisor Dr.Xavier N. Fernando without whose support and guidance this research would not have been possible. I would also like to thank him for advising me on the right curriculum during the course of my studies at Ryerson University. I would like to thank Dr. Vadim Geurkov greatly for agreeing to become my examiner and reviewing my work on a short notice. I like to thank him for his time and energy. I would also like to acknowledge the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the School of Graduate Studies at Ryerson University for their help and support throughout my term at Ryerson University. I feel lucky to be a part of the WINCORE Lab and lowe a great deal to all my fellow students in the Lab for creating a pleasant and friendly work environment and for helping me in every possible way they could. I am thankful again to Dr. Fernando for providing me with a healthy work-space. Finally, I am thankful to my husband Atri for his boundless love, constant encouragement and immense belief in me.

v

