DEVELOPING A PRESCHOOL AND PARENT PROGRAM IN A RUAL CAMBODIAN VILLAGE: THE PERSPECTIVES OF PARENTS

by
Melissa Ganhao B.A., Ryerson University, Toronto, ON, 2008 A Major Research Paper Presented to Ryerson University In partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of

Master of Arts In the Program of Early Childhood Studies

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009

Е Melissa Ganhao 2009

PHOPERlYOF

kVERSON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

Author's Declaration I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this major research paper. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this major research paper to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorIze Ryerson university to reproduce this major research paper by photocopying
or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research .

ii

DEVELOPING A PRESCHOOL AND PARENT PROGRAM IN A RUAL CAMBODIAN VILLAGE: THE PERSPECTIVES OF PARENTS Е Melissa Ganhao 2009 Master of Arts Early Childhood Studies Ryerson University Abstract Educational programs are more likely to be successful when practitioners and parents have a shared vision of goals and expectations for the program, as parents are said to be part of a complex environment that influence the goals, concerns, and expectations they have for their children and their children's educational experiences. This study of parents' perspectives of educational programs was conducted in a rural Cambodian village with the support of a local non-government organization (NGO); an organization that is in the midst of developing preschool and parent programs for the children and families who live in the village. Interviews were conducted with parents to understand parents' goals for their children's future, and their goals for the preschool and parent programs. The study was conducted by utilizing Bronfenbrenner's ecological framework and was informed by the principles of Community Based Research. The study found that parents value education and hope that their children's educational attainment will lead to a favourable career path, that parents want access to preschool and parent programs, and are willing to support the programs through donations of time, money, or food. Parent support through donations indicates parents' willingness to engage with projects, an important aspect of sustainable development.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I would like to express my gratitude to the families of the village, their cooperation and insight made this study possible. I must thank RVD for providing the opportunity and support necessary to complete this study. I would also like to thank my research supervisor, Dr. Aurelia Di Santo, who provided me the guidance, knowledge, and encouragement necessary to complete this study. Lastly, I want to thank my family and friends. It was their support and encouragement that helped me persevere through the challenging moments.

I

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS Abstract ....................................................................................................................................... iii Acknowledgements ..................................................................................................................... .iv List of Tables ................................................................................................................................ v List of Appendices .................................................................................................................... viii Introduction ................................................................................................................................... 1 Literature Review ......................................................................................................................... 3 Introduction ....................................................................................................................... 3 Integrated ECD Programs ................................................................................................ 4 Collaborative Partnerships within the Community ........................................................... 7 Parent Involvement ........................................................................................................... 9 Conclusion ...................................................................................................................... 13 Research Questions ......................................................................................................... 14 Methodology ............................................................................................................................... 15 Introduction ............................ ,........................................................................................ 15 Cambodian Context ........................................................................................................ 15 Non-Government Organization Context.. ....................................................................... 16 Community Based Research Design ............................................................................... 16 Participant Recruitment .................................................................................................. 19 Participants ...................................................................................................................... 20 Data Analysis .................................................................................................................. 22 Findings and Discussion ............................................................................................................. 25 Parents' Goals and Concerns for their Children ............................................................. 25 Parents' Goals for Children's Preschool Experiences .................................................... 28 Parents' Goals for the Parent Program ........................................................................... 30
v

Parents' Strategies to Support Children's Learning ....................................................... 32 Conclusion ...................................................................................................................... 34 Implications for Practice ....................................................... ииии ...... и........................................... 35 Limitations .................................................................................................................................. 38 Conclusion .................................................................................................................................. 39 References ................................................................................................................................... 40 Appendix A ................................................................................................................................. 44 Appendix B ................................................................................................................................. 45

vi

List of Tables Table 1. First and second stage of codes .................................................................................... 23

vii

List of Appendices Appendix A: Interview Questions .............................................................................................. 44 Appendix B: Consent Form ........................................................................................................ 45

.,

.

viii

Introduction Early childhood development (ECD) has been recognized by international development organizations for its important role in supporting the holistic development of children and families who live in Majority world countries. Majority world countries are typically referred to as 'developing nations' or the 'global south' because the majority of the human population lives in these countries (Hartley & Muhit, 2003). In Majority world countries, more than 10 million children under the age of five die from preventable disease, 600 million live in poverty, and more than 100 million, mostly girls, are not in school (United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund [UNICEF], 2002). In an effort to improve the circumstances many children are living in, international development organizations promote and support ECD through various campaigns, projects, policy development, funding, and research. The United Nations (UN) plays a key role in ECD. For example, the UN's Convention on the Rights of the Child protects children's right to have their basic needs met, which includes the right to education as well as the right to life, the right to good quality health care and so forth (UNICEF, 2008). Additionally, expanding early childhood education and care for young children is the first goal of Education for All (EF A). EF A is an initiative of the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization's (UNESCO) and is implemented collaboratively by UNESCO, government bodies, and non-government organizations in many Majority world countries (UNESCO, 2009). Finally, the UN's Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) are eight goals aimed to be achieved by 2015. The second MDG is to achieve universal access to primary education for all children. The MDGs are implemented through an integrated approach to tackle the multifaceted nature of issues facing Majority world countries (United Nations Development Programme [UNDP], 2008). International development organizations

1

clearly support the education of young children as an important factor to achieving better outcomes for children and families who live in Majority world countries. What makes for a high quality ECD program? There is an abundance ofliterature that demonstrates ECD programs are more successful when there is a consensus of goals between parents and educators, administrators, and policy makers (Achhpal, Goldman & Rohner, 2007). ECD programs that are launched from international development organizations should reflect the goals of parents in local communities. Parents are part of a complex environment, influenced by culture, economic, political, and historical factors. All these factors influence parents' goals for their children (Achhpal, Goldman & Rohner, 2007). As well, differences exist across cultures and more specifically, across families. These factors highlight a need to consult parents living in participating communities and involve parents in the planning stages of programs. Utilizing principles of community based research and working from an ecological framework, this study explores the perspectives of parents who live in a rural Cambodian village and who currently do not have access to any preschool or parent programs. The NGO that works in the village is building a preschool program and parent program for the families of the village. Taking into consideration that these programs will be shaped by the parents' expectations, this study will aim to answer the following research questions: 1) What goals do parents living in a rural Cambodian village have for their children's future? 2) What are parents' goals for their children's preschool program? 3) What are parents' goals for the parent program? Implications for practice will be made based on the study's findings.

::

2

Literature Review Introduction Every child has the right to have their physical, social, emotional, and cognitive development protected and supported. Yet a high number of children around the world are suffering from deficits in their development that stem from poor maternal health, malnourishment, and poor social and emotional stimulation (The World Bank, 2004). Viewing Majority world children from an ecological perspective highlights the complex and interrelated environmental factors that impact the individual child. Bronfenbrenner's Ecological System Theory views the child within the context of the system of relationships that form his or her environment (Gordan, 2000). It is most fitting to explore this study through this ecological model because it depicts the range of influential factors found in the child's environment such as e.g., cultural, historical, political, sociological, psychological, pedagogical and physical, all impacting the child (Haddad, 2002). Bronfenbrenner identifies five socially organized systems of environment which each impact the child (Bronfenbrenner, 1979): и и Microsystem- activities, relationships and roles present in the immediate setting Mesosystem- the linkages and processes taking place between two or more settings containing the developing child и Exosystem- comprises the relationships taking place between two or more structures which does not necessarily include the developing child, but does indirectly influence the immediate setting in which the child lives и Macrosystem- the broad, political, economic, societal and cultural forces that impact the micro, meso, and exo indirectly influencing the child

3

и

Chronosystem- The patterning of environmental events and transitions over the course of life In Majority world countries, there are arrays of environmental factors that can negatively

impact children's development. The literature on ECD programs advocates for integrated and holistic ECD programs in Majority world settings to break down barriers to accessing education and to promote children's optimal development. Holistic ECD programs work towards meeting the holistic needs of children. Meeting children's holistic needs can be accomplished through integrated ECD programs that build a synergy of people through collaboration with various professionals and services such as health, nutrition and education (Haddad, 2002). This is an approach to ECD that reflects the African proverb, "It takes a village to raise a child." Integrated and holistic ECD programs are to be developed through collaboration and participation with professionals. This literature review will explore, from an ecological perspective, important aspects of integrated, holistic ECD programs for children and families who live in Majority world countries.
Integrated ECD Programs

i

In the past 10 years, Cambodia has made significant improvements protecting and supporting children's right to life and education (UNICEF, 2009). However, recent national health surveys, which include the major indicators of child development e.g., maternal mortality rates, birth rate, immunization, nutrition level, and basic education, indicate that Cambodia still has much work to do to improve children's outcomes. The wide-ranging problems faced by Cambodian children, and many other children who live in Majority world countries, can negatively impact child development, school attendance, and chances of completing primary education (Education for All, 2006). Environmental, cultural, and social factors such as gender
4

inequality, poor health care services, limited social services, and poor water sanitation can further compound these barriers to education and have harmful effects on child development (The World Bank, 2004). An ecological view highlights the harmful factors in the child's environment and draws attention to the need for a wider range of services. Integrated ECD programs can meet children's holistic developmental needs and work towards breaking down the barriers children face in accessing education. A case study conducted by The World Food Programme (WFP) in Lao Peoples Democratic Republic (PDR) demonstrates that integrated services can positively impact attendance and school enrollment rates. In 2005, the WFP worked in collaboration with Access to Basic Education in Laos (ABEL) and UNICEF to improve access and quality of education in primary schools in rural villages of Lao P.D.R. Preliminary research was conducted in the villages and results showed that education was a low priority for families. It was common for girls to drop out of school in grade one or two (WFP, 2009). In Laos, there were 125,000 children who did not attend school, and only 62 % of children completed primary school (WFP, 2009). WFP, ABEL, and UNICEF transformed primary schools into integrated, holistic programs by implementing a comprehensive, integrated package of services to children who were enrolled in school. The integrated package included a meal program, improved water and sanitation facilities, and a health program. In addition, WFP provided family size food rations for children to take home to their families, which included canned fish, rice, and iodized salt. The family rations were provided to meet the family's nutritional needs, but also to be an incentive for children to attend school. Incentives to attend school are important in a village where education is a low priority for families and the rural setting means some children travel many miles to access school. In 2008, after implementing the integrated package of services,

5

enrollment rates improved. The percentage of boys enrolled in school increased from 60 % to 80% and girl's enrollment increased from 53 % to 84 % (WFP, 2009). An ecological perspective draws attention to many possible factors in the environment influencing the child's access to education, health, and development. While malnourishment had a clear impact on children's ability to learn and attend school, in this village, access to education also played a role. Recognizing possible factors in the environment enabled the WFP, ABEL, and UNICEF to plan and provide appropriate interventions. When examining child development and ECD programs from an ecological perspective, the need for integrated services is evident. There are mutually influencing factors in a child's environment, all which impact her or his overall development, school attendance, and ability to learn (Education for All, 2006). A holistic program provides all the" ... supports children need to survive and thrive in life" (Coordinators' Notebook, 2007). To address a child's holistic needs, ECD programs must include an integration of services that provide food, protection, and health care, in addition to affection, intellectual stimulation, supportive human interactions, and opportunities and activities that promote learning (Haddad, 2002).The traditional sectoralspecific approach can lead to an overlap of services and disregards the interdependence of health, nutrition and education outcomes (The World Bank 2004; Haddad 2002). For example, Integrated Child Development Services (lCDS) has been working in India for almost 30 years to
1

,и

improve the health, nutrition, and development of children, and has yet to reduce child malnutrition or ensure quality preschool education (The World Bank, 2004). While ICDS does provide six services for children from birth to age six (supplementary nutrition, immunization, health check-ups, referral services, preschool education, nutrition and health), services are implemented separately and offered by one staff and an assistant. An integrated program must

6

plan for the whole child. The process of planning, implementing, and monitoring programs should be offered in a coordinated, coherent, and complementary manner (The World Bank, 2004).
Collaborative Partnerships within the Community

To establish an integrated and holistic ECD program, collaboration should not stop at the professional level. Collaboration with professionals and a wider range of services is one aspect, but collaboration must include the community. Increasingly, ECD programs are being developed through collaborative partnerships between professionals, community leaders and members, elders, parents, and children. The bottom up approach achieved through participation and collaboration with community members ensures programs are culturally relevant and community focused (Ball, Brenner & Pence, 2002). Collaboration between ECD professionals and community members, related professionals, elders, and families can shed light on the social, economic, spiritual, political, cultural and historical factors that influence the lives of families and children living in the community (Ball & Pence, 1999). Overarching themes of community focused and culturally relevant programs are: (i) assigned priority to goals and resources identified by the community, (ii) reinforcement and encouragement of community initiative and involvement, and (iii) the incorporation oftraditional and contemporary cultural knowledge and values (Ball & Pence, 1999). Collaboration and participation of the community with projects and programs supports the development of community engagement and ownership and strengthens programs from the synergy created within the community. Participatory methods and collaborative partnerships is not a step that can be added. In order for programs to truly engage the community, policies, programs, and practices should be developed within the cultural context of the community (Gordan, 2000).
7

The community schools project that took place in Egypt is an exemplary project that was developed with support of the community members. In the 1990s, the primary education in the rural villages of Upper Egypt was poor in quality and access was limited. School enrollment rates were below the national average, especially for girls (Zaalouk, 1995). In some areas of Upper Egypt, there was no access to school. Improving access and quality of education was a critical challenge for Egypt (Zaalouk, 2005). An agreement between UNICEF and the Egyptian Ministry of Education was made to work together towards achieving quality education through community participation (Zaalouk, 1995). The first initiative of the community schools project was setting up the schools, the planning and development of the project was conducted with support and input from community members. The community participated in the planning and managing ofthe school (Zaalouk, 1995). Partnerships were established with local women who were trained and hired to work as classroom teachers. The project was successful on many levels. The children from the community schools passed their first grade district fonnal exams with a 100 % success rate (Zaalouk, 1995). In the second year of the project, adult literacy classes were offered and led by trained local women. At the completion of the study, the parent education classes had reached 1,580 adult learners (Zaalouk, 2005). Health posts were planned to be built with support of the health sector and UNICEF in at least ten of the schools (Zaalouk, 2005). At one community school, a bio-gas plant was built through community participation. At another community school, a school committee member built a grocery store ahd donated 15 % ofthe earnings to the maintenance of the community school (Zaalouk, 2005). It was this sense of shared ownership and participation that triggered creativity and initiative in community members (Zaalouk, 2005). The community school was an entry point for other community projects; the school became a means for development and change (Zaalouk, 1995).

,

8

In addition, the Ministry of Education hired and trained the women from the community to be teachers, and this approach led to great outcomes for the development of the community. Hiring and training local women supported the battle against gender inequality. An example of this occurred in a particular district known for exclusionary practices of women (Zaalouk, 1995). The process of recruiting and training women was met with some obstacles. For example a young man was taken back by the idea of an educated wife, and believed it would only create problems because she would ask too many questions (Zaalouk, 1995). Regardless, the community schools have attracted females of all ages; girls participate in school and women attend literacy classes, work as classroom teachers, and participate in the school committee. The school committee is open to all community members. Members of the school committee make important decisions about the school, the number of children enrolled, hours of operation, and participate in the hiring of teachers (Zaalouk, 1995). The community school project demonstrates many elements of a successful community project, including promotion of gender equality, empowerment, self-worth and a value for participation.

Parental Involvement
Of all the collaborative partnerships developed within the community, the partnership between professionals working in the ECD programs and the parents is very important. Strong and equitable partnerships between parents and ECD professionals can be empowering and help parents establish networks of support, all while strengthening the ECD program and the parentchild relationship. Researchers in both the Majority and Minority world consistently find that children benefit when parents are involved in their education. This is demonstrated by improved attendance, reduced grade retention, fewer discipline reports, and improved grades in reading and math (Ferrara & Ferrara, 2005). Parent involvement ranges from parent education classes,
9

parenting workshops, home-visits, parent support, and parent professional partnerships. For parent involvement to be successful, the role or activity taken on by parents should be meaningful and allow parents to participate in decision making that effects systems, policies, programs or practices (Berman, Silver & Wilson, 2004). Furthermore, holistic ECD programs should work toward establishing family involvement by moving beyond simply parent involvement. Involving families in the program means welcoming any person who has a significant role in the child's life. Family involvement in ECD programs allows the positive effects to reach the entire family and not just the child enrolled in the program (UNESCO, 2005). Increasingly, grandparents have had important roles in Majority world ECD programs, and are known to enrich programs by sharing knowledge that is socially and culturally relevant to children (Ball & Pence, 1999). Case Des Tout-Petits, an ECD program in Senegal, included parents and grandparents in their program and found that parents and grandparents strengthen the ECD program (Soudee, 2009). Parents and grandparents ensured teaching practices were culturally appropriate and relevant. Also, the grandparents were the leaders of story time and shared oral stories with the children, which helped enrich the program (Soudee, 2009). Ensuring ECD programs are culturally appropriate and relevant is especially important in Majority world countries where ECD programs are often initiated and sponsored by international development organizations. International development organizations have been criticized for taking what is referred to as a 'blue print approach' and overlooking the individual differences of local communities (Albion, 1999; Cabral, Farrington & Ludi, 2006; Pence, 1999). There are differences in parents' goals for children, childrearing practices, and beliefs of child development. Therefore, a 'blue print approach' is problematic because this approach overlooks

10

the context and culturally specific goals parents have for their children and the program (Albion, 1999).
It is the cultural community, made up of parents, extended family and community

members that share the values and traditions of a culture. Within this culture, parents have created their own beliefs and traditions in regards to what constitutes proper care for their children. Evans and Myers (1994) describe the childrearing practices of a culture as "childrearing norms" (p.6). Examples of a culture's childrearing norms include perceptions of infants, expectations of children's milestones, how long children should be breast fed, what children should eat, and sleep arrangements (Albion, 1999). The differences of childrearing practices across cultures mean differences in parents' beliefs, values, expectations, and goals for their children. Bronfenbrenner's ecological model not only highlights culture as an impacting factor on parents' perceptions and expectation for children, his model also draws attention to the social, economic, political, and historical factors that influence the goals parents have for their children (Achhpal, Goldman & Rohner, 2007). In addition, Maslow's hierarchy of needs explains how environmental factors can influence parents' goals for their children. Maslow's theory states that people are driven by sets of needs; the primary set of needs are referred to as physiological needs, which include breathing, food, and water, and these needs must be satisfied before people can focus on achieving more abstract needs, such as the need to belong and the need for self-esteem (Schweitzer & Wood, 2006). Families in disadvantaged economic situations experience difficulties meeting their basic primary needs, and these difficulties influence the goals parents have for their children, demonstrating how factors such as poverty can influence the goals parents have for their children.

11

A study conducted by AchhpaI, Goldman, and Rohner (2007) examined the similarities and differences that exist between Puerto Rican and European American parents regarding their goals and expectations for their children's preschool and social experiences. All sixty parents were participants of a Head Start program, thirty parents were Puerto Rican and thirty parents were European American. Participants were similar on most demographic characteristics, including age, marital status, educational level, and average number of children (Achhpal, Goldman & Rohner, 2007). To indentify the similarities and differences of parent goals and expectations for their children's preschool experiences, qualitative interviews were conducted. Parents were asked to rank the five most important qualities or personality traits they would like their child to have. Both the European American and Puerto Rican parents rated prosocial skills as the most important, and good behaviour as the second most important (Achhpal, Goldman & Rohner, 2007). Responses differed for the third, forth, and fifth most important quality or personality trait. The European American parents valued integrity, affective skills, and autonomy while the Puerto Rican parents' valued educational attainment, success, and hope that their children will be family orientated (Achhpal, Goldman & Rohner, 2007). Interestingly, educational attainment, being successful, and valuing family are common goals of parents who are part of a collectivist culture, similar to the Puerto Rican culture. Educational attainment is associated with gaining skills that may lead to children's economic and future success (Zayas & Solari, 1994). The findings suggest that in order for ECD programs to attain full benefits, it is important that educators and policy makers recognize and respond to differences in parents' goals and expectations (Achhpal, Goldman & Rohner, 2007). Programs created within the cultural context of the participating communities stand a greater chance at offering educational experiences that reflect parent goals. For example, the

12

Roving Caregiver Program (RCP) is a home-based program aimed for young Caribbean children who are at risk for academic and social delays caused from living in poverty (Roopnarine & Hossain, 2004). The RCP is grounded in culturally relevant theoretical principles and takes into consideration the diversity of families. Also, RCP trains local members of the community, referred to as rovers, to work with parents and young children in their homes. Hiring paraprofessionals from the parents' cultural community is beneficial because they possess knowledge that is culturally relevant to families, and are more likely to understand the child rearing norms of that particular culture (Ball & Pence, 1999). The rover conducts 30 to 60 minute home-visits every week, implementing and modeling a routine of stimulation exercises designed to strengthen parent-child attachment bonds, build good parenting skills, and support cognitive and social development in children (Roopnarine & Hossain, 2004). Each session also includes an opportunity to discuss parental beliefs and practices of childrearing. The children who participated in RCP were assessed prior to entering school and compared with children who did not participate in RCP, and results show that the children participating in the RCP program had higher cognitive functioning skills (Roopnarine & Hossain, 2004).
Conclusion

This literature review examined how holistic and integrated ECD programs can break down barriers to accessing education, and better meet the needs of children and families living in Majority world settings. In a holistic and integrated approach to ECD programs, educators work in collaboration with related professionals, elders, important community members, and families. Integrated and holistic ECD programs are strengthen from the synergy created within the community. Community engagement with projects through collaborative partnerships ensures

13

programs are culturally relevant and community focused and can result in positive outcomes for the children, families, programs and community (Ball, Brenner & Pence, 2002).
Research Questions

RVD is in the planning stages of building a preschool program and parent program, and wants to include parents in the planning of the programs. Therefore, this study aims to address the following research questions: 1) What goals do parents living in a rural Cambodian village have for their children's future? Do they have concerns about acquiring those goals? What are those concerns? 2) What are parents' goals for their children's the preschool program? 3) What are parents' goals for the parent program?

14

Methodology
Introduction

This study explored the perspectives of parents living in a rural Cambodian village, who do not have access to preschool or parent programs. Parents shared their goals and concerns for their children's future. In addition, parents shared their expectations for the preschool and parent programs being planned by RVD. This study was informed by community based research (CBR) principles. In CBR, the power of the researcher and the potential to oppress and exploit local people is recognized and steps are taken to minimize this possibility (Ball, 2005). Researchers should be flexible, able to negotiate research relationships, and support community involvement during the research process. Therefore, the current study was designed and implemented with support from RVD's education team. Negotiation and flexibility were necessary to ensure suggestions provided by the education team were incorporated in the design of the study.
Cambodian Context

The study was conducted in a rural post-conflict Majority world village. Cambodia is a post-conflict country that has been conflict free since 1997. Currently government, nongovernment and international efforts are working towards rebuilding the country (Chhay & Pearson, 2006). Between 1975 and 1979, communist party Khmer Rouge seized power and took the lives of two million people. Khmer Rouge envisioned a society where all of Cambodia would live like the rural people, free of institutions, education, social services and religion. During this time, temples, schools, and hospitals were bombed. The North Western rural jungle villages suffered the most (Chhay & Pearson, 2006). These villages have recently celebrated 10 years of peace; however, the scars left from Khmer Rouge remain and are impossible to dismiss. These

15

villages are healing from the atrocities committed against them; poverty, malaria and landmines are some of the daily issues faced in the life of a Cambodian villager (Chhay & Pearson, 2006).
Non-Government Organization Context

The researcher completed a three month internship at RVO. RVD is an NOO that works in the North Western rural villages of Cambodia. RVD's work is guided by the MOOs and takes an integrated approach to rural development (UNOP, 2008). RVO initiates various agriculture, education, health, and rural development projects. One of the current projects is creating a preschool program for young children from birth to age six and a parent program for the families ofthe children attending the preschool program. Preliminary research, necessary to help establish the preschool and parent program was conducted during the three month internship.
Community Based Research Design

The research study was designed through collaborative partnerships with RVO's education team. The education team was comprised of the director and the coordinator of the education department. Both of the employees are males who have graduated from a university in Cambodia and have experience in the field of education and development work. Through a collaborative partnership with the education team the research study was designed. R VO employees shared their expertise of Cambodian culture to ensure the research was conducted in a culturally appropriate manner. Originally, the plan was to conduct several focus groups in hopes of reaching a higher number of participants. However, the director of education shared that Cambodian people value privacy and tend to be quieter in group settings. In addition, the education team explained that people living in the village possess varying levels ofliteracy. Therefore, it was decided that conducting interviews was the most appropriate method of
1

16

inquiry. To fulfill both RDV's and the researcher's purposes, the interview included a range of open-ended and structured questions (see Appendix A for questions). The interview guide consisted of eight questions. Each of the open-ended and semi-structured questions included several probes (i.e., Where do your children usually spend their day? What activities do your children participate in? Who takes care of your children?). The education team did not understand the need to obtain signed consent from the participants. The collaborative process continued when we reviewed the principles of conducting ethical research. Offering oral consent was necessary for participants who were not able to read the consent agreement. The director of education felt that it was important to offer oral consent to all participants as he described Cambodia as a formal society, where providing a signature may only happen a few times in one's life, possibly on a marriage certificate or registration of child's birth. Working collaboratively with the education team made the researcher aware of the possibility that requesting documented consent might jeopardize the interviews. In keeping with CBR principles, the researcher must be flexible and able to negotiate the research process through collaborative partnerships made within the community thereby supporting the relationship building between the researcher and the participants (Ball, 2005). To ensure obtaining consent did not jeopardize the interviews, we wrote an agreement in simple, uscrfriendly language (see Appendix B for consent form). All participants were provided the option to read the form and sign it or opt for the oral option which meant the translator would read the form and ask the participant to make a'mark by their name to confirm consent. Since this is not the standard method of obtaining consent, it had to be approved by the university'S Research Ethics Board (REB). Prior to receiving approval, the REB requested that the translator act as a witness and provide a signature to confirm that the participants provided the mark by their name.

17

Ball (2005) suggests a process of consultations with the appropriate community members as a method of building trust and successful partnerships between the researcher and the community. As part ofRVD protocol, RVD requested a meeting with the Commune Council (village-level government) to announce upcoming projects. The Commune Council is a group of six Commune Chiefs, who are elected government officials, each representing one ofthe six communes that comprise the village. RVD consults the Commune Council as a method of creating community engagement with projects. At the meeting, all six Commune Chiefs were present, as well as, the CEO of RVD, the director of the education department, the coordinator of the education department, and two Canadian interns, including myself. The CEO ofRVD and the interns speak English, and the Commune Chiefs speak Khmer, which is the official language of Cambodia. The director of education acted as the translator. The CEO of RVD began the meeting by introducing the interns, and explaining the interns' role in the organization. I was asked by RVD to provide a brief description of ECD and how ECD can benefit the children, families, and the community. Following the description of ECD, RVD announced their plans to offer a free preschool and parent program to the children and families of the village. RVD explained that the first step in establishing a preschool and parent program is to conduct interviews with the parents of young children who live in the village to ensure RVD develops a preschool and parent program that reflects parent expectations and goals for the programs. Again, in keeping with the principles of CBR, participating communities should understand how the research is intended to benefit them in order to have community engagement with the research process (Ball, 2005). Therefore, the Commune Council was asked to share any questions or comments about ECD and the preschool and parent program. The only questions and comments pertained to when the facility will be built and when the programs will be offered.

18

Lastly, the Commune Chiefs were asked to help RVD recruit families for the interviews. The Commune Council members shared enthusiasm to support RVD and by a show of hands, every Commune Chief agreed to help recruit families.
Participant Recruitment

Recruiting participants with support of the Commune Chiefs was a recommendation made by Cambodian colleagues at RVD. Several RVD employees believed that participants would feel more comfortable sharing infonnation with a foreign researcher if they were aware that the Commune Chief supported the project. Thus, this method of recruiting participants not only supported community participation, it also supported relationship building between the researcher and the participant. The Commune Chiefs recruited nine parents who were willing to parti ci pate. While the Commune Chiefs were aware of a parent's right to decline participation, every parent they approached agreed to participate. There are six communes that comprise the village but due to geographical barriers, only three communes will have access to the preschool program and only these three communes were included in the study. Three interviews were conducted per day, (one day per commune) over three days, for a total of nine interviews. Each Commune Chief arranged three interviews in their commune, and prepared a schedule of what time the interviews would take place. Participants had the choice to detennine the time they would like the interview to take place. Each morning, the director of education and I met the Commune Chief. The Commune Chief drove through the commune and pointed out the homes of the participants.

19

Participants

An eligible participant was the parent or primary caregiver of at least one child between birth and age six. Participants included nine parents who live in the village and will have access to the preschool and parent program once the programs are offered. Participants' children ranged in age from eleven months to fourteen years old, and all families had at least one child younger than six years of age. Family size ranged from one child to five children. Of the nine participants, seven were females and two were males. All participants spoke Khmer as their first language.
Data Collection

Interviews were conducted in the families' homes in order to establish a comfortable interview setting for the parents. As well, conducting interviews in the homes of the families eliminated any potential costs participants may have incurred commuting to another predetermined location. The director of education was assigned by R VD to be the translator. When we arrived at the family's home, we greeted families and introduced ourselves. Each family welcomed us into their home, and the interviews took place inside or outside the homes, usually sitting on a straw mat on the floor or ground. After greeting the participants, the interviews started by reviewing the purpose of the study. As suggested by Ball (2005), participants should be aware of how they may benefit from the research. Participants were told about RVD's plan to establish a preschool and parent program, and RVD's hope that parents
1

would share their goals in order to develop a preschool and parent program that supports the families. After explaining the purpose of the study, participants were asked for oral consent. Participants were told that any information obtained during the interview would be used in a
20

Major Research Paper, as part of the researcher's graduation requirements for a Master of Arts program. Parents were informed that part of the process requires obtaining their documented consent. Every participant was asked if they prefer reading the form or having the form read to them. Of the nine participants, two wanted to read the form, while seven participants opted for the oral consent option. All participants agreed and provided consent by making a mark by their name. The translator acted as witness and also signed the form to confirm the participants' consent. The oral consent form informed the parents that their participation is voluntary, the purpose of the study, risks involved, benefits, confidentiality, phone numbers to call for questions, and their time commitment. Each participant was given as much time as they needed to comprehend the information and ask any questions they had prior to giving their consent. Although 45 minutes was allotted for each interview, the interviews ranged from 25 to 35 minutes each. Both the researcher and translator were present for all nine interviews. During the interview, the researcher asked participants the question in English. The translator translated the question into Khmer, participants replied in Khmer, and the translator translated the answer into English. This method proved to be beneficial because it enabled the researcher to follow up with probes to elicit richer responses. The interviews were recorded using an MPeg-l audio layer 3 (MP3) recorder and interviews were transcribed the following day by the director of education. Although the director of education was fluent in both English and Khmer, he had limited experience working as a translator; therefore to ensure the translations were accurate, the audio recordings were transcribed a second time by the coordinator of education, who was also fluent in both English and Khmer. Through this process, it was found that although the original transcriptions were

21

accurate, not all responses were transcribed. Reviewing the transcription a second time served to be beneficial because all responses were then able to be included in the data analysis. Data Analysis Data analysis was conducted using a thematic analysis, which is a method that happens over time and not in a linear fashion. Analysis of the data began when data were collected and continued throughout the two stages of data analysis. Since data was collected in an international setting, culture and context of the study was considered (Stephan, 2009). Consideration of culture and context also supported analyzing data through an ecological perspective. The first stage of coding data was conducted through line by line coding, a common first stage of data analysis (Gibbs, 2007). Line by line coding is reviewing the transcriptions line by line and assigning a code to each line of the text. Codes were not pre-established; the codes were developed inductively which is referred to as "data-driven codes" or "open coding" (Gibbs, 2007, p. 50). To develop data driven codes, the researcher must look at what is happening in the

"

data and not make presumptions based on pre-existing theory (Gibbs, 2007). Some of the initial codes were descriptive and did not reflect themes. After the initial stage of coding, codes were organized into three broad categories, each corresponding to a research question; category one included parents' goals and concerns for their children, category two included parents' goals for their children's preschool experiences, and category three included all data which pertained to parent goals for the parent program. Each category was divided into several themes (i.e., parent goals for children's future, parent concerns for children, accessibility to preschool, goals for children's preschool experiences, parents' goals for parent programs, parent's role in supporting children's development, and parent perceptions
22

of early learning). Themes were then grouped into sub-themes (i.e., education, occupation, emotional wellbeing, health, hygiene, nutrition, parent's value for preschool programs, parents support for preschool education, curriculum, social development, parents' support for parent programs, barriers to participation, family involvement, financial support, and nutritional support). The next step was to review the transcriptions and identify all data that related to each code; data were then placed in the appropriate category (Aronson, 1994). In the last stage of the data analysis, descriptive codes were redefined. Questions of, who, when, where, what, how, how much, and why were considered (Gibbs, 2007). The process of asking these questions supported the development of codes. It is important not to be committed to the first set of codes. The first set of codes is likely to describe the data. In order to make theoretical connections, descriptive codes should be redefined to reflect the thematic relationships in the data (see Table 1).
Table 1 First and second stage of codes

Stage 1 What parents want for their children Educational goals
o
o

Stage 2 Parents goals for their children's future Educational attainment
o Preschool

o
o

Preschool Primary Secondary school University

o Primary school
o High school

o University

Career
o o o

Career obtainment

NGO
Doctor Teacher

o Medical
o Education o Community development

Happiness

- Emotional wellbeing

23

PROP6iTYOF h,)t'RSON UN1~'IRSITY UBJUnY

Table 1 (continued) First and second stage of codes

Stage 1 Parent concerns for their children
o o o o o o Malaria Dengue fever Fever Malnutrition Hygiene Child rearing

Stage 2 Parent concerns for their children
o o o o Health Hygiene Nutrition Child rearing

Parents want preschool Willingness to bring children Parents value preschool Willingness to support the program through donations
o o o Time Money Food

Accessibility to preschool programs
)

Parents value for preschool programs - Parents support for preschool education
o Attendance o Donations

Parents hopes for preschool program Subjects
o o o o Reading (Khmer) Writing (Khmer) English Math

Goals for the preschool program Curriculum
o Literacy o Math

Social development

Social
o Make good friends o Play

Parents support children learning
o o o o Financial support Nutritional support Academic support Other

Parent strategies to support children's early learning
o o o o Financial support Nutritional support Academic support Other

Parent perceptions of early learning
o o Play is not learning Learning only happens at school

Parent perceptions of early learning
o Play is not learning o Learning happens at school

t

....

"

24

Findings and Discussion This study included parents who live in a rural village of Cambodia and do not have access to preschool or parent programs. Parents shared their goals and concerns for their children's future, and their goals for RVD's upcoming preschool program and parent program. Data were organized in terms of three research questions: 1) What goals do parents living in a rural Cambodian village have for their children's future? 2) What are parents' goals for their children's the preschool program? 3) What are parents' goals for the parent program? To answer these research questions, data were analyzed using a thematic analysis. Codes were not preestablished; the codes were developed inductively which uncovered the thematic relationships in the data. Parents' Goals and Concerns for their Children Parents were asked to share their goals and concerns for their children. Of the nine parents interviewed, eight of them shared that they have goals of educational attainment for their children's future and hope that by receiving an education their children will have a career. One parent stated, "1 want my children to go to school so they can have a good job and not be a rice farmer." When analyzing data that is collected from an international setting, Stephens (2009) reminds the researcher to take culture and context into consideration. Consideration of the contextual setting of this study draws attention to concerning issues such as poverty, malnutrition, and illness. These factors may impact the goals parents have for their children's future. On average, people living in this village survive on less than $1.25 (American dollars) a day which is deemed as living in extreme poverty according to the UN (MDO, 2009) Families who live in such conditions understandably want a better future for their children, and it appears that participants see education as a method of achieving a better future.
25

Fanning rice was the main method of income for the participants of this study; it is a physically demanding job with little financial reward, and chronosystem factors, such as the economy and global warming, have made it an unstable job. Of the nine parents interviewed, three parents hope their children will work in the area of community development (e.g., NGO), three parents would like children to become doctors and two parents would like their children to be teachers. In the village, opportunities to find work other than fanning rice are limited. The village has several schools that hire teachers, two health facilities that employ doctors and RVD has hired several community members to lead after-school programs. Given that the only nonfanning job opportunities parents are exposed to within the village are medical, education and
~

community development, it is likely that parents selected these as careers for their children based on their experience. Parents' choice of careers may also be reflective of their value for family, and community and hope that children will find a career while still living in the village. It is common for parents from a collectivist culture (such as the Cambodian culture) to have goals of educational attainment, being successful and valuing family (Achhpal, Goldman & Rohner, 2007). Parents may be aware of the increasingly common patterns of migration from rural to urban settings for employment opportunities and the negative outcomes migration has on families and communities (UNICEF, 2008). While working in urban settings will likely improve one's standard of living by increased accessibility to employment, migration can also break family support networks; even sometimes break apart the family unit (UNICEF, 2008). Interestingly, ofthe nine participants, two hope their children will be happy. The field of psychology provides possible reasons as to why parents have given priority to education and employment over emotional wellbeing. Maslow's hierarchy of needs states that people are driven by sets of needs; the primary set of needs are referred to as physiological needs, which include

26

breathing, food, and water, and these needs must be satisfied before people can focus on achieving more abstract needs, such as the need to belong and the need for self-esteem (Schweitzer & Wood, 2006). As noted earlier, poverty may have influenced the goals parents set for their children's future (Stephens, 2009), and poverty is clearly a barrier to meeting basic primary needs. Parents in this study may view education as a way for their children to escape poverty, which is why education and employment are prioritized over emotional wellbeing in the responses provided by the parents. It does not mean that parents do not value their children's emotional wellbeing; it could be argued that parents believe their children will be happy if they have a stable career and are able to meet their basic needs. Although parents hold educational attainment as a priority for their children, it appears that their current daily concerns are not related to education. All nine parents reported that their children's health, hygiene, or nutritional intake was a concern. Five of the parents expressed that their children's health was a primary concern. One mother stated, "My number one problem is health, my children have had malaria, dengue fever and kidney problems." Two of the parents stated nutrition as their primary concern. One parent stated, "my number one problem is nutrition, I'm afraid my children do not eat enough." Interestingly, six of the parents included health, hygiene, and nutrition as the concerns they have for their children. One father stated, "Health, hygiene, and nutrition are important. We cannot separate the issues." Bronfenbrenner's ecological lens uncovers the impact of environmental factors such as illness, malnutrition, and poverty on a child's development, ability to learn, and attend school (Education for All, 2006). This approach draws attention to the need for holistic, integrated ECD programs which address the detrimental environmental factors for children living in the Majority world. Children cannot learn if they are hungry or ill, and integrated ECD programs address this by including nutrition

27

and health programs as part of early childhood education initiatives. Additionally, research indicates that integrated programs can be the source for breaking down barriers to access education (WFP, 2009). It is more likely that parents will support ECD programs that address their primary concerns of health, hygiene, and nutrition.

Parents' Goals for Children's Preschool Experiences
As the research reviewed in the literature review has demonstrated, it was important to include families in the planning stage for the preschool program, therefore, parents were asked to share their goals for their children's preschool education and care. All nine participants stated they would support the preschool program by enrolling their children in the program. One participant said, "I think preschool is very important. I am very happy we are getting a preschool. RVD should build the preschool as soon as possible." Furthermore, all nine parents expressed their willingness to support the program through donations of time, money or food. Understanding parent's willingness to support the program through donations is important for sustainable development. In order for programs to be sustainable, community members must be engaged with the program and donations of time, money or food is one way of engaging parents with programs. Interestingly, eight parents said that they will contribute money or food, only one participant offered to donate her time. It is possible that parents selected money and food over time because they do not value or know of the contributions they can make to educational programs. Engaging parents in ECD programs is an opportunity to empower parents by validating their knowledge. Educators can help parents recognize the valuable contributions they can make to ECD program by accessing their funds of knowledge. Funds of knowledge are the historical and accumulated strategies (e.g., skills,

28

abilities, ideas, practices) or bodies of knowledge that are essential to a household's functioning and well-being (Amanti, et aI., 2005). The ECD program in Senegal that is discussed in the literature review is an example of a program that benefited from the contributions of families. Parents and grandparents made valuable contributions to the program by leading story time and sharing oral stories of their culture. As demonstrated in the first finding, parents value education. Parents may perceive education as a way for their children to escape poverty and achieve future success, which is why education and employment have been given priority. It is reasonable to assume that parents see preschool as an important part of children'S education, and are willing to support the preschool program as a strategy to support their children's education. One parent said that the preschool program should include a meal for children. The other eight participants did not explicitly express a desire for additional services such as nutrition, health, or hygiene programs. It is interesting that parents reported concerns of health, hygiene, and nutrition for their children yet, they did not include these concerns in their goals for the preschool program. The context of this study provides a possible reason as to why these parents did not explicitly state that a preschool program should provide additional services (Stephan's, 2009). It is likely that parents have not had experience with preschool programs because in the village, parents do not have access to preschool programs, nor has there ever been a preschool program in the village. It may be that the parents' lack of experience with preschool programs has restricted their ideas regarding what an ECD program can offer. Although offering additional services was not stated by parents as a goal for the ECD program, the finding, which uncovered

29

their concerns of health, hygiene, nutrition for their children, indicates that parents may appreciate a preschool program that address the primary concerns parents have for their children. Ofthe nine parents interviewed, four parents shared their hope that the ECD program will provide children an opportunity to socialize and make friends. This finding is congruent with Achhpal, Goldman and Rohner's (2007) study that indicated that American-European and Puerto Rican parents' primary goal for their children's preschool experiences is to build prosocial skills. Prosocial skills are the ability to empathize, share, cooperate, and help others (Achhpal, Goldman and Rohner, 2007). Six parents hope the ECD program will support the development of their children's literacy skills. Three ofthose parents indicated that they would like their children to learn to speak English. Parents' goal for children to develop literacy skills niay be to improve employment opportunities. English may be seen as a valuable asset, especially in the field of community development. Understanding parents' goals is an important part of developing the preschool program. As previously noted, preschool programs are more likely to be successful and provide full benefits for children when parents, educators, administrators, and policy makers share the same goals for the program (Achhpal, Goldman and Rohner, 2007).

Parents' Goals for the Parent Program

In order to develop a program for parent's that reflects their expectations, parents were
asked to share their goals for RVD's parent program. Understanding the parents' desire to participate in the program is an initial stage in the process of developing community focused and culturally relevant programming (Ball & Pence, 1999). All nine parents indicated that they would like to participate in the program. It is important to note that although parents were not aware of what the parent program would consist of, they indicated that they wanted to

30

и iii

iiloo..

participate. In addition, it appears that parents want accessibility to parent programs when all nine participants offered to support the program through donations oftheir time, money, or food. Parents were asked what parenting topics would be most useful to them. Only two participants responded and stated that they were interested in behaviour management. The other seven participants did not answer the question. Two of the seven participants who did not respond explained that they had never been to school, and therefore found it difficult to answer the question. An ecological perspective of parents living in this village highlights the social, political, and historical factors of this village, and the impact of Khmer Rouge's government is evident. Khmer Rouge was in power in Cambodia from 1975 to 1979. During this time and for many years to follow, access to education was limited, especially in the rural villages (Chhay & Pearson, 2006). One participant shared that while she would like to participate in the parent program, she is not sure she can because she cannot read or write. When considering the historical context of the village, it may be possible that other parents share the same concern. Thus, to establish a fully inclusive and holistic ECD program, sensitive consideration of such factors should be taken into consideration. Although parents did not explicitly state their goals for the parent program, through analysis of the data, findings were uncovered which provide important implications for parent involvement. For example, six parents shared the important role grandparents have in the lives of their children. Three parents shared that grandparents help parents by caring for the children when parents are working. Two parents stated that the grandparents share the disciplinary role with them. One parent said, "If children do not want to learn, grandparents will be disappointed. If children aren't going to school, their grandparents will take them." In Cambodia, elders of the community receive the most respect (Chhay & Pearson, 2006). Recognizing the significant role

31

of grandparents in the Cambodian culture and how they can support community collaboration highlights the importance of including grandparents in the parent program. As stated earlier, programs that strive to be inclusive should work towards establishing collaborative partnerships with families, community members, community leaders, and elders (Ball & Pence, 1999). Involving families in the program means welcoming any family member who has a significant role in the child's life. As the findings show, grandparents have a significant role in children's life. In a community based approach to curriculum development, it was found that grandparents, elders, and respected community members contributed locally relevant knowledge, and helped to ensure that teaching practices were informed by culture and appropriate for the community (Ball, Brenner & Pence, 2002; Soudee, 2009). Grandparents have been known to enrich programs by sharing cultural knowledge that is relevant to children's lives (Ball & Pence, 1999).

Parents' Strategies to Support Children's Learning
Parents were asked to describe how they help their children learn. The responses provided by parents demonstrate the strategies parents use to support their children's learning. Four of the nine parents said they helped their children learn by providing money for the financial expenses involved in getting to school and/or purchasing the school uniform. Due to living in a rural setting, the school is sometimes located far from the homes of families. Many children ride a bicycle to school and for children who do not own a bicycle, school is inaccessible. Thus, parents support children's learning by providing them with a means of transportation. Three parents shared that preparing their children's lunch for school was how they supported their children's learning. As discussed before, there is a link between nutrition and readiness to learn and parents are helping children learn by preparing food and snacks for their children (WFP, 2009). In addition, parents can help children learn by taking advantage of the many teachable

32

moments between parents and children. Three of the participants shared that when their children are playing at home, they are not learning. This is a common misconception among parents and an important issue to be addressed. Parents have many teachable moments at home with their children, and parent programs often try to help parents understand the important role they have in their child's development. The Roving Caregiver Program is an example of a parent program that worked to strengthen the parent-child relationship by modeling games, routines, and positive language (Roopnarine & Hossain, 2004). Interesting findings arose pertaining to parents' perceptions of early learning. Five of the participants said that learning only happens at school. One parent stated, "Teachers at school can teach them, they will learn everything from the teacher." This finding is supported by McCaleb's (1994) theory that describes parents who have little or no formal education as having a tendency to believe that the school is better able to transmit knowledge and see the teacher as the expert. When parents view the teacher as the expert, it can perpetuate an inequitable relationship between the parent and the teacher, and stand as a barrier to parental involvement. The inequitable relationship between parents and teachers has been studied in parent involvement literature, and it has been found that teachers often perceive these parents as uninterested and uninvolved, again creating another barrier to parental involvement (McCaleb, 1994). After the interview, participants were given an opportunity to ask any questions they might have about the preschool or parent program. The only questions participants asked related to when the facility will be built and when they will have access to the programs. Participants did not inquire about the type of program that will be offered, they only inquired about when the program will be offered. It is possible that the deprivation of services and programs in this

33

village, along with parent's lack of experience with education has lett parents in a position where they will accept any services or programs offered. In order for parents to actively participate in the planning of the program, they must be empowered to participate, question, and contribute (Heywood & Peterson, 2007). This especially true among vulnerable or disempowered populations, and characterizes illiterate, post-conflict societies. Interestingly, as demonstrated in the community schools project in Egypt, engagement with community projects can be the empowering experiences parents need to actively participate in projects (Zaalouk, 1995).

Conclusion
The findings of this study indicate that parents have goals pertaining to high education
1

attainment, favourable career paths, and future success for their children. This finding supports the body of literature which describes parents of collectivist cultures as possessing goals of educational attainment, being successful, and valuing family for their children (Zayas & Solari, 1994). This study also found that parents want access to preschool and parent programs and are willing to support the program through donations oftime, food, or money. Through family participation R VD hopes that the preschool and parent program in the village will be successful, as community engagement is a predictive factor for successful development projects (Cabral, Farrington & Ludi, 2006).

34

Implications for Practice Research has shown that child outcomes of early childhood education programs are stronger if there is a shared vision of expectations and goals between parents and educators, administrators and policy makers (Achbpal, Goldman & Rohner, 2007). While it is important not to generalize these findings, as these findings are context specific, the findings of this study of parents' perceptions does suggest implications for practice for educators and policy makers who are developing preschool and parent programs in Majority world countries. In terms of program development, this study sheds light on the type of program that may be more successful in Majority world settings. For example, parents expressed concerns for their children's health, hygiene, and nutritional intake. Integrated ECD programs that offer a wide range of services can address parent concerns for their children's health, nutrition, and hygiene. Research has clearly demonstrated that children cannot reap the full benefits of an ECD program if they are suffering from health issues and malnutrition (Education for All, 2006). Integrated ECD programs can meet children's holistic needs and lead to better outcomes for the child. Also, there is more likely to be a consensus of goals between parents and educators, administrators, and policy makers, if the ECD program considers the primary concerns parents have for their children. The finding pertaining to parent goals for the preschool program provides implications for practice. Six of the parents hoped the preschool program will support their children's development ofliteracy skills, and three of those six responses indicated a hope for development of English skills. Fluency in English may be perceived by parents as a method to increase one's chances of finding employment. Dual language development can have positive outcomes for

35

children; research shows that second language acquisition can support children's abstract thinking, improve math skills and increase vocabulary (Cummins, 2001). It is likely that learning English is desirable in Majority world settings because speaking English increases opportunities for employment and can have positive outcomes for children's overall development. Careful introduction of the English language in Majority world settings should be taken to ensure that English is not presented as the more valuable language. The findings regarding the parent program provide important implications for educators and policy makers working with parents who live in Majority world villages. Parents were asked to share their goals for the parent program and two parents said they could not answer the
1

question because they had never been to school. It is important to consider the background of participants when designing a research study. Parents in this study did not have experience with preschool and parent programs. Prior to conducting the interviews, it may have been beneficial if the parents had participated in a discussion regarding preschool and parent programs. Talking with parents prior to conducting the study may have helped the researcher establish a shared understanding of what preschool and parent programs are. In addition, meeting with participants prior to conducting interviews would have helped to built trust between the researcher and participants and may have empowered parents to actively participate by questioning and challenging the researcher.
It is common for parents living in post-conflict and illiterate societies to feel

disempowered and view the researcher as the expert. This was evident during the interview process when parents had an opportunity to ask questions about the programs. Questions asked related to the building of the facility and when the programs would be offered. Although parents agreed to participate in the programs they did so without questioning what type of programming
36

would be offered. Parents must be empowered in order for them to actively participate in the research, planning, and implementation of programs (Heywood & Peterson, 2007).

37

Limitations Working with RVD provided opportunities for research that would have been difficult to conduct without the support of an established organization. While working with RVD made this study possible, it has put several limitations on the study. The CEO ofRVD allotted three weeks to the education team to design the study, conduct the interviews, and transcribe the data. The three week time constraint limited the number of participants and the length of time for each interview. The village where interviews were conducted is approximately three hours away from the RVD office. RVD provided accommodations for three working days in the village. Conducting more than three interviews per day was not possible because of the range of distance between the homes of participants. Therefore, we conducted nine interviews in this study because we were able to spend in three days in the village. The process of transcribing the interviews also included an additional step of translating the transcriptions, a process that could only be completed with the support of the education team. The amount of time needed to transcribe and translate recordings was taken into consideration when deciding the number of questions to include in the interview. Engaging with participants prior to conducting the interviews may have strengthened the relationship between the participants and the researcher, however time constraints made this impossible. It should be noted that, while it is important to support community involvement at each stage of the research process, participatory strategies have been practiced in many different ways and this should not be seen as a weakness of CBR but rather that research methods exist along a continuum, all of which should be recognized (Roche, 2007).

38

Conclusion Developing preschool and parent programs should always include researching parent goals for the program so that educators, administrators, and policy makers can incorporate parent goals into program development. This is especially true in Majority world countries where ECD programs are often initiated and sponsored by foreign development organizations. Bronfenbrenner's ecological model highlights differences that exist across cultures, communities and families. Therefore, parents' goals, beliefs, attitudes, and expectations for ECD programs differ across cultures, communities and families. Although the implications for practice noted in this study may have relevance to all Majority world villages, the differences that exist across cultures and families means participating communities should always be involved in the planning stages to develop contextually-based programs that reflect the goals and expectations of parents.

39

References Achhpal, B., Goldman, l.A., & Rohner, P. (2007). A comparison of European American and Puerto Rican parent' goals and expectations about the socialization and education of preschool children [Electronic version]. International Journal of Early Years Education, 15(1),1-13. Albion, LJ., (1999). Crossing a tightrope: A case study of the development ofaparenting curriculum for caregivers in the Lao Peoples Democratic Republic. Unpublished master's thesis, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada. Amanti, C., Gonzalez, N., Gonzales, R., Moll, L., Rendon, P., Rivera, A., Tenery, M. (2005). Funds of Knowledge for Teaching in Latino Households. Urban Education. (29) 444471. Aronson, J. (1994). A pragmatic view of thematic analysis. The qualitative report, 2( 1) retrieved on August 7, 2009, from http://www.nova.edulssss/QRJBacklssues/QR2-lIaronson.html Ball, l. (2005). Nothing about us without us: Restorative research partnership involving Indigenous children and communities in Canada. In A. Farrell (Ed) Exploring ethical research with children (pp.81-96). Berkshire, UK: Open University Press/McGraw Gill Education. Ball, J., Benner, A., & Pence. A. (2002) Quality child care and community development: What is the connection? Hayes, M.V., Foster, L.T. (Eds.) Too small to see, too big to ignore: Child health and well-being in British Columbia (pp.75-102). Victoria, B.C: Western Geographical Press. Ball, J., & Pence, A. (1999). Promoting healthy environments for children and youth through participatory, bicultural, community-based training partnerships [Electronic version]. Intercultural and Second Language Council Journal, 1(1),26-33 Berman, R., Silver, S., & Wilson, S. (2004). What participant's value: Practices and outcomes at family resource programs. Retrieved on August 24,2009, from http://www.ryerson.ca/ voices/pdБ'participantsvalue. pdf Bronfenbrenner, U. (1977). Toward an experimental ecology of human development [Electronic version]. American Psychologist, 32, 513-531. Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development: Experiments by design and nature. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Cabral, L., Farrington, J., & Ludi, E. (2006). The millennium village project: A new approach to ending rural poverty in Africa? Retrieved on July 17, 2009, from http://www.odLorg.uk resources/download/33.pdf Chhay, L., & Pearson, J. (2006). Perspectives on the complexities of Cambodians and expatriates working together. Phenom Phen, Cambodia: VBNK.

40

Cummins, J. (2001). An introductory reader to the writings ojJim Cummins. Baker, C., Horberg H. (Eds.): Author. Evans, J., & Myers, R. (1994). Childrearing practices: Creating programs where traditions and modem practices meet. Coordinator's Note book, 15. Ferrara, J., & Ferrara, M. (2005). Parents as partners: Raising awareness as a teacher's preparation program [Electronic version]. A Journal of Educational Strategies, Issues and Ideas, 79(2), 77- 81. Gibbs, G. (2007). Analyzing qualitative data. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications Gordan, J. (2000). Ecological influence of parenting and child development. British Journal oj Social Work, 30, 703-720. Haddad, L. (2002). An integrated approach to early childhood education and care: UNESCO early childhood and family policy serious 3. Retrieved on June 3, 2009, from http://unesdoc.unesco.org/imagesI0012/001279/127983e.pdf Hartley, S., Muhit, M. (2003). Using qualitative research methods for disability research in majority world countries [Electronic version]. Asia Pacific Disability Rehabilitation Journal, 14(2), 103-114. Heywood, D., & Peterson, S.S. (2007). Contributions of families' linguistic, social, and cultural capital to minority-language children's literacy: Parents', teachers', and principals' perspective. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 64(4),517-538. McCaleb, S.P. (1994). Building communities oj learners: A collaboration among teachers, students, Jamilies and communities. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Pence, A. (1998). Reconceptualizing ECCD in the majority world: One minority world perspective [Electronic version]. International Journal ojEarly Childhood, 20(2), 1930. Roche, B. (2007). New directions in community-based research. Retrieved on July 5,2009, from http://wellesleyinstitute.comifiles/newdirectionsincbr.pdf Roopnarine, J.L., & Hossain, Z. (2004). The rover caregiver program: A family-based intervention programme for enhancing early childhood development and parenting. Retrieved on August 20, 2009 from http://www.bemardvanleer.org/publication_store/ publication_storeyublications/strengthening_the_young_childs_care_environment/file Soudee, S.R. (2009). Indigenous knowledge and practice into ECCE: A comparison of programs in the Gambia, Senegal and Mali. Current Issues in Comparative Education, 11, 15-23. Schweitzer & Wood (2006). Everyday encounters: An introduction to interpersonal communication. (3rd ed.). Toronto, ON: Wadsworth. Stephens, D. (2009). Qualitative research in international settings: A practical guide. New York, NY: Routledge.

41

The Consultative Group on Early Childhood Care and Development. (2007). Coordinators notebook: An international resource for early childhood, No.27. Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Author. United Nations. (2008). The millennium development goals. Retrieved on June 19,2009, from http://www.un.orgimilIenniumgoals/pdf/The%20Millennium%20Development% 20Goals%20Report%202008.pdf United Nations Development Programme. (2008). Millennium Developmental Goals. About the MDGs: Basics. Retrieved June 8,2009, from http://www.undp.orglmdglbasics.shtml United Nations Educational Scientific Cultural Organization. (2005). Education for All: Global monitoring report. Retrieved on July 6,2009, from http://unesdoc.unesco.orglimages/ 0013/001 373/137333e.pdf United Nations Educational Scientific Cultural Organization. (2006). Education for All. Global Monitoring Report. Retrieved July 6,2009, from http://unesdoc.unesco.orglimages/ 0014/00l416114163ge.pdf United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund. (2008). Parenting support conceptual framework. Unpublished. United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund. (2002). State of the world's children. Retrieved on August 26,' 2009, from http://www.unicef.orgisowc02/pdf7sowc2002-engfull.pdf United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund. (2009). State of the world's children. Retrieved on June 16,2009, from http://www.unicef.orgisowc09/docs/SOWC09FullReport-EN. pdf United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund. (n.d.). The Convention on the Rights of the Child. Survival and development rights: the basic rights to life, survival and development ofone's full potential. Retrieved on July 14,2009, from http://www. unicef.orglcrc/files/Survival_Deve1opment.pdf World Bank. (2004). Reaching out to the child: An integrated approach to child development. Retrieved on September 17,2009, from http://www.wds.worldbank.orglexternal/defaultl WDSContentServerlWDSPIIB/2004/08116/000 1600 16 2004081610 1728IRenderedi PDF/29695.pdf World Food Programme. (2009). Learningfrom experience: Good practicesfrom 45 years ofschool feeding. Retrieved on September 9, 2009, from http://documents.wtp.orgl stellentlgroups/public/documents/newsroomlwfp204664.pdf Zaalouk, M. (1995). Children of the Nile: The community schools projects in Upper Egypt. Education for all: Making it work. Retrieved on September 10, 2009, from http://www. eric.ed.gov/ERICDocs/dataiericdocs2sql/content_storage_ 01/00000 19b/80/1 b/99/00.pdf

42

Zayas, L.H, & Solari, F. (1994). Early childhood socialization in Hispanic families: context, culture, and practice implications. Professional Psychology Research and Practice, 25(3), 200-206.

~

I "

43

Appendix A

Interview Questions
1) What is most important for your child's future?

2) Please describe a day in the life of your child.

3) Do you believe your children learn before they go to school? If so,

what would you like them to learn?
4) Do you believe it is important for your child to attend pre-school and if so, why?

5) Would you bring your children to preschool?

a) If so, what would you like the program to do for your child? b) What are your goals for the program?
6) Do you believe parents have an important role in a young child's development?

a) If so, what can parents do to help their children learn?
7) Would you like to participate in a parent program?

a)

Ifso, what type of program is most valuable?

8) If you would like to attend the preschool and parent program, are you willing to contribute:

a) b) c)

time food resources

44

AppendixB Consent Fonn
Ryerson University Participant Oral Consent Form
This interview will help RVD understand how to build programs that work for you. The researcher will ask questions about your goals and concerns for your children, and your goals and expectations for the developing preschool and parent program. The interview will take forty-five to sixty minutes. The interviews will be audio recorded because we need to refer to your answers at a later time. There are minimal risks involved in this study; some questions ask personal information. If you do not want to answer a question, please say pass. You can stop the interview at anytime with no penalty or prejudice. We hope you enjoy answering the questions and find the interview a pleasant experience. The information you tell us will help RVD build a program that works for you. The infornlation you share is confidential. Only the following people will have access to the information: The CEO ofRVD The Director of Education Department The Coordinator of the Education Department Ryerson University's Research Ethics Board Dr. Aurelia Di Santo (supervising professor from Ryerson University) Dr. Rachel Berman (second reader) Melissa Ganhao (myself, Intern at RVD and student of Ryerson University) The interpreter is also bound to the terms of confidentiality. While the study is not anonymous, I hope you find comfort in knowing the data which identifies individuals will be stored separately from the names of individuals through the coding of data (coding keys are kept separate from the data). Please contact me for any further information or questions you may have at, (098) 730-4171. To address any complaints or concerns about this research study, please contact: CEO ofRVD - (098) 671-4481 The Research Ethics Board - 1(416) 979-5000 Ext. 7112 Dr. Aurelia Di Santo, supervising professor - 1(416) 979-5000 Ext. 4576 Please make a mark under your name to confirnl you understand and agree to the information I have just read. This indicates that you agree to be in the study and have been told that you can change your mind and withdraw your consent to participate at any time.

Name ofparticipant _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __ Mark to indicate understanding:_ _ _ _ _ _ _ __ Signature oftranslator:_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __ Signature of investigator: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __ Date: _ _ _ _ __ Date: _ _ _ _ __ Date: _ _ _ _ __

45

