MENTORING PARTNERSHIPS FOR SUCCESS: THE ROLE OF MENTORING IN RECONSTRUCTING PROFESSIONAL IDENTITIES AND IN CREATING A SENSE OF BELONGING FOR INTERNATIONALLY-EDUCATED TEACHERS FROM VISIBLE MINORITY GROUPS IN GREATER TORONTO AREA SCHOOL COMMUNITIES

by Patricia Robertson . B.Sc. in Mathematics, University of Guelph, 1996 B.Ed. in Elementary Mathematics, University of Western Ontario, 2005

A Major Research Paper presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of

Master of Arts in the Program of Immigration and Settlement Studies

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2011 © Patricia Robertson 2011

PROPEmY Of ---~ " RYEOOm~ UNIVERSITY llBfWtY

Author's Declaration

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this major research paper.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this paper to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Signature

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this paper by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Signature

11

MENTORING PARTNERSHIPS FOR SUCCESS: THE ROLE OF MENTORING IN RECONSTRUCTING PROFESSIONAL IDENTITIES AND IN CREATING A SENSE OF BELONGING FOR INTERNATIONALLY-EDUCATED TEACHERS FROM VISIBLE MINORITY GROUPS IN GREATER TORONTO AREA SCHOOL COMMUNITIES Patricia Robertson Master of Arts, 2011 Immigration and Settlement Studies Ryerson University ABSTRACT

This study explores and analyses mentoring relationships between unemployed and underemployed internationally-educated teachers (lETs) from'visible minority groups and Canadian-experienced educators, and their influence on the re-establishment of migrant teachers' professional identities and perceptions of inclusion in Greater Toronto Area (GTA) school communities. A detailed literature review summarizes previously identified issues in this area while, nine in-depth interviews conducted with mentees, mentors and mentoring pairs in this study identify prior and newly emergent themes. Primary themes that transpired include: the presence of varying forms of resistance from the dominant community towards lETs; the role of mentoring relationships in meeting lETs' needs; and the importance of consistency, trust and honesty in building collaborative relationships that foster lETs' successful integration into the teaching field. Recommendations include: the delivery of equity-oriented programming through educational bodies; the development of sustainable occupation-specific teacher mentoring programs; and the promotion of lETs to the greater community by educational stakeholders.

Key words: Internationally Educated Teachers, Immigrants, Visible Minority, Mentoring. Identity, Sense of Belonging.
11l

Acknowledgements
I am grateful to the many people that offered me their support throughout the process of this major research paper. I would first like to thank Dr. Carmen Schifellite for his academic supervision, guidance and patience, without which I may not have made it to the end! I would also like to thank Shabnum Budhwani, Nafeesa Afridi and Maya Rattan of Skills for Change, Toronto, who helped me to recruit mentoring pair participants for this study. In addition, I am appreciative for the time and willingness of mentee and mentor participants to share their experiences with me. I would especially like to thank my wonderful family, friends and work colleagues who patiently listened to me when I faced challenges and spent many days apart in the completion of this study. Finally, and most importantly, I would like to offer my love and gratitude to my husband Stewart for his unconditional support throughout this process. Now that this paper and master's program is complete, I promise we will spend much more time together!

IV

Table of Contents
Author's Declaration .................................................................................................................... ii

ABSTRACT .................................................................................................................................. iii
Acknowledgements ...................................................................................................................... iv Table of Contents .......................................................................................................................... v Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 1 Literature Review .......................................................................................................................... 3

Need for lETs in Ontario School Communities.......................................................................... 3 Challenges Experienced by lETs in Ontario ............................................................................... 5 Dominant and Migrant Teacher Identities .................................................................................. 7 Model Teacher Identity .......... ................................................................................................. 7 Migrant Teacher Identity ...................................................................................................... 10 Dominant and Migrant Teachers' Standing within the Professional Community .................... 12 Mentoring Relationships in Reclaiming Migrant Teacher Identities and Creating a Sense of Belonging .................................................................................................................................. 18
Research Focus ............................................................................................................................. 26

Research Context and Purpose Statement ................................................................................ 27
Research Methodolo~ ·.·...····.·······.·······.·.·····.·······.········.·····.·..·······..············.······...·.·····...··..···.· 29

Sampling ................................................................................................................................... 31 Data Collection .................................................................. , ....................................................... 32
Results and Analysis ................................................................................................................... ~5

The Dominant Community's Resistance to lETs ............................................................. 36 1.1. Forms ofResistance from the Dominant Community .................................................... 37 1.2. Reasons for the Dominant Community's Refusal oflETs.............................................. 39 1.3. Impact ofDominant Community Resistance oflETs ..................................................... 42 2. The Importance of Mentoring Relationships in Providing Support to lETs ..................... 45 2.1. Fulfilling lETs' Knowledge and Understanding ofthe Ontario Education System ...... 46 2.2. The Importance ofProviding lETs with Job Search Information and Support ............. 50 2.3. The Importance ofMentoringfor lET Recognition by the Teaching Community ......... 53 2.4. The Importance ofMentor Advocacy for lETs in the Ontario Teaching Profession ..... 55 2.5. The Importance of Providing lETs with Encouragement and Guidance....................... 58 3. The Importance of Consistency, Trust and Honesty in Building Collaborative Mentoring Relationships ............................................................................................................................. 60 3.1. The Importance ofConsistency............................................. ......................................... 60 3.2. The Importance of Trust and Honesty ........................................................................... 61 3.3. The Importance ofCollaboration .................................................................................. 63
Discussion .................................................................................................................................... 64 Strengths and Limitations .......................................................................................................... 72

1.

v

Recommendations ..····.··..·····..······.······..···.··.·..···.··.··..·...·····.·· ~···.··.···....··....·...·...·...···.··..····.·.····· 74 References ·.···..·.·........·.·...·.··....···.....···.....··.....·.·....··.....··.·.·..·..···..···..·.··.·.······..·······..··....····.·.····· 78 Appendix A: AppendixB: Appendix C: AppendixD: Appendix E: AppendixF: Recruitment Flyer ·.···.··.·····....·.··.······..·.···....····.....··....·..··....·..·..····..·....··..·..·.· 85 Telephone Script ··.·······.······..·············..······.····.·.·······.·····.·······..············.········· 86 Mentee Consent Form .·.···.·..........····....···..····..·..·····.····..····.··.···..·.···.·....····..·· 88 Mentor Consent Form ·...·.···.....··.·.·..·......·.·......···...·.··.......·.....··.·...·.......····.... 92
Interv-iew Questions ···············..···········.·..······.·············.···············.··················· 96

Suggested Topics for Reflective Journal Entries ......................................... 98

VI

Introduction

Since the establishment of the Ontario College of Teachers (OCT) in 1997, over 14,000 highly skilled and experienced internationally-educated teachers (IETsl) have obtained certification with the hope and anticipation of re-entering their profession in Ontario schools (OCT, 201 Ob). In 2009 alone, over 1,200 lETs were certified, with almost half of these teachers originating from non-English speaking countries and over a third representing visible minority groups. At present, Ontario's public school boards are under considerable pressure to meet the distinct learning needs of an increasingly racially and culturally diverse student population. lETs have the potential to address this challenge and make a valuable impact on the educational experiences of students in Ontario schools; however, the full potential of these teachers has remained underutilized. To illustrate this point, in the 2009-2010 public school year, around two-thirds of newly certified lETs were unable to fmd any teaching job; while only 7% had found regular teaching employment (OCT, 2011).

lETs face numerous barriers that impede their ability to secure employment and establish themselves within the teaching profession in Ontario (see for example, Deters, 2008; Phillion, 2003; Thiessen, Bascia, & Goodson, 1996). lETs in such positions have expressed feelings of frustration, isolation and marginalization within the greater teaching community. Furthermore, their professional identities have been destabHized due to the lack of recognition of their qualifications and experiences, perceived differences in professional practices, lack of supportive and positive relationships, and a loss of status and self-esteem (Beynon, Ilieva, & Dicupa, 2004; Mawhinney & Xu, 1997; Phillion, 2003). With limited opportunities to foster constructive
I In this study. I reference the Ontario College of Teachers' (OCT) defmition ofIET, which is any individual who conducted their elementary and/or secondary teacher education outside of Canada. For the purposes of my research, I focused on Ontario-certified lETs from visible minority groups.

1

relations and gain teaching practice in schools, lETs consequently face challenges in reconstructing their professional identities and in finding a sense of belonging in new school environments.

Teacher mentoring partnerships have proven effective in supporting beginning teachers'· needs and in facilitating their establishment in the teaching profession and in school communities. In the particular case of visible minority lETs experiencing unemployment and underemployment2 in Ontario, mentoring relationships with established and experienced teachers in the professional community can help to facilitate the reconstruction of their identities as teachers and promote their sense of belonging in the profession. This study analyses the effects of mentoring partnerships on lETs by addressing the specific research question: How do mentoring relationships between unemployed and underemployed lETs from visible minority groups and Canadian-experienced educators affect the development of foreign-trained teachers' professional identities and their perceptions ofinclusion in Greater Toronto Area (GTA) public school communities? This study, in particular, focuses on lETs from visible minority groups experiencing unemployment and underemployment in GTA public school boards, and examines lETs' reclamation of their identities in the profession and sense of belonging in new teaching communities, and the potential value of mentoring relationships in these negotiations.

2 In this study, I reference the Ontario College of Teachers' (OCT) defInitions of unemployed and underemployed teachers. An unemployed teacher refers to an Ontario-certified teacher not working in any teaching capacity in the education system in Ontario. An underemployed teacher refers to an Ontario-certified teacher working in an occasional or assisting teaching position rather than as a regular contract teacher in the Ontario education system.

2

Literature Review
The following review firstly examines recent literature on Ontario's need for teachers from visible minority groups and the challenges that these teachers encounter in accessing the profession. Next, the paper references the (re)production of the dominant 'model' teacher identity in Canada and its correlation to the construct of the lET as a migrant teacher, and examines the 'model' and migrant teachers' standing within the professional teaching community. The review then looks at the juxtaposition of these identity constructs and positions to the specific challenges experienced by visible minority lETs in renegotiating their professional identities and fostering a sense of inclusion in their new school communities. I lastly consider the literature on the potential of mentoring relationships in reforming lET professional identities, and in confronting dominant teacher identity and professional community constructions.

Need/or lETs in Ontario School Communities
In 2006, the Toronto District School Board (TDSB) sponsored a comprehensive survey of over 105,000 of their students from 289 schools, from grades 7 through 12, with a specific aim to develop future strategies to promote student success for all. Notable in the results, the majority of students, including 69% and 67% of grade 7 to 8 and 9 to 12 student populations respectively, identified themselves as visible minorities (Yau & 0' Reilly, 2007). In students' responses to questions on diversity in learning, survey outcomes indicated that over 70% of students felt that education centred on their own cultural or racial backgrounds would make learning in schools more engaging. Furthermore, roughly half stated that learning about their own cultural backgrounds would promote their academic performance. However, survey results also showed that a significant nwnber of students indicated they did not see their own cultures and races reflected in the faces of their teachers. The report showed that teachers from visible 3

minority groups were largely underrepresented in schools, with around a quarter of the TDSB teaching staff racially identifying themselves as other than White. In the wake of the survey results, then TDSB Director of Education, Gerry Connelly, emphasized the necessity for more diversified staff who could offer students role models reflective of their cultural and racial backgrounds (Brown & Rushowy, 2007). This need to recruit a teaching force that better reflected the changing ethnic, cultural and linguistic diversity of student populations was also echoed by the Canadian Teachers' Federation (2006) in their response to the federal government's Employment Equity Act of 1995.

Recent literature has explored the distinct advantages that visible minority teachers offer in supporting diverse school communities. In Ontario, several studies have examined the benefits and valuable experiences of teachers from visible minorities in racially and culturally diverse schools (see for example, Dei & James, 2002; Klassen & Carr, 1997; Solomon, 1997; Thiessen et al., 1996). One prominent theme in the literature has been the correlation between visible minority teachers' and students' shared identities, and the greater sense of belonging. value and representation afforded these students by the presence of such teachers in their school communities. For instance, in Solomon's (1997) focus group study with Toronto pre-service teacher candidates of colour, the teachers observed the constructive influence their 'otherness' had in developing productive relationships with students, in promoting and enriching an inclusive curriculum, in dispelling racially and culturally motivated myths and stereotypes, mid in inspiring students of diverse cultural and ethnic backgrounds through positive role modeling. As the author expressed, the teachers had: ... intervened in students' lives, assuming the role of cultural brokers. interceding on their behalf in a sometimes inhospitable learning environment, and authenticating their voice by moving (ethnic) cultural knowledge from the

4

margins to the mainstream of the curriculwn. Using strategically the politics of cultural identity ... [the teachers] broke down barriers that often exist between students of colour and dominant-group teachers. (Solomon, 1997, p. 406) lETs from visible minority groups have also shown the capacity to advocate on the behalf of diverse students within their school communities. In a range of studies conducted by Thiessen, Bascia, and Goodson (1996) on six racial and ethno-cultural minority immigrant teachers employed in Ontario, the authors examined the influence of the teacher's race and culture on the particular roles they assumed in their schools. In these studies, for example, an lET, Edgar described his experiences providing leadership and guidance to his colleagues in developing a more inclusive curriculwn to meet the diverse needs of their multi-cultural and multi-lingual students (Thiessen et aI., 1996). As noted by the authors, the lETs associated their advocacy roles and responsibilities for visible m.inority students with their own inclinations, values and experiences as teachers, learners and immigrants, as well as with their previous professional practice. Similarly, Klassen and Carr's (1997) study of racial minority and White teachers' perceptions of anti-racist education in Toronto schools further observed that visible minority teachers' abilities in, " ... enhancing cultural compatibility, demystifying the hidden curriculwn, developing positive attitudes towards persons from a variety of backgrounds, expressing lived experiences, connecting with the students, and connecting with communities"

(p. 70) greatly supported inclusive schools and education. The unique perspectives, knowledge
and practices that these teachers from visible minorities contribute to school communities has thus been shown to reinforce Ontario's commitment to student learning and success for all.

Challenges Experienced by lETs in Ontario
While lETs from visible minority groups have the potential to make a valuable impact on the educational experiences of students marginalized in Ontario schools, facts show that a great

5

number continue to be excluded from practicing in their profession. According to the OCT's

(2011) Transition to Teaching 2010 survey, about two-thirds of newly certified lET respondents
reported experiencing considerable obstacles in obtaining teaching positions in Ontario. They cited a lack of contacts and local references as a key barrier and a lack of Canadian experience and difficulty in even finding a volunteer placement as marked obstacles to their employment. Survey outcomes further indicated that lETs had more than double the unemployment rate of Ontario faculties of education graduates (68 versus 27%). According to the survey results, only 7% oflETs had found regular teaching jobs; and only 2% found those regular teaching jobs in Ontario's public school system. Specifically in the GTA, as reported in the OCT's (201Oa) Transition to Teaching 200!! survey, fewer than one-fifth (18%) ofIETs were employed in regular private or publicly-funded contract teaching positions, whilst more than 40% experienced underemployment. As one lET respondent observed, "1 find being trained overseas is looked down upon. Employers, more often than not, interview and hire those educated within Ontario" (Respondent, as cited in OCT, 2010a, p. 40). Most remarkably, in this study, four-fifths of these lETs brought more than two years of prior experience to Ontario, and more than one-third offered over 10 years of classroom teaching. Finding a sense of belonging in the profession and school community has proved challenging for many lETs in situations of unemployment and underemployment as on-call teachers. Experienced lETs seeking occasiona14 and/or regular contract teaching positions in Ontario's' publicly-funded education system have expressed feelings of frustration, isolation,
3
4

Equivalent figures for 2010 were not reported in the OCT's (2011) Transition to Teaching 2010 survey. For the purposes of this research, occasional teaching will be used interchangeably with substitute and supply teaching.

6

and a lack of support needed to successfully establish themselves within the profession. According to the OCT's (2011) Transition to Teaching 2010 survey, several lETs in occasional teaching positions voiced concerns about the lack of recognition of their prior teaching experience by the professional community in Ontario. They are also worried about resuming their teaching careers, and about difficulties in creating networks in the field which they felt were necessary to obtaining regular contract teaching positions. Such insecurity, doubt, and a sense of otherness within the teaching community have inevitably left underemployed lETs feeling marginalized within the profession. Dominant and Migrant Teacher Identities Model Teacher Identity Before further exploration and examination ofIETs' perceptions of teacher identity and their positioning in Ontario school communities, it is imperative to look at the present construction of the dominant teacher identity and its standing within our society. In Canada, teaching has traditionally been a largely White-identified profession, where the teacher's conventional place and status is embedded in notions of social mobility, middle-class respectability, authority and legitimacy. Studies conducted by Schick (2000a, 2000b) with White-identified Canadian pre-service teachers revealed that such identity constructions were rooted in the teachers' performances, (re)pro~uction and reinforcement of dominant Whitemiddle class society's collective norms, values and cultural practices. She further observed that these imagined or 'model' teacher constructions fulfilled Canadian society's normative expectations and qualities considered fitting to persons of good and moral character. Likewise, the author noted, participants' connections with White-Canadian history, governance and cultural practices further ensured their claims to these rightful and natural forms of dominant teacher

7

identities. Furthermore, Schick (2000b) noted that White 'model' teachers, as caregivers to society's children in Canada, are situated in places of great influence and responsibility. Their advantaged positions permit these teachers to uphold prevailing philosophies, knowledge, language and beliefs, " ... through the performance of [their] white identities in roles necessary for the continuation of white domination" (p. 308). 'Model' teacher performances, as a result, help to warrant their continued dominance and the (re)production of accountable and suitable White teacher identities.

Underpinned by dominant racialised and classed characteristics, the place of the 'model' teacher identity in Canada is inherently positioned within a neutral White centre. According to Schick (2000b), the 'model' teacher identity'S construction assumes the required normative characteristics that determine a teacher's suitability for the teaching profession, such as being racially indistinct, straight, and 'normal'. Taken-for-granted dominant knowledge, language and notions furthermore instruct 'model' teachers how to behave and practice within the professional community, and help them to conform to society's expectations of what is required to be a 'good teacher' (Schick, 2000a). Teachers' appropriateness to their profession and claims to the 'model' identity are in turn tied to their ownership and performance of these normative understandings and practices. Yet, as Schick (2000b) observed from discussions with Whiteidentified pre-service teachers, "Assumptions about who can be a teacher and how she will act are regulated by unspeakable norms that go unnoticed ... especially by people who most easily fit the norms" (p. 302). Consequently, these teachers are, " ... advantaged by and implicated in the maintenance of an educational system that advantages them and students who are like them" (McIntyre, 1997, p. 120). As such, the recurrent processes by which White-racialised teacher

8

identities are established and (re)produced result in the continued development and reinforcement of normative constructions within the teaching profession.

Situated in privileged positions within the professional community, 'model' teachers remain largely naive to their privileged positions within the community, and of their roles in (re)producing both dominant ideologies and identities. As such, they have been able to ignore their advantages and in tum reinforce racially marginalized peoples' positioning within the school community. In Schick's (2000a) study of White-identified Canadian pre-service teachers, teacher candidates recognized that in upholding their "goo~ white subject identities" (p. 85), they were required to maintain socially acceptable anti-racist projections and a liberal awareness of racial discrimination. Most notably in Schick's (2000a) interviews, several of these teachers were highly critical of their peers' ignorance about the issues concerning race and racism in schools. However, as emphasized in the author's research, the teachers who were most judgmental of others appeared to use the superiority of their own positions to escape a more thorough and critical examination of their own race-related notions and assumptions. White preservice teacher participants also revealed a superficial understanding of the relationship between their dominant White standing within the community and "the racialisation and subordination of others" (Schick, 2000a, p. 87).

'Model' teachers' resistance in assessing and judging their privileged places within the school community further strengthens their central positions and their continued domination in the profession. Notably, in Schick's (2000a) study, she observed from discussions with the preservice teachers that their, " ... accomplishment of white supremacy and the 'naturalness' of its reproduction [were] dependent on an assumed link between whiteness and innocence" (p. 85).

9

Teachers' professed innocence and refusal of ownership in the marginalization and discrimination of others fortifies their normative identities, assures their privileged standing within the community, and fulfils their desires for security, respectability and goodness. Furthermore, the 'model' teacher's refusal denies those in marginalized positions their unique experiences and their rights to be heard within the community. In other discussion groups with White-identified pre-service teachers in Ontario conducted by Klassen and Carr (1997), the authors concluded that teacher candidates' disregard of race and racism in schools denied the appreciation and value of others' lived experiences, as well as the correlation between those experiences and their White domination within the professional community. Similarly, as Mills (1998) states, dominant White perceptions of reality and the world, thought to be "all-inclusive of the human experience" (p. 9) are in fact removed and deceptive to the experiences of those in marginalized positions. Mills further asserts that the possession of the power and knowledge that places those dominant in positions of privilege in turn allows them to doubt and disregard the reality of those experiencing oppression within their communities. As the research has shown, these power relations and negotiations make it difficult for teachers of non-dominant groups, such as lETs, to access and find a voice and place within the professional community.

Migrant Teacher Identity The identity construction and place of the migrant teacher in the Canadian teaching profession and community have often been shown to be precarious and peripheral. However, migrant teachers in their countries of origin frequently hold privileged positions within their communities, where their qualifications and experience, as well as their values and attitudes award them elevated status and esteem. In Brigham's (2008) discussions with lETs in Canadian schools, she identified the qualities that these teachers associated with the "good teacher", 10

namely their higher qualifications, class advantages, mobility and successful teaching careers, all of which had given them a greater sense of respect, security and stability within the profession. However, in studies conducted with migrant teachers in new teaching communities, several of the lETs identified themselves and felt labelled by their counterparts in the profession as 'different' or as part of 'the other' (Peeler & Jane, 2005; Thiessen et aI., 1996; Wang, 2002). In research conducted in Australia (Kostogriz & Peeler, 2007; Peeler & Jane, 2005), dominant teacher scrutiny and notions that lETs' previous knowledge and experiences were dissimilar and inferior to those oflocally-educated teachers, were shown to weaken lETs' competencies and identities, all of which made migrant teachers appear 'less than professional'. As indicated at the start of this segment of the literature review, the dominant notion of the 'model' teacher involves the inherent ownership of dominant White-middle class norms, values and cultural practices. For that reason, according to Schick (2000a), the dominant community's presumption that migrant teachers lack 'model' teachers' understandings, credentials, status and practices suggest that migrant teachers are professionally 'other' and deficient. As Mills (1998) further expresses, prevailing discriminatory attitudes suggest that 'the other' is "not a full person but rather a 'subperson'" (p. 6), and in the eyes of those dominant, "he is either not taken into account at all in their moral calculations or is accorded only diminished standing" (p. 9). This 'othering' and devaluing ofIETs by members of the dominant teacher group thus threatens the stability of migrant teachers' professional identities and may reinforce their marginalization within the teaching community. This process of'othering' may also affect lETs' choices regarding what beliefs and attitudes to discard and retain as part of their identity negotiations in new school environments. Migrant teachers who choose to hold onto professional identities based upon prior philosophies,

11

knowledge and practices, have often been shown to experience resistance and tension within new teaching communities. As Schick (2000b) observed in her study, a teacher's aptitude for teaching is questioned when they are perceived to challenge dominant expectations and to fail at upholding the social norms that regulate the 'model' teacher's practice. Correspondingly, in discussions with lETs in Australia, Peeler and Jane (2005) noted that those who chose to maintain previous beliefs, understanding and ways of doing things as part of their professional identities consequently ran the risk of being censured and displaced within their teaching communities. As Mills (1998) states, those in marginalized positions face conflict between seeking recognition by the dominant group and feeling pressured to assimilate to dominant practices and culture, while simultaneously struggling to maintain aspects of their own identities. In such cases, boundaries between dominant and migrant teacher identities, rooted in polarizations between respectable/non-respectable behaviour, moral/immoral beliefs, legitimate/non-legitimate practices and se1f7other, are built up and reinforced. lETs' voices in such positions within the community are thus lost, their teacher identities are destabilized, and they face, " ... unforeseen dilemmas for their professional development and shifts in their definition of self' (peeler & Jane, 2005, p. 325).

Dominant and Migrant Teachers' Standing within the Professional Community The professional teaching community in Canada is structured and governed by dominant codes of conduct and norms that work to manage member teachers' practices, behaviours and attitudes. Largely characterised as White middle-class, non-political and objective, the overriding teaching community is highly protective of its image, values system and traditions, as well as its standing within the greater society (Schick, 2000a). As Puar and Rai (2004) express, inclusion within dominant communities necessitates fulfilling predetermined requirements for 12

belonging. These requirements are not based on differences amongst its members but instead on resemblances that reinforce a particular 'community identity' or 'solidarity'. Similarly, membership and acceptance within the professional teaching community encourages teachers to uphold a common image, as well as a set of overriding beliefs and values, to aid in the construction and maintenance of a dominant community identity. Teachers' relationships with others in privileged community roles, including teacher colleagues, former classroom teachers, faculty of education professors as well as their traditional associations with "the generic teacher" (McIntyre, 1997, p. 119), additionally help to strengthen their membership claims and power of the professional community. In this way, dominant teaching community members are agents who, " ... in their allegiance to white values, their claims on whiteness and their interest in reproducing it" (Schick, 2000a, p. 91), at once perform their teacher identities and defend the professional community's standing by representing themselves as part of the privileged centre and as an active constituent of the community's domination.

Socially constructed as an idealized society, the professional teaching community is projected as an inclusive place of mUltiple forms of diversity, including race, ethnicity, gender, class and sexuality. This normative professional community identity is not unlike that of the imagined North American dominant community as illustrated by Puar and Rai (2004). Promising inclusion and opportunity, the authors describe the dominant community as a place of salvation where members are not required to compromise their values, beliefs and identities. According to Puar and Rai (2004), these communities are often sought after by those who desire a place of "racial harmony and multiculturalism" (p. 75) and yet, they are a myth constructed by those in dominant groups. Similarly, the professional teaching community has created this notion of an imagined all-inclusive and diverse community, welcoming to teachers of different 13

backgrounds and ethnicities. However, this imagined community does not yet appear to have been realised. For instance, although there has been a progressive increase in the hiring of teachers of visible minority groups in the TDSB in the last fifteen years (Barbara Herring & Associates Inc., 2007), previous research conducted with this public school board has also shown that students feel their teachers do not adequately reflect their diverse ethnicities and cultures (Yau & 0' Reilly, 2007). As well, there is ambiguity surrounding who counts as a visible minority teacher. Specifically, the research provided by TDSB does not specify whether its visible minority teachers include those that have been internationally-educated. In" addition, statistical research focused on the hiring of lETs and lETs of visible minority groups has yet to be made available by the TDSB and other public school boards in the GTA. This lack of information about lETs and their representation in GTA public school boards, and lETs' low employment rates in Ontario relative to others in the field, implies that the hiring of visible minority lETs may not yet be as common as the hiring of visible minority teachers locallyeducated in Canadian faculties of education.

Several Australian and Canadian studies speak to migrant teachers' experiences and peripheral positions within the professional community, dispelling myths of racial harmony and challenging illusory community identities. Kostogriz and Peeler (2007) and Peeler and Jane (2005) found that migrant teachers' inability to identify with normative and taken-for-granted social customs and values affected their feelings of acceptance by the dominant group, and their professional recognition within the teaching community. Similarly, a recent study ofIETs by Schmidt (2010) in the Manitoba education system documented lET and other education stakeholder accounts of exclusion and discrimination towards migrant teachers in schools and faculty of education courses. The forms of discrimination identified included the prejudicial 14

treatment ofIETs on the basis of accent, dress, immigrant status, and perceived 'foreignness' all of which led to their marginalization in the professional community. In Brigham's (2008) interviews with lETs of colour, she found that the teachers' lack of White-Canadian middle-class attitudes, accents, social skills, appearance, language, and familiarity with popular culture led others within the professional community to perceive the migrant teachers as abnormal, backward and distasteful. According to Brigham (2008), as foreigners and as 'the other' within the profession, lETs, "lack the social script" (p. 44) that those in privileged positions inherently possess. Without access to the intrinsic knowledge they feel they need to effectively function in new communities, the lETs expressed feelings of frustration, isolation, and a lack of support needed to successfully establish them within the profession and in school communities. These feelings of insecurity, doubt and sense of 'otherness' have the potential to further distance lETs from central positions within the profession and emphasize their non-acceptance by the dominant community.

Migrant teachers are additionally under pressure to prove the value of their foreign qualifications and experiences to members of the professional community. Research indicates that negative views ofIETs' foreign-credentials, prior teaching experiences, and non-native language skills, have led to perceived devaluation of their qualifications and lack of recognition, consequently undermining their sense of professionalism and community standing (Bascia, 1996; Kostogriz & Peeler, 2007; Mawhinney & Xu, 1997; Phillion, 2003). As expressed by one lET in Brigham's (2008) study, "Everything we are experiencing outside this culture seems to be discounted" (p. 44). Another added: ... you want to be a teacher. You think all your education, all your experiences back home have been erased ... That makes me so depressed. That makes you

15

fall down. You start thinking, 'I have wasted my time here ... I have to start as a fresh child'. (Participant, cited in Brigham, 2008, p. 44) The dominant community's ignorance and negative perceptions ofIETs' qualifications and experience further displace these teachers to peripheral positions in the professional community. Additionally, added stress and anxiety to prove their worth to those in the dominant group contribute to migrant teachers' feelings oflowered self-esteem and status.

Resultant tension between lETs and dominant members of the teaching community may also arise from migrant teachers' practices, empathy and support of marginalized students in their school communities. Such conflict may further contribute to lETs' feelings of isolation, frustration and 'otherness'. As defined by Thiessen (1996), lETs' professional selves are demonstrated in " ... the ways they interact with students, in the tensions between their personal and professional lives, in their coping strategies about being different, and in the images of themselves and their colleagues as teachers" (p. 141). From their peripheral positions within the professional community, lETs have been shown to reach out and give voice to other members experiencing marginalization in the school community. For example, in Bascia's (1996) study of visible minority lETs in Ontario, she observed that these teachers became primary advocates and professional role models to students of visible minorities within their schools. However, their practices and associations with these students resulted in feelings of difference and strain in dealings with colleagues. Their advocacy for these students furthermore was found to impact lETs' sense of credibility, standing and belonging among members of the professional community. As one migrant teacher Rose exclaimed, "1 would just appreciate it if 1 were treated with the same degree of seriousness and respect [by my principal] ... I feel that it's because of my race, stature, gender, and probably position [that I am not]" (Participant Rose, as cited in

16

Bascia, 1996, p. 166). Marginalized positions within the professional community further expose migrant teachers to resistance in the form of racial stereotypes, negative attitudes, discrimination and racism (Mawhinney & Xu, 1997; Thiessen et aI., 1996). Such prejudice and injurious beliefs about migrant teacher loyalties and practices further alienate and label lETs as 'the other' and different from the dominant group.

While migrant teachers face obvious struggles within the professional community, their presence and actions also have the potential to create forms of resistance by members of the dominant community. Puar and Rai (2004) remark that migrants are under pressure to assimilate and adopt dominant norms, views and practices in order to survive and become what is perceived by the dominant community as the "model minority" (p. 77). lETs are also challenged to comply with the dominant teaching community'S understandings and practices. However, as Kostogriz and Peeler (2007) found, lETs who chose to rebel against assimilation by maintaining previous ways or identities demonstrated defiance and were at risk of becoming further alienated within the professional community. Differences that create opposition and disturb existing dominant structures, norms and practices are perceived as threats to the security, stability and power, as well as the character of the dominant collective community (Puar & Rai, 2004). Due to the dominant group's need for stability and fixity, the presence and the danger of the lET as 'the other' are thus seen to undermine and unsettle the professional community's identity and its place in the greater community_ As Schick (2000a) observed, acts of resistance by the dominant community were demonstrated in instances of teachers' refusal of, or negative response to, antiracist pedagogy, and in learning new forms of objectivity that contested the existence of racism in schools and the allowance of 'the other' within the professional community. As has been made evident in the research, when the dominant community's privileged positioning, identity

17

and knowledge are considered or perceived to beat risk of being destabilized, those marginalized within the community may face repercussions and resistance from the dominant community members.

Mentoring Relationships in Reclaiming Migrant Teacher Identities and Creating a Sense of Belonging
For visible minority lETs, their success in negotiating challenges, in establishing themselves in new schools, and in reconstructing their sense of professionalism, are highly dependent on access to the knowledge and support they receive from the professional community. Teacher mentoring has been recognized by educational stakeholders and researchers alike as a vital and comprehensive strategy that effectively provides this support for beginning teachers in the profession. Mentoring relationships have been shown to playa fundamental role in developing beginning teachers' sense of self-efficacy and professional practice, and in easing the challenges that these newcomers face in their first teaching assignments (for example, Bullough & Draper, 2004; Cherubini, 2007; Howe, 2006; Hutchison, 2006; Johnson, 2004; Wilkins & Clift, 2007). Mentoring collaborations give both beginning and experienced teachers the opportunities to self-reflect, enhance their critical thinking skills, and . develop adaptive abilities vital to their success in the professional community. Most importantly, mentoring relationships further facilitate professional interactions and seek to offer safe and nurturing spaces in which to identify, constructively discuss, and critically evaluate teacher responses to issues within the context of the school community and profession. As Tickle (2000) remarked (as cited in Kitchen, Cherubini, Smith, Goldblatt, & Engemann 2008), induction strategies such as mentoring need ", .. to go beyond the mere practical advice and socialization process ... to include opportunities for self-questioning and reflection not only

18

upon teachers' own actions, but also upon the values and norms underlying the education settings in which they work" (p. 63).

Mentoring partnerships can prove valuable in providing encouragement and support in orienting lETs to the philosophies and practicalities of teaching in new educational environments, and in promoting their success. For example, a case study by Peeler and Jane (2005) on a group of non-white immigrant teachers in Australia found that mentoring relationships aided lETs in 'bridging the gap' between prior and new ways of knowing, in functioning effectively as teachers, as well as in developing positive professional identities in their new teaching environments. Teacher participant narratives illustrated that the supportive mentoring relationships between lETs and experienced practitioners helped these newcomers negotiate meaning and their sense of professionalism by making connections between their prior knowledge and experiences and the practices they found in their new teaching environments. In one example, a participant named Akiko described the continuous support she received from her mentor as being instrumental in developing her cultural knowledge, classroom practice, confidence, and understanding of her role as a teacher.

In another study by Jane and Peeler (2007), lET participants acknowledged that mentors' commitment to their relationships, time taken in dialoguing and modeling practice, as well as patience, were vital to fostering the lETs' emotional stability, social empowerment, personal motivation and assertiveness. For these lETs, these relationships aimed to provide them with the insights and tools they needed to navigate new teaching environments, decode local practices, and ease frustrations and feelings of seclusion and doubt. Acquiring the appropriate sociocultural knowledge through mentoring in these examples correlated with lETs' increased sense

19

of self-worth, feeling of inclusion in the teaching community, and a re-establishment of professionalism.

Participants in a Kostogriz and Peeler (2007) study of nine female migrant teachers in Australia expressed a sense of exclusion from the professional teaching community and within their workplaces. Central to these feelings were the lETs' experiences of having their prior knowledge devalued, of cultural differences, and their lack of appropriate socio-cultural capital to navigate the systems and practices. As consequences to these experiences, participant teachers referred to instances of misunderstandings in the staffroom, confusion during staff meetings, and awkwardness in establishing collegial relationships as obstacles faced in becoming a part of their teaching communities. The IETs' workplace experiences with lower levels of English language proficiency and lack of cultural literacy further deepened their sense of exclusion within their schools. As noted by the authors in their observations, informal mentoring partnerships proved to be a valuable means by which these teachers integrated and comprehended these unwritten conventions in their new teaching environments. Participants in their mentoring relationships made connections between previous work practices from their countries of origin and those found in their current schools to make sense of their new professional spaces. Mentoring partnerships in these ways helped these migrant teachers move away from marginalised positions in the dominant professional community and, in turn, transformed their professional identities.

Several studies on lETs from visible minorities' experiences in Ontario schools additionally highlighted the great need for dedicated mentoring initiatives. Deters' (2008) study of the integration experience of migrant teacher Emily from China examined the relationships

20

between her identity, agency and professional acculturation during her first teaching position in an Ontario school. The findings of the study determined that supportive and constructive social interactions Emily had with fellow teachers and administrators were important to the construction and reinforcement of a positive professional identity. In interviews, Emily described receiving valuable guidance, resources, and emotional support from colleagues, as well as gaining acceptance as a legitimate member of their school community through mentoring relationships. In one particular example, Emily related the emotional support she received from a fellow teacher:

At the beginning ... I was so frustrated. I didn't know how to handle the problems with the students, because they were quite different from the problems I had in my previous school. So she talked to me, showed me, she shared with me her experience. She seems to be understanding. (Participant Emily, as cited in Deters, 2008, p. 19) The guidance Emily received from her teacher-mentor built confidence in her skills, and lessened her feelings of isolation and frustration. Hence, socialization played a role in enabling Emily to overcome challenges she faced in her first year of teaching and in achieving a positive sense of self and professional identity.

In a subsequent study conducted by Deters (2009) on the professional acculturation experiences of elementary, secondary and post-secondary lETs in Ontario, the author considered, in part, the role ofmentoring in migrant teachers' identity, agency and professional language and culture acquisition. In her discussions with 33 mainly employed lETs and 15 educational professionals, including administrators, mentors and professional deVelopment facilitators, the author identified various constraints to lET participants' professional integration in Ontario. Some of the constraints noted were differences in teaching and learning styles, curriculum, and

21

the roles, responsibilities and expectations of teachers in Ontario, as compared to their countries of origin. Another constraint identified was discrimination by members of the school community based on lETs' race, English language proficiencies, accents, and foreign education and experiences. Support and guidance from teacher colleagues, administrators, mentors, and the wider school community, on the other hand, were acknowledged by more than half of the lET participants as an affordance to their establishment in the teaching profession and schools. As noted by the author, the validation, emotional support and resources provided by these individuals in part fostered lET participants' sense of belonging in these new school environments and helped them to develop positive professional identities.

A report conducted by MawhiIUley and Xu (1997) within an Ontario public school context, examined in part the role of mentoring relationships in the reconstruction of seven visible minority lETs' professional identities through their participation in a 13-week recertification pilot program. In their interviews, several of the lETs identified challenges that they faced in establishing themselves within their school communities. Many of the lETs experienced negative attitudes towards their English language accents, their credentials, and their abilities in the classroom. The lETs also reported experiences of racial discrimination. Community members' perceptions ofIETs as being outsiders within the school community also caused frustration and tension. Nevertheless, the study showed that mentoring between some of the migrant and established teachers in the schools provided opportunities to develop professional relationships that eased their transition. However, the study also showed that due to the lack of dedicated mentoring partnerships, these teachers did not receive the consistent degree of help they needed.

22

Similarly, in Wang's (2002) Toronto case study of eight Chinese migrant teachers and their experiences of cultural dissonance and adaptation, the participants expressed frustration and difficulties in negotiating their integration in Canadian school environments. Among their challenges as teachers were differences in teaching preparation and methodologies, classroom management, and peer relations. For example, in narratives exploring relationships with teacher colleagues, a teacher named Alice recognized that, " ... good relation with Canadian colleagues is very important to carrying out the daily job as an immigrant teacher in the Toronto school" (p. 162). She further commented that collegial relations in Canada were more essential than in China. However, she also stated: ... to learn to be good and friendly with everyone is not easy, simply because we don't know the cultures they [teachers from other countries] are from or how to deal with them ... if you don't handle the peer relationship well [in the Toronto school] ... you would feel so uncomfortable and frustrated all the time. (Participant Alice, cited in Wang, 2002, p. 162) Other participants in the study responded that they did not have teacher friends or colleagues to communicate with in their schools. In their adaptation to their new teaching environments, these teachers expressed feelings of isolation and exclusion that they associated with the differences they felt between themselves and their Canadian coworkers. As Alice expressed, " ... most of the times, I am alone. [I am] not sure whether it is because I am new to the school or because I am a Chinese immigrant. They seem to treat me differently" (Participant Alice, as cited in Wang, 2002, p. 163-164). Several of the participants echoed this sentiment in their narratives. Findings showed that most of the participants turned to family and friends, as well as other immigrant teachers, for emotional and psychological support in dealing with these challenges. The study also produced some contradictory results. Most of the lETs interviewed stated that they preferred to maintain a distance between themselves and their colleagues and did not

23

believe that relations with them would be of benefit to their integration. Nevertheless, one of the suggestions made by the study's participants was to create a comprehensive and dedicated support system to meet future migrant teachers' unique needs, allowing these teachers to express any conflicts they may experience at cognitive, philosophical or emotional levels throughout their school system integration process.

Research indicates that mentoring relationships help to produce shifts in lETs' identities, to create a sense of belonging and recognition, and to allow migrant teachers to move away from marginalized positions within the professional community. Yet, the success of mentoring relationships for migrant teachers is highly dependent on the role that dominant community member teachers play within the partnerships. According to Schick (2000a), dominant teachers' desire to help those in need, as well as their need for positive self-images as respectable and legitimate members of the professional community, are correlated to their desire to help and to gain a better understanding of 'the other'. In the same way, the dominant community'S 'good' and helper teacher identities motivates them to support migrant teachers in positive and constructive mentoring relationships within the teaching community. However, dominant teachers' refusals to scrutinize their insecurities about 'the other' as well as their privileged positioning within the community have the potential to impede the outcomes of these relationships. According to Schick (2000a), even while maintaining their imiocence, 'model' teachers recognise that much is at risk if they lose, " ... control over privilege, history,job opportunities, a good name, positive teacher image, and the power of self-definition" (p. 96). 'Good' teacher mentors' compassion, support and shared knowledge are therefore not sufficient

in unravelling and revealing the complex issues that face migrant teachers and determine their
racialised positions in the professional community. As McIntyre (1997) states:

24

· .. when teachers' personalities, school curricula, and educational practices are left unproblematized and unchallenged, we run the risk of passively transferring unexamined knowledge, thus, reifying and maintaining oppressive structures that ensure the sanctity of the dominant group's power, privilege, and ideology. (p. 117) However, mentoring may offer a vantage point from which lETs and their mentors can challenge and refuse dominant normative identity constructions and the positioning of migrant teachers within the professional community. As Harding (l993) states, relationships based upon diverse perspectives and experiences produce the critical questions that identify, examine and challenge dominant and oppressive structures, relations and practices: While these learning experiences may prove disorienting, uncomfortable and even disturbing to some, mentoring relationships have the potential to challenge teachers of the dominant community to gain stronger objectivity and engage in discourses about marginalized teachers' experiences, barriers, and goals in the teaching profession. The answers to the questions that arise from these marginalized positions may not necessarily be found in the experiences of those marginalized, but instead, " ... in the beliefs and activities of people at the center who make policies and engage in social practices that shape marginalized lives" (p. 54). Discourses with migrant teachers in this way allow established teachers in the community to critically examine the dominant beliefs and practices that continue to discriminate against migrant teachers. Active and collaborative relationships between those in periphery and dominant positions within a community, therefore promote the understanding of each of their own roles in perpetuating these institutional practices and resultant marginalization (Harding, 1993). As Schick (2000a) observes, "a [teacher's] desire for goodness and self-presentation are also the site for re-evaluating possibilities for change and for asking 'what does "good" look like now?'" (p. 99). Mentoring relationships offer the possibilities for

25

re-examining and changing those attitudes which can be found in teachers' places of doubt, insecurity and inner conflict.

Mentoring relationships are also sites of action that can give both migrant and established teachers within dominant communities the opportunities and spaces to facilitate change. As suggested by Harding (1993), these relationships challenge teachers of the dominant group to think more fundamentally about underlying misconceptions, normative identity and community structures that promote inequities and the marginalization of migrant teachers. Similarly, mentoring relationships support the construction of ever-evolving teacher identities, and provide those in marginalized positions within the professional community with the ability to reclaim their identities and self-worth from positions of resistance. As described by Schick (2000a, 2000b), mentoring relationships have the potential to expose and challenge the (re)production of dominant knowledge, values, beliefs and racist myths that have their roots in a White middleclass system of privilege and power. Moreover, as Flax (1993) stated about truth and certainty (as cited by Schick, 2000a, p. 100), " ... these junctures are exactly where responsibility beyond innocence looms as a promise and a frightening necessity". It is therefore within these mentoring moments that there lies the possibility for lETs and their Canadian-experienced mentors to explore new understandings and knowledge production, and to recognize diverse and alternative forms of what it means to be a valuable and productive member of the teaching community.

Research Focus
The literature reviewed has provided valuable insights into the potentially positive role of mentoring partnerships in the renegotiation of visible minority lETs' professional identities and
26

in fostering their sense of inclusion in school communities. With regards to the proposed study, however, several angles in this research area have yet to be explored. First, most of the participants in the research examined were lETs in government-funded pre-service teacher training, recertification and internship programs, as well as regular contract teaching positions with publicly-funded school boards. Notably absent from the literature was a focus on the experiences of unemployed and underemployed lETs and the potential impact that mentoring relationships could have on their identity reformation and feelings of inclusion in GTA schools. Additionally, the studies I analysed were mainly one-sided and did not explore the mutual perspectives and experiences of both mentees and mentors in such relationships. Consequently lacking in the literature therefore, were the voices of the experienced teacher-mentors themselves. Mentor teachers' attitudes on the affects of mentoring relationships on their own professional practice and identities, as well as non-white lETs' roles in school communities, would present an important addition to the literature. Finally, a specific look at dedicated mentoring partnerships between unemployed and underemployed visible minority lETs and Canadian-experienced teachers outside of school environments has not as yet been attempted. Examination of these relationships and their influence on the reconstruction of lETs' professional identities and sense of belonging within GTA school communities would provide valuable insight into this area of research and make recommendations for future mentoring initiatives. These are some of the issues that I address in this study.

Research Context and Purpose Statement
My strong interest in exploring the integration experiences of visible minority lETs within GTA school communities is rooted in both my previous and current work with skilled migrants in the immigration settlement and employment services fields. As a former Facilitator

27

and Counsellor for the Teach in Ontario program at Skills for Change, Toronto, I had the privilege to work with more than 450 IETs through the Sector-Terminology, Information and Counselling (STIC) bridging program from May 2006 to April 2008. In the nearly two years that I spent in these roles, I witnessed firsthand the struggles and challenges faced by these lETs as they strove to regain meaningful teaching employment and to re-establish themselves within the profession in Ontario. The certified unemployed and underemployed lETs in occasional teaching positions who I worked with often expressed their frustrations about the insufficient support they received from in-service faculty of education professional development courses and school board-run occasional teaching workshops. The teachers voiced concerns that these supports did not adequately equip lETs with the strategies, knowledge and practices they needed to address their distinct challenges, to build their self confidence, and to foster their sense of place within the Ontario educational community. Despite the difficulties they encountered, these individuals were dedicated to teaching and learning, they were persistent in overcoming barriers to their profession, and they showed great desire to reconstruct their professional identities within Ontario schools. For these reasons, I feel compelled to this day to continue my support ofIETs and to further explore interventions that promote their successful integration into the profession, and their obtainment of secure and stable employment in the teaching field. My current position as a Case Manager and Mentoring Coach with the Integrated Prearrival Services Online (IPSO) project at JVS Toronto has additionally provided me with great insight into the positive impact ofmentoring partnerships on internationally-trained migrants' settlement and employment experiences in Canada. As noted in the literature review, mentoring has been shown to be an effective strategy in fostering lETs' successful employment integration, in reconstructing their professional identities, and in creating their sense of inclusion. However, 28

there remained a gap with respect to the role of dedicated mentoring partnerships outside of schools between unemployed and underemployed visible minority lETs and Canadianexperienced mentors in the Ontario teaching profession. Furthermore, the literature examined failed to address the perspectives of both visible minority lETs and Canadian-experienced educators in these partnerships. The purpose of this study therefore is to observe the effects of dedicated mentoring relationships on visible minority lETs' perceptions of their professionalism and on their feelings of belonging within the Ontario educational community, as well as the perspectives of Canadian-experienced teachers in mentoring roles. In doing so, the research conducted addressed the following questions: 1. How do mentoring relationship experiences foster the reconstruction of visible minority lETs' professional identities? 2. What effects does the mentoring process have on these lETs' perceived sense of belonging in the professional community? 3. What are lET mentees' and Canadian-experienced educator mentors' views on the role of mentoring partnerships in fulfilling these goals? 4. What are the implications of these outcomes for future mentoring program delivery for lETs and other internationally trained professionals? Research Methodology This study employed a qualitative methodology to describe and understand the mentoring experiences of visible minority lETs and Canadian-experienced educators in the Ontario professional community. According to Neuman (2008), a qualitative method follows a non-

29

linear path that allows the researcher to become iinmersed in the lived experiences of their subjects and to gradually develop a particular focus based on what is gathered and learned from the data (p. 149-177). This approach was therefore considered most appropriate to explore the mentoring relationships and their outcomes through the eyes of both the lET mentees and Canadian-experienced mentors. Using an interpretive stance, the study drew upon and considered the participants' experiences in relation to the literature reviewed and in response to my research questions. Given the focus of my research questions, and the aim of my study to better understand the lived experiences of lET mentees and their mentors, I used semi-structured, in-depth interviews as my primary data collection instrument. As reviewed in the background literature, many of the studies pertaining to lET identity, sense of belonging, and the role ofmentoring relationships in new school environments, used qualitative, first-person narrative approaches (for example, Deters, 2008; Peeler and Jane, 2005; Phillion, 2003.). A narrative inquiry framework (Clandinin & Connelly, 2000) was used to foster an understanding of participants' experiences from their perspectives, to build rapport and trust, and to promote dialogue that further developed relationships and a sense of community. Interviews with lET mentees and Canadianexperienced educator mentors across subject specializations and personal and professional histories enabled me to explore similarities and differences in the experiences of my research participants. Mentee and mentor interviews, mentee participant journal entries, and my own reflections throughout the research process, provided insight into the importance of these partnerships, as well as their influence on the reconstruction of lETs' professional identities and sense of inclusion in the Ontario teaching community.

30

Sampling
Teacher participants for this study were drawn from the Mentoring/or Change mentorship program at Skills for Change, Toronto, which supports and assists intemationallytrained professionals, including lETs, in overcoming barriers to successful employment integration. To ensure that I obtained participants that met my research study requirements, I employed a purposive sampling technique to recruit three lET and Canadian-experienced mentoring partnerships. After receiving approval from the Ryerson Ethics Board (REB) at Ryerson University, Toronto, a recruitment flyer was provided to a staff member at Skills for Change to distribute via email to lETs that had completed the Men/oring/or Change program (see Appendix A). A telephone script was given to the staff member to help in the recruitment of lETs over the phone (see Appendix B). Initial screenings of prospective lET participants by the Skills for Change staff member followed. Partnering Canadian-experienced mentors were then recruited by email and phone to pair with those lET mentees who expressed an interest in participating in the research study. Each pair recruited for the study comprised of one visible minority unemployed or underemployed lET mentee licensed to teach in Ontario, and a currently employed or retired Canadian-experienced educator mentor (see Table I). I then contacted the interested parties and arranged interviews at their convenience.

31

Table 1:

Participant Profiles
Pair A Yvette' 7 years Elementary 2003 2007 EA No Sri Lanka PairB Mentees Sukhvir 14 years Elementary, Senior 2007 2008 Unemployed Yes India Mentors Chanchal Over 25 years Elementary Principal PairC Panninder 8 years Elementary 2004 2006 Occasional Teacher Yes India

Teaching experience Teaching level Certification process began Certification received Current employment Volunteering Country of origin

Teaching experience Teaching level Current employment

Past employment Country of origin Ethnicity

Graham Over 30 years Elementary Retired Teacher, Principal, Program Consultant, Author Canada White

Michelle Over 20 years Elementary Retired Teacher, Vice Principal, Principal Canada White

Teacher, Vice Principal India South Asian

Data Collection
Nine in-depth interviews consisting of six individual mentee and mentor interviews and three pair interviews with lET and Canadian-experienced mentoring pairs were performed between December 18th , 2010 and February 5th , 2011. Participant individual and pair interviews were conducted in various locations throughout the GTA, including a Toronto public library, a TDSB elementary school, a local coffee shop, and a mentor's home. All participants were informed in advance of the interviews that they could refuse to respond to any questions that they did not wish to answer, and that they could opt out ofthe research study at any time (see

5

To protect the confidentiality of research participants, their names have been withheld in this study. Pseudonyms have been used in substitute of participants' real names.

32

Appendices C and D). Individual interviews with lET mentees were conducted separately from mentor and mentoring pair interviews to ensure impartiality and confidentiality. The in-depth interviews were initiated by a number of general open-ended queries with an aim to establish trust, prompt additional questions, and lead toward further topics of interest. The interviews were non-linear in nature, and their development depended upon the responses generated by the initial set of questions posed. Different questions were asked of mentees, mentors and mentoring pairs to explore their retrospective accounts of their mentoring relationships and experiences in the Ontario teaching community (see Appendix E). For instance, the following questions were used in opening individual dialogues with lET mentees: 1. Tell me about your previous teaching experiences in your country of origin. 2. What were your experiences in the teaching field when you came to Ontario? 3. Describe your experience in the mentoring partnership. 4. How has the relationship changed the way you feel as an internationally-educated teacher in Ontario? Questions posed in interviews with individual Canadian-experienced mentors included: 1. What do you understand are the primary challenges that internationally-trained teachers face in seeking teacher licensing and employment in Ontario? 2. What expectations did you have of your mentee in this relationship? 3. What challenges, if any, did you encounter in the relationship? 4. How has this relationship influenced your perceptions of the teacher's role in Ontario school communities? In pair interviews with lET mentees and Canadian-experienced mentors, questions asked included: 33

1. Why did you choose to enter into a mentoring partnership? 2. What have been the benefits to your participation in this relationship? 3. How has this relationship influenced your perceptions of the teaching profession and your role in school communities? 4. Has this relationship changed the way you both feel as teachers and life-long learners? A second component of the data collection of this study consisted of lET mentee reflective journal entries. Mentee participants were requested to make two to three_handwritten or typed entries in response to a list of topics provided at the start of the research study (see Appendix F). This alternative means of data collection allowed lETs to freely express their views and feelings about their experiences in their mentoring relationships and in the Ontario teaching community at their own convenience and pace. Excerpts from the journal entries enhanced the data collected from the mentee, mentor and pair interviews. All interviews were conducted in person and audio-tape recorded with participant permission. The recordings were transcribed verbatim and sent to each of the research participants for member checks. Written reflections were sent via email from participant mentees. Additional clarification and missing information was attained through email correspondence. Both transcripts and lET reflective journal entries were coded for meaning and categorized based on emergent themes. As per Neuman (2006), open, axial and selective coding techniques were then implemented to condense, organize and focus the data collected. Dominant and recurring themes were analyzed and explored in relation to the research question and provided a basis for the subsequent discussion and recommendations.

34

Results and Analysis

The interviews with the mentees, mentors and mentoring pairs, as well as mentee reflective journal entries, produced an abundance of data from which I was able to draw three principal themes of relevance to this study. These themes and their sub-components both resemble and are different from those found in the literature review. The themes and sub-themes have been organized in the following manner: 1. The Dominant Community's Resistance to lETs

1.1. Forms of Resistance from the Dominant Community
1.2. Reasons for the Dominant Community's Refusal of lETs 1.3. Impact of Dominant Community Resistance ofIETs 2. The Importance of Mento ring Relationships in Providing Support to lETs 2.1. Fulfilling lETs' Knowledge and Understanding of the Ontario Education System 2.2. The Importance of Providing lETs with Job Search Information and Support 2.3. The Importance of Mentoring for lET Recognition by the Teaching Community 2.4. The Importance of Mentor Advocacy for lETs in the Ontario Teaching Profession 2.5. The Importance of Providing lETs with Encouragement and Guidance 3. The Importance of Consistency, Trust and Honesty in Building Collaborative Mentoring Relationships 3.1. The Importance of Consistency 3.2. The Importance of Trust and Honesty 3.3. The Importance of Collaboration The first theme, The Dominant Community's Resistance to lETs, speaks to existing dominant community perceptions and attitudes that hinder lETs from establishing themselves in the Ontario teaching profession and in school communities. This theme is broken down into three significant parts, namely, the forms of resistance from the dominant community toward

35

teachers from visible minority groups and lETs, reasons for the dominant community's refusal of lETs, and the impact that this resistance has on lETs' sense of identity and belonging in the teaching profession. The next theme, The Importance ofMentoring Relationships in Providing Support to

lETs, illustrates the positive influence mentoring relations with Canadian-experienced teachers
have on lETs in fostering their development as professionals and in helping them to access the teaching field in Ontario. This theme is divided into five sub-components. The first segments describe the role ofmentoring in fulfilling lETs' knowledge and understanding of the Ontario education system and teaching practices, and in providing job search information and support. The remaining sub-sections outline the importance ofmentoring relationships in gaining the teaching community's appreciation and recognition of lETs' contributions to Ontario school communities, in advocating for lETs in the Ontario teaching profession, and in providing lETs with encouragement and guidance. The final theme that emerged from the research data, The Importance of Consistency,

Trust and Honesty in Building Collaborative Mentoring Relationships, describes the significance
of these attributes in developing constructive partnerships that foster lETs' successful integration in the Ontario teaching profession. This theme is further subdivided into the importance of dependability, reliance and common purpose to lETs and Canadian-experienced mentors in these relationships. The following segments provide the overall findings of this research.

1.

The Dominant Community's Resistance to lETs
A key theme that emerged from the interviews with lET mentees and Canadian-

experienced mentors was the dominant community's resistance to teachers from visible minority

36

groups, including lETs. Previous studies in the literature review also referenced this particular theme. The following sections will describe the findings of this study in terms of participants' views on the forms of resistance from the dominant community, the reasons for this resistance, and the impact that it has on lETs in the Ontario teaching profession. 1.1. Forms ofResistance from the Dominant Community In their interviews, mentees and mentors alike described various forms of resistance coming from the dominant community, such as intolerance, resentment, and lack of recognition of visible minority teachers' and lETs' worth to the profession and to school communities. For example, Yvette, a mentee, recounted her first experience in the Ontario educational system when she attempted to secure a volunteer position with a local school, three months after her arrival in Canada. As she recalled, the acting school administrator rejected her as a volunteer and handed her a 'pink slip' on her first day of assignment: [The administrator said] 'You can't volunteer as a teacher. There are people who don't like it'. He told me straight to my face. Believe me, the feelings I had in my chest that time I just was so scared, so disappointed ... I didn't go back after that. (Yvette, individual interview) Yvette was again met with refusal from the professional community when she applied for her teaching license at the Ontario College of Teachers (OCT). This mentee, who is ofBurgher6 descent and a native English-speaker from Sri Lanka, described this encounter with a member of the regulatory body's Client Services department: I fill in everything and I go and give it to the counter and, I think the woman's an Indian by origin, she looks at me and she says, oh, so you're applying to that. I

6

The Burghers are a Eurasian ethnic group, historically from Sri Lanka, consisting mainly of male-line descendants of 16th to 20th century European colonists of Portuguese, Dutch, German and British decent. Today, the mother tongue of the Burghers in Sri Lanka is English and Sinhalese is a second language.

37

PROFfRTY OF ____ RYEOOON Uli!\JERS1TY L1SRARY

"'"It

said, yeah. Do you know that you would have to do an English test? I said, yeah. Well, not many of you pass, you know. (Yvette, individual interview) Yvette proved to the professional community that she was worthy of acceptance and of being licensed as a teacher by achieving the requirements for certification four years later. However, as demonstrated by Yvette's initial experiences in the educational system, lETs are vulnerable to rejection and prejudice from the dominant teaching community as they attempt to establish themselves in the profession. Canadian-experienced mentors also talked about the dominant professional community's resistance to visible minorities and lETs. In several instances as a school administrator, Michelle, a mentor, recounted facing underlying tension from White teaching staff and parent communities for hiring teachers from diverse racial and cultural backgrounds to meet the needs of immigrant families in her schools. In one example, Michelle recalled a White teacher's resistance to a fellow teacher, an lET from a Muslim background, who had voiced divergent cultural views on marriage and religion. As Michelle observed, the White teacher "was hearing things they didn't necessarily want to hear" (Michelle, individual interview) and later suggested that the lET was not open to listening to otller members of the school community. Michelle described the mood towards lETs in that school: I felt that there was a resistance - nobody ever said anything to me, whatever. But things sort of come out, and I felt there was some kind of resistance in, in the school itself, among certain people. (Michelle, individual interview) Michelle also recounted instances where parents demonstrated forms of "intercultural resistance" (Michelle, individual interview) toward lETs in school communities. She recalled a time when a parent of European-origin demanded that their child be removed from a classroom being taught by an internationally-educated Muslim teacher. Negative past experiences with Muslims was cited by the parent to Michelle as their reason for refusal of the lET. In other cases that Michelle

38

relayed, parents' insistences for "perfect English and no accent whatsoever" (Michelle, individual interview) resulted in requests for transfers from lET classrooms.

1.2. Reasonsfor the Dominant Community's Refusal oflETs
Discrimination, misrepresentation and negative attitudes toward lETs' practices, knowledge and experiences were the main reasons cited for the dominant group's resistance to, and their lack of recognition of, lETs as legitimate members of the professional and school communities. These perceptions were revealed in individual interviews with mentors. As mentor Michelle explained: There's racism in the schools. We try to hide it underneath the table, and everything, and say certain things above the table ... I think the fact that some people [lETs] don't necessarily have the same strategies that you have, even if they're learners ... if they have somewhat of an accent - you know, they dress differently, they eat differently ... some people don't like that. They just think that they're better than that. (Michelle, individual interview) As Michelle contested, dominant notions that lETs are different, deficient or inferior were motivators for the dominant group's rejection and othering of lETs from visible minority groups. These perceptions of visible minorities and lETs as different and part of 'the other' were also attributed to the teaching community's resistance to permit these teachers entry into the profession, even amidst the need for increased racial and cultural diversity of teaching staff in local school boards. This was made apparent in discussions with mentors about teacher hiring practices in Ontario schools. Differing accents, values and beliefs were quoted as potential reasons why administrators might refuse lETs access to the professional community. For example, in discussions with Michelle, a mentor, she observed that her views on diversifying teaching staff to reflect the student population were not always shared by other administrators in her public school board. For instance, although she acknowledged that school administrators

39

have worked to develop support for students of diverse racial and cultural backgrounds, in speaking about a fellow administrator in her previous school board, Michelle admitted, "He wouldn't hire anybody that had an accent, I know that" (Michelle, individual interview). Motives to maintain cohesion and prevent potential conflict amongst school community members were also recognized by mentors as possible grounds for administrators' refusal to employ teachers of diverse cultural and ethnic backgrounds. As mentor Michelle remarked: If you have some kind of incident, even thOUght it could have been an incident that anybody else could have, that just adds to your belief that's a negative thing; you don't want somebody like that there, even if they're excellent teachers. (Michelle, individual interview) Perceptions of lETs as 'the other' and dissimilar to dominant members of the teaching community have thus been shown to potentially hinder the acceptance of these teachers in school communities and in the profession. Prejudicial attitudes toward and discomfort with visible minorities were also cited by mentors in their interviews as reasons why administrators of the dominant teaching community might refuse lETs admittance into the profession. In response to being asked whether she felt as an administrator that there was discrimination against visible minorities and lETs in the greater teaching and school communities, Michelle replied: ... definitely ... probably if you broke that down, it could be broken down on a cultural basis ... I would say probably that Muslims would be some of the most discriminated against, because of 9-11 and plus other things that happen ... You see - I don't know if you saw it in the [Toronto] Star - they were showing stoning in Afghanistan ... pretty vivid pictures, like big pictures of what was happening. And people look at that and they go, you know - they want to be as far away from them as possible. (Michelle, individual interview)

40

The dominant community's fear of 'the other' therefore fosters misconceptions and stereotypes about visible minorities' practices, values and beliefs, and influences their decisions about admitting lETs into the professional and school spheres. The dominant teaching community members' resistance was also attributed to the notion that lETs posed a risk to the stability of their collective professional identity and privileged positioning within school communities. The dominant group's general lack of knowledge about cultural diversity, the 'immigrant experience', and their inability to communicate with linguistically diverse communities, were considered some of the reasons for this perception. Michelle explained it as such: Because they haven't had the ... immigration experience, which is an experience unto itself, you know, struggling. A lot of teachers are from middle-class families and so on. They haven't had any of those experiences. They haven't had the language experiences. And some of them have never travelled ... They haven't been any place where they've been like in the minority and people can't understand, or you can't understand everybody else because they're speaking another language. So it is sort of intimidating when you don't know those kinds of things, and some people don't learn from that. They're threatened ... in a way, uneasy. (Michelle, individual interview) lETs' depth of previous teaching experience and subject knowledge also contributed to the notion that migrant teachers pose a threat to the dominant teaching community. In discussions with Graham, another mentor, he asserted that. it was important for his mentee Yvette to highlight her prior post-secondary level teaching experiences to administrators to be competitive in the field. However, he also acknowledged that in doing so, she ran the risk of discouraging those from the dominant community from accepting her as a rightful member: [lETs] have to go and show the principal that they're worth a lot because of the experience base that they have. I mean if we're talking about Yvette, she's got university [teaching] experience. I don't want to get into the situation of intimidating people but if it's not presented in the right way ... sometimes 41

depending on the individual, it might intimidate these people. (Graham, individual interview) According to the Canadian-experienced mentor, acceptance was therefore dependent to some extent upon the perceived threat of the lET to the status and stability of the dominant teaching community. The dominant community's fear about IETs and the notion of migrant teachers as a potential threat therefore place lETs in a conflicting position, where they are at once required to demonstrate their worth in order to be acknowledged and to also withhold aspects of their teacher identities to prevent daunting community members who might feel
intimid~ted.

1.3. Impact ofDominant Community Resistance oflETs
The dominant community's resistance to lETs of visible minority groups can be detrimental to their identity reformation and sense of belonging in Ontario school communities and the teaching profession. Discussions with mentees revealed instances of lowered selfesteem, feelings ofloss, frustration and inferiority. For example, in the four years that passed between her teaching experience in Sri Lanka and her becoming licensed in Ontario, Yvette spoke of losing self-assurance in her abilities, and in her sense of identity and belonging to the professional community: I was so disappointed in everything. I could feel it in my bones, everything going. My confidence, the person I was as a whole, [I] who would go out and do things, I just sank into a kind of ... like into a shelL I didn't want to look at people ... I said no because that was at the back of my mind, I will not make it with Canadians. I'm going to be a failure. (Yvette, individual interview) Throughout Yvette's interview, she expressed bouts of confusion and conflict in establishing her professional identity. Yvette associated her feelings of uncertainty, disappointment and frustration with the various barriers that she had faced in accessing the teaching profession: Many people have to remind me. Yvette, what are you talking about? You are a teacher. Then I think, yeah, I am. Then again, I think, hell no. I'm not in a 42

classroom. I don't have my students. I don't have a register. I don't have my books around me, a blackboard. Then, I think, no, I'm not. (Yvette, individual interview) In the individual interview with another mentee, Sukhvir, she related her frustration with what she perceived to be the differing treatment lETs received in the labour market as compared to Ontario faculty of education graduates. While Sukhvir indicated throughout her discussions that she did not feel excluded, uncomfortable or inadequate as an lET in an Ontario classroom, she suggested that local school boards treated her and other lETs differently: [School boards] just see that [lETs] have [not] done 'Bachelor of Education from Ontario, from somewhere else, and that's why they are not getting interview calls ... right now, the job market is not so good and some teachers who have studied here, they are also not getting interview calls, but it is not so common [as] with internationally-educated teachers who are so experienced, like I have twelve years teaching experience, a Ph.D. in Chemistry and excellent reference letters. So what else for a supply teacher is required? (Sukhvir, individual interview) In individual interviews with mentees, such as Yvette and Sukhvir, the resistance that they felt from the dominant teaching community proved damaging to the reconstruction of their sense of identity and inhibited them from developing feelings of inclusion in the Ontario teaching profession. The impact of resistance by dominant teaching community members was also seen in mentees' experiences of marginalization in schools. Prior to becoming a certified teacher in Ontario, Yvette attained a position as an Educational Assistant (EA) with a local school board. She described the negative perceptions and conduct of several dominant teaching community members towards EAs that she observed in her school: [They] have this image that an EA is lower than them ... You can see it in the way they look at you, the way they talk to you and in the staff room when they go to have lunch. EAs will sit there and the teachers will sit ... some will even never join you. Some will never accommodate you ... sometimes when I see the

43

way they interact with us EAs, I think, 'Do they know who I amT (Yvette, individual interview) When asked whether the teachers in her school knew she was an lET, Yvette replied: Not at the time. I was keeping it quiet 'til I got my [teaching] certificate ... because I wanted to have that in my hand, and it anyone told me anything, I would produce it and I would say, I'm like you ... That was my, so to speak, ammunition. (Yvette, individual interview) As an EA and an lET in the outer sphere of her school community, Yvette revealed the value she placed on the Ontario teaching certificate as proof to her belonging to the profession, and as her defence against hostile and resisting members ofthe dominant community. She further described an incident in a staff meeting at her school where she drew upon her Ontario teaching license and experience, but had to speak out in order to be heard by other members of the professional community: I was so popping mad. I put my hand up, and the principal ignores. I put my second hand up; still nobody's looking at me. I stood up and I said, excuse me. I have something to tell you. I said, you of all people, as teachers, should know if you have done your Special Education Part I [course], you should know ... You see, at this time, I had got my [teaching] certificate ... and anyone who went against me, whatever they were saying, I would put that out. I will bring it up. (Yvette, individual interview) Yvette's experiences of non-acceptance and resistance from the dominant professional group increased her need to advocate for others resigned to the periphery of her school community. In her role as an EA working with students with special needs, Yvette recounted several cases where she stood up for students who were relegated by the dominant group to the margins of the school and classroom communities. Yvette described a confrontation she had with a teacher who had segregated a student in the classroom: As I walk in, you know what the teacher told me? Take that pain out of my sight, and do whatever you want with him. Verbally, I turned around and said, no, I'm not taking him out of this room. He's going to sit there and I am going to read

44

him a story ... that teacher was so annoyed with me. I said, no, he has a right, as much as you have a right, and those children have a right. (Yvette, individual interview) Yvette's recollections of her attempts at defending students' rights and fostering their sense of belonging also reflected her desires to be heard and accepted as a legitimate member of her school community and profession. In summary, it is clear in discussions with mentees and mentors that the dominant community'S resistance towards lETs can have a potentially significant impact on the positive identity reconstruction and standing of these teachers in the profession.

2.

The Importance ofMentoring Relationships in Providing Support to lETs
Another prominent theme from the interviews with participants was the value of

mentoring relationships in providing lETs with the information, recognition, support and guidance they needed to be successful in the teaching profession in Ontario. This theme is further sub-divided into sub-themes that include the roles of mentors in meeting lETs' needs for knowledge and understanding of Ontario's educational system and teaching practices, and in providing lETs with encouragement and guidance in their quest to access the teaching profession in Ontario, both of which were referenced in the literature review. Additional sub-themes that were not present in the literature detail the importance of mentoring relationships in developing job search strategies, in attaining recognition for lETs from the teaching community. and in advocating for lETs within the profession. It is important to note that mentees referenced both in-school mentoring experiences that they had during volunteer and internship program placements, and out of school experiences that they had with their mentors, when speaking about this theme.

45

2.1. Fulfilling lETs' Knowledge and Understanding ofthe Ontario Education System In interviews with mentees and mentors, both recognized that there exists a 'gap' in the knowledge and understanding ofIETs new to the Ontario education system in contrast to that of Ontario faculty of education graduates. This 'gap' was often identified in mentee and mentor discussions as lETs' lack of understanding of how the Ontario education system works, and their unfamiliarity with expectations regarding teachers' roles, responsibilities and practices in Ontario schools. These included differences in teacher and student roles in the classroom, assessment strategies, classroom management techniques, and reporting. For example, Michelle, a mentor, remarked from her experience in delivering professional development workshops to lETs that their knowledge base of teaching and assessment practices in Ontario was "sort of narrow compared to what you're looking for as somebody who would hire a teacher here" (Michelle, individual interview). Michelle illustrated this discrepancy in lETs' understanding with the example of what are known as 'manipulatives', which are commonly found today in Ontario classroom teaching and learning: Let's say using manipulatives in Mathematics and so on - some countries, they don't use manipulatives. And so it's one thing to talk about it, one thing to have a little workshop on it. But it's not like learning about it at the faculty, going out and using it every day in the classroom and getting feedback from it, seeing how children grow and learn. (Michelle, individual interview) Moreover, as Michelle observed, such 'gaps' in knowledge and understanding of the Ontario educational system and its practices have the potential to impede lETs' prospects of gaining access to the profession: ... those people that take their REd. here, I think they have a better chance of getting hired, because they have the - they've had experiences here in the classroom and have come across different strategies for discipline and everything ... Now in the school, let's say you've got somebody that has been educated here

46

and somebody who hasn't. That piece still is there unless that [lET] is really, really a strong, strong learner. (Michelle, individual interview) In individual interviews with mentees, participants also recognized that there existed a 'gap' in their grasp of the Ontario educational system and teaching practice as compared to their prior understanding of the profession. Parminder, a mentee, commented: ... I was good in my native country too. But here, you know so many things are new to learn, [for example] how to deal with the students ... here, I think teacher has to deal with so many things. In my native land, it's only teaching. (Parminder, individual interview) Sukhvir, another mentee, demonstrated the importance of acknowledging the discrepancies between her teaching experiences in her country of origin and those she has had in Ontario. Moreover, she spoke about her need to reconcile these differences in order for her to develop her understanding of the education system and the teacher's role in Ontario. In her interview, Sukhvir reflected: I knew my subject, but in the beginning I was not familiar with all the strategies which are used in the classroom here, but once I start my lesson then it doesn't make any difference for me ... but there are so many differences, like diversity. Back home also there is diversity, but here there are many differences also in the education system, but there are many similarities also. When we learn about the differences then we think, oh, there is nothing different ... we have to reach to our students and students are the same basically. Every child thinks in the same way. Only the languages and these things are different. (Sukhvir, individual interview) Mentoring partnerships proved valuable in helping lET mentees make connections between their prior training and experience and the knowledge and practices they need in the Ontario context to effectively function as teachers in new school environments. As mentee participants indicated, mentoring relationship experiences, both within and outside of Ontario school communities, offered them opportunities to observe what is expected of teachers in their roles, in their practices and in their engagement with students in classrooms. In interviews with

47

mentees Sukhvir and Panninder, both described their various in-school mentoring experiences through volunteering and internship programs that gave them exposure to the rules, requirements and practices of teachers in Ontario. As Sukhvir explained: I wanted to learn all the rules of Ontario teachers because everything was new for me ... while working with [my teacher-mentor] ... I learned all the rules of Ontario teachers such as curriculum designing and implementing ... like backward mapping and firstly teacher and students' learning. I learned more of strategies to celebrate diversity in the classroom ... I learned more about religions, different types of people and [that] special [needs] students are in the main classroom ... I got some new opportunities like my teacher-mentor gave me some different types of roles like she asked me to organize a science fair because she came to know about my background and she knew that I can do it, so it was a big responsibility. (Chanchal and Sukhvir, pair interview) Panninder spoke about being given opportunities to discuss and practice teaching strategies with her in-school teacher-mentor, such as marking students' work, tutoring students with special needs, and preparing materials for lesson planning. She also commented on the value of these opportunities to her development as a teacher in the Ontario context: Whatever she asked me to do; I always did for her ... Then after two years, she started to teach grade two; I worked with her again, and she gave me the time to teach the class ... whatever I needed, she told me the way - I learned a lot in her classroom. (Panninder, individual interview) Both in individual and pair interviews, participants also detailed discussions they had during their out of school mentoring relationships on the differences between the norms and values of the education systems in Ontario and their countries of origin. .The notions of student respect and classroom management were most often brought up in interviews as topics of interest and concern to mentees. In one instance, mentee Panninder commented on the differences she observed with regards to student responsibility, behaviour and respect in Ontario classrooms as compared to what she experienced as a teacher in India:

48

There was hardly a behaviour problem in our native country. Here the students, they don't give that kind of respect to the teacher ... some students, they don't care. I don't know what is the problem ... Sometimes I'm worried about those things. When I go home, sometimes I think [students] should be responsible for what they're learning, and teachers, they are there to provide the environment ... Sometimes the students just don't pay attention. (parminder, individual interview) As illustrated in discussions with mentoring pairs, mentoring relationships also gave lET mentees opportunities to engage in reflective practice as teachers, which proved significant to their reclamation of their identities and sense of belonging in the profession. In mentoring pair interviews, participants freely exchanged and reflected upon different classroom management strategies that they had observed and implemented in Ontario classrooms. In the pair interview with Yvette and Graham, for example, the teachers shared their assessments on personal and physical boundaries between teachers and students and provided cases from the Ontario teaching context to illustrate their views. When speaking to her mentor, Yvette took time to further reflect upon and evaluate various teacher strategies that she had observed as an EA. As Yvette explained in her interview with her mentor Graham, she felt confident in the "practical knowledge" (Graham and Yvette, pair interview) she learned in their mentoring exchanges and in her abilities as a teacher to foster a well-managed Ontario classroom learning environment. Similarly, in the interview with Parminder and Michelle, Parminder recalled numerous behavioural management strategies that she had learned from her mentor that would be suitable for the Ontario classroom and spoke of their importance in maintaining student respect. Ultimately, she saw these strategies as crucial to her survival as an occasional teacher. In one example, Parminder recounted a teaching moment that her mentor shared that provided her the opportunity to consider and strategize ways to handle a disciplinary situation involving several students and their parents. In her recollection and further discussion with her mentor Michelle, Parminder highlighted the importance of her mentoring relationship on her assessment of prior

49

and new understandings of student behaviour and teacher responsibilities, on the development of her sense of professionalism, and on her practice in Ontario school communities. 2.2. The Importance of Providing lETs with Job Search Information and Support Mentees and mentors frequently remarked that fulfilling lETs' need for accurate information and guidance in their job searches, and providing an understanding of the hiring processes used by Ontario public school boards, was a significant part of their outside of school mentoring relationships. Interviews with mentees additionally highlighted the distinct importance of dedicated outside of school mentoring support to securing employment in the Ontario teaching profession. For example, mentees Sukhvir and Parminder stated that although they benefitted greatly from their mentoring experiences in Ontario classrooms, they also acknowledged that the support and direction that they required in their teaching job searches could not have been obtained from volunteer or in-school mentoring experiences alone. In the pair interview with Sukhvir and Chanchal, Sukhvir, the mentee, recognized that she required more individualized and precise support to get to the next stage of the teacher hiring process, which she was not able to obtain from her internship program teacher-mentor: After doing my co-op program also, although I was familiar with the system and I learned all the roles, actually experienced all the roles, but I could not get into the system ... just to enter into the system, I needed something more. (Chanchal and Sukhvir, pair interview) In response to Sukhvir's observations, Chanchal, her mentor, commented on what she felt her mentee meant by 'something more': She had the teaching and all the knowledge in the classroom, and now she wanted somebody, she needed somebody, who could help her get ajob and also guide through it to get the job. I think that was more ... she was at a point now that, okay, I'm ready now. I need somebody to help me get into the system. (Chanchal and Sukhvir, pair interview)

50

All mentees and mentors agreed that their outside of school mentoring relationships were instrumental in providing the guidance and information the lETs needed to comprehend and navigate the job search process. Specifically, mentor support included providing their mentees with 'practical' knowledge, such as the steps to complete public school board teaching applications, interview preparation and practice, and advice they required to be competitive in the teaching labour market. For instance, in discussions with Graham, a mentor, he stressed the importance of understanding the practical aspects of the job search process to become a teacher in Ontario~s public school boards. He spoke about his mentee Yvette's needs in this respect: She has a lot of great credentials but it's knowing the step-by-step fashion in order to get to the goal that she wants ... it's the manner of going about and finding out what is necessary, what you should have, where you should go, what you should know, what you should take with you. (Graham, individual interview) In discussions with Sukhvir, she also spoke about how her mentor Chanchal's useful knowledge and guidance helped her in finding a position in the profession, and compared this to what she had previously gained in her Ontario classroom experience: ... in the classroom, I just prepared myself. I learned the things which I am required to do as a teacher, but getting into the job, I can ask my mentor. Like she told me that you have to apply in the first week of January and how to apply. You need two evaluation letters. So these are very important things which I came to know from my mentor. (Sukhvir, individual interview) In their pair interview, another menteeParminder referred to the "practical experience" (Michelle and Parminder, pair interview) that she received from her mentor Michelle as essential to her job search and subsequent occasional teaching position with a local school board. Parminder described her mentor's assistance in preparing a lesson plan required for the hiring process as invaluable to her planning for the interview: Before my actual interview, when I talked to the vice-principals, the viceprincipals they said we first talk, all we want [is] to observe your lesson. Then I 51

emailed to Michelle, and I prepared my lesson ... she made corrections. Sometimes she added something. Most of them, she added new things, practical things. So that time, vice-principal, she came to observe my lesson. So I was confident. (Michelle and Parrninder, pair interview) In addition to practical information and advice, mentors also recognized their mentees' needs for precise knowledge and coaching to give them an edge in the hiring process and to be competitive in Ontario's difficult teaching labour market. For instance, in his discussions with his mentee Yvette, Graham provided instruction on the value of showing interest and asking questions, and of promoting herself in teaching interviews with administrators and school board representatives. Graham explained what was important for Yvette when interviewing: ... don't be bashful when it comes to indicating her qualifications and what she's done in the past as far as experience is concerned. And another thing that would be helpful for her would be to have a portfolio available ... some samples or reference letters so that the people who are interviewing her could see that she does have merit and should be given that opportunity. (Graham, individual interview) Michelle, a mentor, also frequently spoke to the importance of lETs having "insider information" (Michelle and Parrninder, pair interview) that could help make a difference in realizing their employment goals in the profession: ... say [for example] Parrninder's going to go to an interview with somebody. And if! can - I may not know the [administrator], or if! can find somebody that knows this person, you know, I can find out some information for her, which I think is helpful ... If you can have insider information, you know, why not? (Michelle and Parrninder, pair interview) During the pair interviews, there were several opportunities to observe mentors providing their mentees with coaching tips and the unspoken rules of the job search process to help them stand out from other teacher candidates. In one illustration with mentoring pair Michelle and Parminder, Michelle coached her mentee on specific approaches to interview responses based upon feedback that she received from the Human Resources department of a local school board.

52

In her advice to Parminder, Michelle highlighted the need for her mentee to provide more than the superficial or 'cookie-cutter' answers that other lETs, who were unsuccessful, had given in their interviews. Michelle also gave Parminder strategies for gathering information about a school community prior to her job interviews so that she could make a good impression by 'being in the know'. As mentor Michelle stated to her mentee in their pair interview, it is "those kinds of strategies that may make a difference" (Michelle and Parminder, pair interview).
2.3. The Importance ofMento ring for lET Recognition by the Teaching Community

Another sub-theme that was prominent in discussions with mentees was the positive effects that the dominant teaching community's appreciation ofIETs had on their sense of belonging and worth as teachers in Ontario school communities. In speaking about this subtheme, mentees frequently referenced previous in-school mentoring experiences in addition to the outside of school experiences they presently had with their mentors in these pair interviews. Mentees Sukhvir and Parminder often spoke about the pride they felt in being recognized by members of the professional community and students for their hard work, subject expertise, interactions with students, and teaching abilities in schools. The positive impressions that they made on students, teachers and administrators provided the lETs with additional opportunities for support in developing their teaching practice, their job search strategies, and confidence in the profession. In the interview with Parminder, she spoke proudly about the appreciation she received as a professional from her school teacher-mentor and school administrator for her work as a dedicated volunteer in the classroom: They treated me as a teacher ... [my teacher-mentor] liked my work a lot, and she talked to the principal about my work ... The principal came to observe my lesson in that school too, and she liked [it] .·. and she wrote a reference letter. (Parminder, individual interview)

53

Recognition and admiration from professional community members also resulted in numerous opportunities for lET mentees to get more involved in school community activities and interactions with students. Such opportunities allowed the lETs to develop their teaching practice and self-esteem, and to foster a sense of belonging in their school communities. In discussions with Sukhvir, a mentee, she recounted several responsibilities that she was given by her teacher-mentor that helped to develop her professionally, such as preparing students for examinations, supporting classroom and occasional teachers, and organizing a school science fair. In one particular example, Sukhvir spoke about being offered a unique opportUnity to start a co-curricular program based on her subject expertise: [The teachers] were highly impressed with my [doctorate] degree and they started a new program for me just to help me ... [They said] we will start a homework club after school and then if students will come, it's good for you and for students also. So in that way I continued that program. It was published on school website also. So the teachers were thankful and everything was good. (Sukhvir, individual interview) In this case, Sukhvir was provided a chance to gain practice in the Ontario teaching environment while demonstrating her skills and expertise to other members of the professional community. Such opportunities boosted her sense of worth, professionalism and feelings of inclusion. Sukhvir's dedication and hard work in the school community further garnered the notice and appreciation of the school administrator: When I started teaching these units of science, I was being observed by other teachers and principal of the school when they were going in the hallway. Soon my teaching method and subject expertise were discussed in the lunchroom among teachers and my teacher mentor told said. 'You were being praised in lunchroom today during lunchtime'. In this way I was well accepted in the school by staff. principal and students. I gained my self-esteem. One day the principal told me, 'I observed you today while you were teaching. You were doing pretty well'. Later I asked her for evaluation of my lesson. She came to observe my lesson in classroom. (Sukhvir. reflective journal)

54

In mentee Parminder's interviews, she also described the acknowledgement she received from the professional community during her in-school mentoring experiences, and the positive affect it had on her future practice as an occasional teacher: Those teachers, now they call me, they book me in for their classrooms. They always ask me first. Even the vice-principal, they email to me, because they like my work. (Michelle and Parminder, pair interview) As made evident in interviews with lET mentees, acknowledgement and approval from teaching and school community members through mentoring relationships have positive affects on the reestablishment ofIETs' teacher identities and on their feelings of belonging in Ontario teaching environments. 2.4. The Importance ofMentor Advocacy for lETs in the Ontario Teaching Profession Mentors' desire to aid, promote and advocate for their lET mentees in the professional community was another outstanding theme that emerged from the interview data illustrating the importance of mentoring relationships. In their discussions, mentors often spoke about the experiences that motivated them to support lETs in their mentoring relationships. One motive cited by Michelle, a mentor, was her desire to diversify the teaching profession in Ontario by promoting the inclusion of teachers of different racial and cultural backgrounds. Michelle recalled a significant lesson she learned at the start of her career as a school administrator, which she identified as a ·'turning point" in her understanding the importance of diversity in her teaching staff: I can remember talking to this woman who was a Black social worker, and she said to me very clearly, no matter what you do, no matter how much you care, you are not going to make a whole lot of difference to these students, because you do not reflect them and their culture. (Michelle, individual interview)

55

Diversifying the teaching profession in Ontario was identified by mentors as a sure way to support and encourage students and parents who felt marginalized in their school communities. In their interviews, mentors recognized the significance of lETs in meeting these needs. From her own experiences working with lETs in schools, Michelle spoke extensively about the ability ofIETs' to "reach out", to make connections, and to foster a sense of security among students and parents of diverse racial and cultural backgrounds: [As an administrator] I saw the strength and the wealth [ofIETs], and you know it's hard to pick the exact words, but the power that having really good teachers that reflected the community, how it made a difference, how it made a difference to the children ... how it made a difference to the community in general. (Michelle, individual interview) Chanchal, a mentor and administrator, agreed when she spoke about the need for lETs at her school: For a school like this one, so a predominantly very diverse school ... at least 3540% Muslim population here, and [lETs] bring in a wealth of knowledge, experience and the reflection of the community ... [lETs] also relate with the students and the parents. So that's a great asset to recommend. (Chanchal and Sukhvir, pair interview) Mentors' respect for and recognition ofIETs' struggles in accessing the profession were also attributed to their need to advocate for and support these teachers in their mentoring partnerships. As Chanchal expressed: ... internationally-trained teachers are highly qualified. As I said, I have high respect for them and I know that they're very capable of teaching in schools, diverse schools, in Ontario and they're going to be great educators ... my perception has strengthened by working with Sukhvir formally as well as many other [internationally-educated] teachers informally. (Chanchal and Sukhvir, pair interview) As expressed in her interviews, mentor Michelle's increased awareness of the resistance and difficulties faced by lETs in accessing the profession also motivated her to help these teachers:

56

· .. before I had any of these experiences, I knew it was difficult for some people. · . to be successful, to be accepted, to be respected ... [but] once I became involved more with the international community, I just learned how much harder it is. (Michelle, individual interview) Mentors' greater awareness of the value oflETs to Ontario school communities, and the challenges impeding them from accessing the profession, often incited mentors to advocate for their mentees and other lETs. During the interviews with Michelle, she recounted numerous occasions where she felt called upon to stand up for lETs in her interactions with resistant members of the dominant teaching community. For instance, in response to detrimental and prejudicial comments about lETs, she reacted by sharing her own constructive impressions and experiences in working with these teachers: · .. [I would say] 'Well that's not what I've found, and I've had a number of staff who were internationally-educated teachers, but then I have worked with a fair number of people, and this is what I've found. And, I quite often will use [Parminder] as an example - 'this is how hard some people work' ... you never know what little piece is going to sort of sink in ... orthat might be repeated. (Michelle, individual interview) This case illustrates the mentor's awareness of her standing in the professional community and the potential influence she has on altering others' perceptions oflETs in the profession. In refuting dominant members' negative notions oflETs, mentors demonstrate their ability to resist the marginalization ofIETs in the teaching community. In interviews with mentor Chanchal, she also spoke about the various efforts she made in promoting her mentee Sukhvir to others in the profession. In one example, Chanchal related how she felt she had to strategize her approach in order to appeal to a fellow administrator's sensibility to secure Sukhvir a volunteer opportunity at her school: So she is also a'minority ... so I said that I've been mentoring lots of internationally-trained teachers and it's really difficult for them. They are highly educated but they're not able to find jobs right away. They're really struggling .. · I kind of built the context with her and then I spoke to her that there is a person 57

who is highly educated. Would you take her? (Chanchal and Sukhvir, pair interview) She also added: ... [My mentoring relationship] has made me feel like I have responsibility. Responsibility is attached to leadership. It's cyclical. I feel responsible in many ways. First of all, especially being a minority, I feel that I have the obligation to help the people ... I learned a lot about the process and I also learned what kind of hardships [lETs are] facing and it makes you a better person, more empathetic. It gives you even stronger drive to help them. So that's the kind of person I have become, and also I have realised the power within me that I have the ability to change. I have the ability to help people ... I am the agent of change. (Chanchal and Sukhvir, pair interview) Mentors' desires to support and promote lETs in the Ontario teaching community were a significant part of the positive impact that such relationships had on their mentees. The actions of these mentors reflect Schick's (2000a and 2000b) view that those teachers who reach out to support those in marginalized positions in their school communities, such as lETs, do so in order to help fulfil their desires to do good. However, these relationships proved mutually beneficial to mentors as well. Interviews with mentors further revealed the positive influence that their mentoring relationships had on their identities as advocates, leaders and educators in their schools and professional community. In discussions with Chanchal, for example, she took the opportunity to reflect on her duties as a member of the professional community, as a visible minority in the profession, and as an agent for change who helps lETs. She identified the impact of her involvement in mentoring partnerships with lETs on the development of her skills and confidence, and on her role as a leader in the professional community.

2.5. The Importance ofProviding lETs with Encouragement and Guidance A final sub-theme in this thematic grouping relates to the influence of mentor guidance and encouragement on the value and success of their mentoring relationships with lETs. In their interviews, all of the mentees recounted times when they encountered disappointment and

58

frustration in trying to gain access to the profession and in upholding positive teacher identities. Each mentee described occasions when they went to their mentors for support, reinforcement and guidance in such challenging circumstances. In one example, Parminder, a mentee, recalled her mentor's response when she did not receive an occasional teaching job offer due to a bad reference: I thought, what should I do? That time I was really upset. But Michelle helped me a lot ... She said keep on, don't worry. Just keep on and preparing yourself for the interview ... next time apply for the position and you will get it. (Parminder, individual interview) Mentors also provided encouragement when lETs expressed feelings of self-doubt or lack of direction, and when encountering obstacles in establishing themselves in the profession. Sukhvir talked about how her mentor kept her on track and focused on her goals: ... I can do so many things. So the most difficult thing is to decide what we want to do and which direction we should put ... like for me someone told do this pharmaceutical courses. So I did three courses there so this was a waste of time and effort and energy. If I had put that thing in the beginning in teaching, things may be different, and now also I was thinking to switch to other things. So I am thankful to my mentor, she told me to stay here. Sooner or later, you will get in. You should stay here. [Now] I'm almost prepared at least for a supply position. (Sukhvir, individual interview) In recalling the uplifting words of her mentor Graham, Yvette also showed how her mentor's encouragement proved significant to her feelings of self-worth and identity as a teacher: ... right now, it's very, very slow, the hiring process but he said, don't worry. It's going to happen. You are a teacher. You will be a teacher and love being a teacher. You'll feel disappointed but don't give up. (Yvette, individual interview) The support and guidance that the lET mentees received from their mentors in these relationships proved to be fundamental to their perseverance in establishing a place for themselves in the teaching profession.

59

3. The Importance o/Consistency, Trust and Honesty in Building Collaborative Mentoring Relationships
A final theme that emerged in mentee and mentor interviews was the value that constant and dedicated mentoring relationships have on promoting lETs' increased sense of belonging, identity formation, and success in the Ontario teaching profession. Mentees and mentors alike identified specific conditions that they said fostered positive and cooperative mentoring partnerships. These included consistency, trust, honesty and collaboration. These are subthemes that were not found in the literature reviewed and I explore them in the following sections.

3.1. The Importance 0/ Consistency
Dependability was recognized by lET mentees as an important trait for the success of their mentoring relationships. All three mentees, for example, recounted numerous cases where their mentors provided them with prompt responses to their questions, concerns and requests. Mentee Sukhvir, in one example, spoke about the value she placed on her mentor's consistency in offering her feedback and assistance: ... whenever I need any guidance, I email Chanchal ... Any doubt or any procedure about anything and she immediately gives her feedback, immediately replying to me, whatever requirement I have, like interview questions or any other information about the [school] Board or like the school in which ... ifI need any information about the principal ... ifI have any doubt I ask and every step she guides me ... However busy she is, she always get back. (Chanchal and Sukhvir, pair interview)

All mentees in their discussions about their mentoring partnerships stressed the value they placed on their mentors' dedication and dependability. Their recounts of instances where their mentors displayed these attributes were often accompanied by mentees' disbelief of their mentors' generosity of time and effort and their gratefulness for this support.

60

3.2. The Importance of Trust and Honesty Trust and honesty were also cited by mentees and mentors alike as essential characteristics for the success of their mentoring relationships. Mentees often spoke about the importance of their mentors' expertise and honest appraisals and to their feelings of trust and security in their mentoring partnerships. For example, in discussions with mentee Sukhvir, she expressed the value of receiving a truthful assessment of her needs, and precise information and advice from her mentor: ... we need some more besides knowledge, like accurate things which we want and [mentors] guide us. They provide more focused things, whatever is the requirement, whatever you ask for or whatever is the need for the employment or where we are lacking, they give their expert opinion. Like [my mentor] told me you should take pronunciation classes, so she knew what is the requirement of the profession and she wants to improve me. (Sukhvir, individual interview) Mentors also recognized the significance of trust on their mentoring relationships and on their mentees' sense of security. As Chanchal described: The mentorship is like a safety net ... whenever she has a question of doubt in her mind, should she say something or not, she asks me. I'm her safety net. For me, it's an honour to be put on that pedestal that there is someone who trusts me so much ... So for her, I think she has the expectation that at least in her mInd I'm going to ask this question and I know that there's going to be an answer or at least there's going to be support. (Chanchal and Sukhvir, pair interview) As made evident in the interviews, trust between the partners in a mentoring relationships was essential for mentees to receive fair evaluations of their needs and the appropriate guidance they needed to progress in their development as teachers in the Ontario education system. A specific example of the importance of honesty between mentees and mentors in their relationships was given in pairs' discussions on the issue ofIET mentees' English language proficiencies and accents. All mentors acknowledged that communication tended to be a significant challenge for lETs, particularly with fellow teachers and parents of school

61

communities. Michelle, a mentor, recalled her conversations with her mentee Parminder about her Indian accent and the possible impact it could have on others' responses toward her from the dominant teaching community: I said to her, the thing is when you're talking with someone like me, and I'm like really open to you, you're talking and you've got an accent. I just have to turn on my third ear ... You can't just listen like you normally listen. You have to listen really carefully because there's that accent in there. And I said, that's a tiring thing for people to do, and some people won't give you a chance to get started, and some people will try and they'll get tired. (Michelle, individual interview) Mentees also acknowledged the significance of getting their mentors' honest views on their English language proficiencies and their guidance in overcoming these barriers. Mentee Sukhvir, for example, identified her appreciation of her mentor's honesty about her needs for improvement: ... [My mentor] also guided me about taking classes for improvement of pronunciation and I started there also, and I know this is a good thing. She actually guided me about all the mistakes, like you don't have to say this word like this ... Only a good person who really wants to help you can pinpoint your mistakes that you have to improve in these things. (Sukhvir, individual interview) In further discussions, Sukhvir compared the degree of support she receives from her mentor and their partnership to that of the feedback she received from other teachers she worked with in Ontario classrooms as a volunteer: ... there are times when we need more accurate knowledge about the things which we may not ask the teacher with whom we are volunteering because they are so busy and all of them are not of a helping nature. They don't want to share everything. Sometimes they just use us ... so these technical things I only came to know from [my mentor]. (Sukhvir, individual interview) Knowing that their mentors had their best interests in mind was an important element for lET mentees in their partnerships with Canadian-experienced educators. Mentors' honesty about

62

their mentees' needs for improvement proved valuable in preparing the lETs for the teaching profession in Ontario.

3.3. The Importance o/Collaboration
Collaboration between mentees and mentors in their partnerships also contributed to the success of the mentoring process and to the achievement ofIETs' goals in the profession. As Yvette explained, being in a mentoring relationship meant that she did not have to undergo the process of accessing the teaching profession on her own: I didn't want to be alone in this. I didn't want to be alone in finding out about how you could become a teacher ... I wanted somebody to be there to guide me, and that's how I'm with Graham. (Graham and Yvette, pair interview) In the pair interview with Chanchal and Sukhvir, the mentor described the significance of teamwork to the success of their mentoring relationship: It's the desire of the drive, also the willingness to work with somebody as a team. I didn't see myself as giving her advice or guiding her. We were both together. It was the four wheels, that we were moving forward, both of us. (Chanchal and Sukhvir, pair interview) The ultimate goal to see lETs establish themselves in the Ontario teaching profession was a common thread in mentoring pair discussions. Mentees and mentors frequently identified their partnerships as a means by which to realise this aim. Mentoring pair Parminder and Michelle explained: P: I wanted to prepare myself for interviews. First of all was that. I really wanted to get into the system, because I had the experience, and I love teaching ... Michelle has experience, so that's why I decided so I should work with her and get on the system. That was my expectation, to get on the supply teaching list. That was my goal. Well my goal was different. Alright, yes, to get on the supply teaching [list], but still to get into a long-term and then to get a [regular] contract position. And I think that is probably your goal as welL (Michelle and Parminder, pair interview) 63

M:

My interviews with mentoring pairs provided me with a unique vantage point from which to observe the relationship dynamics between participant mentees and mentors. From the observations that I made during the three mentoring pair discussions it was apparent that relations between the lET mentees and their Canadian-experienced mentors were both cooperative and collegial. As would be expected in a mentee-mentor relationship, mentees did depend on their mentors for the information they felt they needed to be successful in the field, and there were times when the mentors led discussions and imparted knowledge to their mentees as they saw fit. However, as I observed on the whole, the mentoring pairs shared information and expressed their views as professionals and as equals. Overall, collaborative mentoring relationships that considered the importance of consistency, trust and honesty proved to be advantageous to both lET mentees and their Canadian-experienced mentors. While mentees gained from the information and advice that their mentors provided them, mentors too received the opportunity to develop their communication and interpersonal skills and the chance to help others in achieving their goals. Discussion

The diverse experiences and perspectives that participants shared in their interviews in this study produced great insight into the significant and beneficial role that mentoring partnerships play in the reformation of mentee lETs' teacher identities and in the development of their sense of belonging in the Ontario teaching profession. Discussions with mentees and mentors revealed various aspects of their mentoring relationships that contributed to these positive outcomes. Firstly, participants' discussions on the existence of dominant community's resistance towards visible minority teachers, including lETs, provided crucial background

64

information on the challenges faced by these teachers in accessing the profession in Ontario. Interviews with mentees and mentors also spoke to the importance of mentoring partnerships in fulfilling lETs' unique needs with respect to the knowledge, practices and behaviours expected of teachers in Ontario schools, as well as to the job search strategies required to secure employment in the field. The participants in this study moreover discussed the significance of dominant teaching community recognition and support to lETs' sense of belonging in their school communities. Participant discussions also addressed Canadian-experienced mentors' roles as advocates for lETs, and the importance of mentor eI)couragement ofIETs in mentoring relationships. Finally, mentee and mentor participants spoke about the value of consistency, trust and honesty in developing cooperative partnerships and in achieving mutual goals. The following segments examine each of these components of the study's results. As noted in the literature review, the mentor participants from the teaching profession recognized the need for more teachers of racially and culturally diverse backgrounds in Ontario's school communities. They also readily acknowledged the unique and valuable contributions that lETs could make in fulfilling this need. Participant mentors identified lET mentees' experiences as immigrants to Canada, their years of teaching experience, and their abilities to communicate and identify with parents of diverse languages and cultures, as significant attributes that would benefit all students in Ontario school communities. These distinct qualities would suggest that migrant teachers of visible minority groups would be in high demand by local school communities with diverse student popUlations. Yet, mentees and mentors mutually agreed that amidst an overabundance of certified and experienced teachers in this province, lETs continued to be at a distinct disadvantage, even as compared to recent and relatively inexperienced Ontario faculty of education graduates. This contradiction supports the claim that lETs are persistently

65

faced with systemic barriers that impede their access to the profession and their establishment in local school communities. It also suggests that there exists a perception amongst educational stakeholders and decision-makers that lETs have less to offer the education system in Ontario as compared to others in the profession. Discussions with mentees and mentors identified discrimination and negative attitudes from members of the dominant teaching community as likely hindrances to the inclusion of lETs within the Ontario teaching field. Mentee participants in this study showed that the dominant community's negative attitudes toward lETs' differing accents, teaching qualifications, behaviours and values, as well as migrant teachers' perceived lack of proficiencies in English, resulted in their feelings of marginalization, both within the profession and in their school communities. This interview data supports similar findings in the previous literature reviewed. In-depth discussions with Canadian-experienced mentors in this study, however, added to the literature by providing a unique vantage point from which to examine this issue. Mentors offered further evidence of the dominant community's discriminatory practices and their potential motives for refusal of visible minorities and lETs in the profession. Dominant community perceptions that lETs are different and part of 'the other' were acknowledged by mentor participants as likely reasons for the marginalization of these teachers in the profession. Even amidst a need for a diversified teaching staff in local schools, mentor narratives showed that resistant practices and beliefs from members of the professional community prevented the inclusion ofIETs in these communities. In discussions with mentors, the notion that visible minority lETs pose a potential threat to the community's collective identity and standing in society also emerged. While this notion

66

was also explored in several of the studies in the literature review, this study highlighted the impact of this perception on lETs' acceptance and establishment in the teaching profession and in GTA schools from the viewpoint of Canadian-experienced educators. Examples of resistance by school administrators, based on lETs' non-native English accents and the idea that they are a potential risk to staff cohesion, were presented by mentors as a means through which school administrators could prevent the hiring of migrant teachers of visible minority groups in diverse school communities. This presents an interesting dichotomy which appears to be operating in the education system and its schools. On the one hand, disc~ssions with mentees about their volunteering and internship experiences in schools revealed that they generally felt comfortable and supported by established members of the teaching community. However, on the other hand, results of this study also suggest that, when visible minority lETs attempt to secure employment in the field, resistance from the dominant teaching community's decision-makers may prevent their access to and equal standing in the profession. Discrimination, negative attitudes and the fear ofIETs as a threat were not the only barriers identified in this study; nevertheless, according to the findings, this inequity was recognized by mentees and mentors as a pervasive issue impeding lETs from gaining admittance and establishing themselves in the profession. Previous research conducted in both Canada and Australia noted the significance of inschool mentoring relationships in filling lETs' 'gaps' in knowledge of the education system and the expectations of teachers' roles and responsibilities in new environments. Interviews with mentee participants in this research substantiated such findings. However, the importance of outside of school mentoring relationships to unemployed and underemployed lETs, as documented in this study, provided an added contribution to the prior literature. In particular, the results of this study demonstrated the significant role of outside of school mentoring in

67

supporting lETs' job searches and their establishment in the teaching field. Discussions with lET mentees highlighted the value they placed on the 'practical' information, strategies and knowledge of the unspoken rules imparted by their Canadian-experienced mentors during their mentoring sessions for the job search process. Such support, mentees acknowledged, was not often provided by their teacher-mentors from in-school volunteer and internship placements. Mentees and mentors alike recognized that lETs appear to be at a distinct disadvantage in the teaching labour market as compared to Ontario faculty of education graduates. Nevertheless, the knowledge and guidance provided by mentors in these relationships allowed lETs access to a more level playing field from which to contend for teaching employment. As was made evident in one of the mentoring pair discussions, this advantage was instrumental in the mentee gaining employment in the profession and in reaching her goals. These findings suggest that lETs require more than just in-school mentoring experiences that orient them to the Ontario education system. The results indicate that lETs also require mentoring support that helps them to navigate the steps and obtain the information they need to be competitive and ready to search for employment in the teaching field. Previous studies in the literature review also spoke to the importance of mentor support and encouragement in mentoring relationships with lETs. A finding unique to this study, however, was the influence of the teaching community's appreciation and respect for unemployed and underemployed lETs on the building of their confidence and increased sense of belonging in the profession. For example, mentees in their discussions described the value they placed on the recognition they received from their teacher-mentors, administrators and other teaching staff in their in-school mentoring experiences. They also acknowledged the importance of their teacher-mentors in providing them opportunities to become known and appreciated for

68

their expertise, experiences and abilities by others members of the dominant teaching community. As expressed by the mentees in this study, such experiences led to increased levels of self-esteem, sense of pride, and feelings of acceptance and security in their identities as teachers in Ontario. This finding suggests that mentoring experiences which offer lETs opportunities to demonstrate their unique abilities, expertise and knowledge, are important in building a migrant teacher's sense of belonging and professionalism in new school environments. Such opportunities may also have the potential to change negative perceptions of lETs held by members of the dominant teaching community: Also unique to this study was Canadian-experienced mentors' acknowledgment of their roles as leaders, advocates and educators in promoting lETs' worth and potential to members of the dominant teaching community in Ontario schools. In discussions with mentors, they frequently spoke about their sense of responsibility towards IETs and their desire to support their establishment in the profession and in local school communities. This sense of accountability was rooted in their need to diversify the teaching profession to better reflect the culturally and racially diverse student populations in GTA schools. At the same time, their work with lETs in mentoring partnerships also enriched their understanding of visible minority migrant teachers' experiences and the challenges they faced in accessing and finding acceptance in the field. The Canadian-experienced mentors, in these roles, were given opportunities to take a stance against prejudicial treatment towards lETs, to question normative practices and beliefs that continue to marginalize lETs in the field, and to prompt positive change in the perceptions and practices of resistant members of the dominant community. These results suggest that mentors' sense of responsibility toward lETs may have not only been in response to forms of resistance toward migrant teachers from the dominant teaching community, but also due to their recognition of

69

their privileged standing in the profession. Mentoring relationships with visible minority lETs therefore also proved influential in reconstructing Canadian-experienced mentors' views and professional identities. In addition to the kinds of support indicated above, the encouragement and guidance provided by the Canadian-experienced mentors in their partnerships in this study helped lETs to uphold positive teacher identities in moments of frustration and disappointment. While this theme was also noted in the previous literature, this study provided additional insight by focusing primarily on the impact of this support on unemployed and underemployed lETs in outside of school mentoring relationships. In discussions with mentees about their partnership experiences, they referred to times when they doubted their choice to re-enter the teaching profession, especially when they were being encouraged by those outside of the profession to try other occupations. Yet, mentees frequently identified the encouragement they received from their mentors as essential to helping them stay on track and to maintaining stable and positive professional identities even during difficult times in the Ontario teaching labour market. This aspect of their mentoring partnerships was especially significant for the lET mentees in this study who were still in the process of securing employment in the teaching profession. The final theme that emerged in this study highlighted the importance of consistency, trust and honesty in fostering collaborative and dedicated mentoring partnerships between lET mentees and Canadian-experienced mentors. While previous literature spoke to the value of dedicated mentoring relationships, this study examined the particular features of such relations and their significance to positive mentoring experiences. Discussions with mentees emphasized the value they placed on their mentors' straightforwardness and truthfulness to the success of their relationship, and their commitment to help them reach their professional goals. lETs 70

additionally identified mentors' abilities to identify their individual needs and their genuine desire to help make a difference as important aspects of their relationships. Mentees, by the same token, acknowledged that there were others in the profession who were not as willing as their mentors to help them secure employment in the field, especially without getting something in return. Unlike some of the previous studies in the literature review, for example, Deters (2009), this study did not find the notion of professional identity to be a particularly important point of contention for mentees and mentors in their discussions. Participant discussions instead tended to focus more on the 'practical' aspects of their mentoring partnerships in fulfilling mentees' individual needs, especially those relating to mentee job searches in the field. Mentees and mentors additionally spoke about the existence of discrimination and the dominant community's resistance to the inclusion of visible minority lETs in the profession and the potential of mentoring relationships in lessening these barriers. Nevertheless, the results of this study strongly suggest that collaborative mentoring partnerships with Canadian-experienced teachers have a positive influence on the reclamation ofIETs' professional identities in the Ontario teaching field. The acceptance, affirmation and the nature of support that the lET mentees received from their mentors were all found to be crucial to the successful transition and establishment of these teachers in the profession. In summary, results of this study support the notion that there are members of the dominant teaching community who are resistant to supporting lETs in establishing themselves in the profession. For instance, while some of these community members may accept the contributions of lETs in voluntary or internship positions in their schools, they may also perceive migrant teachers as inadequate or as potential risks when granted legitimacy and equality in the 71

professional community. As this study found, however, dedicated mentoring partnerships based on collaboration and mutual goals can provide lETs with the individualized support they need to gain equal access and standing in the profession. Mentoring relationships also offer opportunities for lETs to have access to local information, resources and practices, and to become recognized and respected as valuable members of the professional community. These partnerships, furthermore, can be the vantage point from which Canadian-experienced mentors in the field are able to critically examine and refute dominant attitudes and behaviours that exclude visible minority lETs from establishing themselves in the Ontario profession. Such partnerships can most importantly support lETs in building their confidence, in strengthening their professional identities, and in fostering a sense of belonging in the profession. In turn all of these elements increase the chances for lETs of visible minority groups to achieve their goals in the Ontario teaching field.

Strengths and Limitations
One of the greatest strengths of this study is that it makes numerous contributions to research on certified lETs in Ontario schools. First and foremost, this study helps address the gap that exists in the research on mentoring experiences of unemployed and underemployed lETs outside of government-funded pre-service training, recertification and internship programs in Ontario. Furthermore, this research focuses on the effects of both in-school and outside of school mentoring relationships with Canadian-experienced teachers on lETs' professional identity reformation and sense of belonging in Ontario schools. Finally, this study provides an in-depth exploration of Canadian-experienced mentors' experiences and views on the impact of their outside of school partnerships on lETs' development as teachers in Ontario, as well as on their own professional practice and teacher identities. This examination offers a more 72

comprehensive view of the impacts ofmentoring relationships on lETs and their mentors, and enriches the current literature in this area. Another important strength of this study is the qualitative approach that I used to collect my research data. My semi-structured interviews with the research participants gave me opportunities to examine mentee-mentor interactions during the mentoring pair interviews. I was able to witness the mentoring process firsthand, and to observe the exchanging of new ideas, teaching strategies, and reflections on practice between mentees and mentors. Participant narratives in their individual interviews also provided opportunities for me to elicit mentee and mentor experiences and perspectives that went beyond the scope of my interview questions. These interviews enhanced my research findings and provided more insight into the advantages ofmentoring for both lETs and their Canadian-experienced mentors in their professional development. This study also has limitations that are a product of my sample size and demographics. First, this study was limited to discussions with a small group of individuals, namely female lET mentees of South-Asian origin. While the majority of teachers in Ontario are female, this study did lack a male lET viewpoint as well as perspectives of other lETs from a diversity of ethnic origins. As the primary focus of my research \Vas on lETs of visible minority groups, I also did not include interviews with English as an Additional Language (EAL) or native-English speaking White-identified lETs. Research on the experiences of non-visible minority lETs would most likely have revealed a range of barriers unique to this group in the Ontario education system, possibly related to their ethnicity, English language proficiency, prior teacher training and teaching practices. An examination of the challenges faced by this group of teachers would require further research outside the scope of this study. Furthermore, although lET participants 73

referenced and compared both in-school and outside of school mentoring experiences in their interviews, the sample data only included mentee-mentor pairs who had been chiefly engaged in relationships outside of Ontario school environments. A final limitation of this study was the limited English language proficiency of some lET participants. All interviews were conducted in English and differing language proficiencies could have affected lET interpretations and responses to some of the questions I posed.

Recommendations
My research goal was to explore the ways in which mentoring relationships with Canadian-experienced mentors provided lETs with numerous benefits that support them in reclaiming their professional identities and in creating a sense of belonging in the Ontario teaching profession. In exploring lETs' standing in the professional teaching community, and the affect ofmentoring relationships on lETs' development, the research has generated several implications and policy recommendations for educational stakeholders and immigrant service providers delivering mentoring program initiatives. The first recommendation that follows from this research would be for anti-racist, equityoriented programming to be delivered in teacher education, in school communities, and amongst educational stakeholders. Such initiatives can address and challenge normative and privileged policies, practices and attitudes that sustain the dominant group's standing and marginalization of lETs in the education system. As this study and others have shown, the dominant community'S resistance towards acceptance ofIETs and teachers of visible minority groups can have a detrimental effect on lETs' professional identity reformation and sense of inclusion in the Ontario education system. Consequently, there is a continued need for the dominant professional

74

community to acknowledge and to be critical of their roles and responsibilities in (re)producing the systemic barriers that impede lETs from accessing and establishing themselves in the teaching profession. Anti-racist, equity-oriented initiatives could provide professional community members with safe opportunities to discuss and analyse their beliefs, perceptions and experiences relating to lETs, and to explore prevalent issues, such as discrimination in the workplace, that privilege dominant groups in their schools. These initiatives may help to confront systemic barriers and to support professional community members in developing positive attitudes, behaviours and strategies that promote the inclusion ofIETs in the profession. Another possible recommendation might be for governments to commit to the development and long-term implementation of an occupation-specific mentoring program initiative that meets the unique needs of lETs. As made evident in participant responses in this study, dedicated mentoring partnerships with Canadian-experienced educator mentors provided lETs with the guidance and knowledge they need to get meaningful employment in the field. However, according to the Ontario College of Teachers (OCT) teaching labour market outcomes, certified and experienced lET newcomers to the province are continuing to experience lower employment rates and longer waiting times in accessing the profession than their Ontario facu1ty of education counterparts. Unfortunately, occupation-specific mentoring programs for lETs alone are no longer available in the. GTA as they had been in the past. Sustainable funding for teacher mentoring program initiatives could help to establish and maintain a dedicated volunteer mentor-base, mentoring resources, and program staff expertise. Such mentoring programs should not be limited to being a part of in-service, recertification or bridging programs, but should also operate as standalone programs that can benefit the growing number oflicensed lETs who are unemployed or underemployed in the teaching field. Finally, the foundation for such 75

mentoring program initiatives should be based on principles of advocacy and equity, not only so lETs can contribute to Ontario school communities to reflect the diversity of students, but so they as newcomers can also implement the wealth of professional qualifications and experiences they bring to the province. A third recommendation would be to have educational stakeholder groups, rather than just individuals, become involved in promoting the value and importance ofIETs to the greater Ontario teaching community. Discussions with Canadian-experienced mentors in this study highlighted the roles they assume as leaders and advocates for lETs in the Ontario professional community. In their attempts to alter negative attitudes held by some in the professional community towards migrant teachers, mentors have taken it upon themselves to increase others' awareness ofIETs' potential in enriching the teaching profession and in supporting students of diverse racial and ethnic backgrounds. While this is commendable, a possible means by which to further support these teachers could be to give those individuals who have worked with lETs greater opportunities to speak to educator groups, school board representatives and school community members, and offer evidence QfIETs' contributions and worth to the Ontario education system. Collaboration between educational stakeholders and those that have worked alongside lETs can help to strengthen the professional community's understanding and appreciation of migrant teachers in the Ontario teaching field. Finally, although this study makes a worthwhile contribution to the field of migrant teachers' experiences in the Ontario teaching profession, further research on the impact of mentoring partnerships on lETs' professional identity reconstruction and on the creation of a sense of belonging for these teachers is needed. For example, future qualitative research could conduct a comparative analysis on the effects of various mentoring fonus, such as infonual76

formal, individual-group or in school-out of school. This research would then assess the differences in impact of these forms on lETs in the teaching field. Due to school-year restrictions, I was unable to attempt an ongoing study of mentoring relations between visible minority lETs and their mentors. Therefore, a second possibility would be to conduct a longerterm study on the outcomes of mentoring relationships on lETs and their Canadian-experienced mentors from the start to the end of their partnerships. Such an analysis could offer opportunities to observe the ongoing development ofIETs and their mentors in the Ontario teaching profession and help to enrich the literature in this field.

77

References

Bascia,. N. (1994). Inside and outside: The experiences of racial and cultural minority teachers in Canadian schools. In D. Thiessen, N. Bascia, & I. Goodson (Eds.), Making a difference

about difference: The lives and careers o/racial minority immigrant teachers (pp. 157178). Toronto, Canada: University of Toronto.

Barbara Herring & Associates Inc. (2007). Demographic composition o/Toronto District School

Board employees. Retrieved from:
http://www.tdsb.on.ca/wwwdocumentslabout_us/about_us/docs/Workforce%20Census.p df

Beynon, J., Ilieva,. R., & Dicupa,. M. (2004). Re-credentialling experiences of immigrant teachers: Negotiating institutional structures, professional identities and pedagogy.

Teachers and Teaching: Theory and Practice, 10(4), 429-444.

Brown, L., & Rushowy, K. (2007, November 28). Teach us about us: Students. The Toronto

Star. Retrieved from http://www.thestar.com/artic1e/280562

Brigham, S. (2008). Seeing straight ahead with Pierre Bourdieu: Female immigrant teachers in an arts-informed research inquiry. In J. Groen, & S. Guo (Eds.), Thinking Beyond

Borders: Global Ideas, Global Values. Online Proceedings of the Canadian Association
for the Study of Adult Education (CASAE).

78

Bullough, R., & Draper, R. (2004). Mentoring and the emotions. Journal ofEducation for

Teaching, 30(3),271-289.

Canadian Teachers' Federation. (2006, May). Review of the Employment Equity Act: Into the future. Paper submitted to the Labour Program of Human Resources and Social Development Canada, Ottawa. Retrieved from http://www.ctffce.calpublicationslBriefs/Subm-toHRSDC-reEmplymtEquityAct-eng.pdf

Cherubini, L. (2007). A personal services paradigm of teacher induction. The International

Electronic Journal for Leadership in Learning, 11(6). Retrieved from
http://iejIl.synergiesprairies.caliejIIlindex.php/iejlIlarticle/view/662

Clandinin, D. J., & Connelly, F. M. (2000). Narrative inquiry: Experience and story in

qualitative research. San Francisco, US: Jossey-Bass.

Dei, G. J., & James, I. M. (2002). Beyond the rhetoric: Moving from exclusion, reaching for inclusion in Canadian schools. Alberta Journal ofEducational Research, 48(1),61-87.

Deters, F. P. (2008). The professional acculturation of internationally educated teachers in

Canada: Affordances, constraints, and the reconstruction ofprofessional identity. Paper
presented at the Sociocultural Perspectives on Teacher Education and Development Conference. Oxford, United Kingdom.

79

Deters, F. P. (2009). Identity, agency, and the acquisition ofprofessional language and culture: The case of internationally educated teachers and college professors in Ontario. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Toronto, Canada.

Harding, S. (1993). Rethinking standpoint epistemology: What is "strong objectivity"? In L. Alcoff, & E. Potter (Eds.), Feminist epistemologies (pp. 49-82). New York, NY and London, UK: Routledge.

Howe, E. R. (2006). Exemplary teacher induction: An international review. Educational Philosophy and Theory, 38(3),287-297.

Hutchison, C. B. (2006). Cross-cultural issues arising for four science teachers during their international migration to teach in U. S. high schools. School Science and Mathematics, 106(2), 74-83.

Jane, B., & Peeler, E. (2007). Mentoring: Boosting self-worth, optimising potential. In P. L. Jeffery (Eds.), AARE Conference 2006 (pp.l-1 0). Adelaide Australian Association for Research in Education. Retrieved from http://www.aare.edu.auJ06pap/jan06699.pdf

Johnson, S. M. (2004). Finders and keepers: Helping new teachers survive and thrive in our schools. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

80

Kitchen, J., Cherubini, L., Smith, D., Goldblatt, P., & Engemann, J. (200S). Learningfrom

experience: Supporting beginning teachers and mentors, Booklet 5: research summary.
Ontario College of Teachers and Brock University. Retrieved from http://www.oct.caipublicationsIPDF/induction_bookletS _ e.pdf

Klassen, T. R, & Carr, P. R (1997). Different perceptions of race in education: Racial minority and white teachers. Canadian Journal of Education, 22(1), 67-SI.

Kostogriz, A., & Peeler, E. (2007). Professional identity and pedagogical space: Negotiating difference in teacher workplace. Teaching Education, 18(2), 107-122.

Mawhinney, H., & Xu, F. (1997). Reconstructing the professional identity of foreign-trained teachers in Ontario schools. TESOL Quarterly, 31(3),632-639.

Mcintyre, A. (1997). Making meaning ofwhiteness: Exploring racial identity with white

teachers. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.

Mills, C. W. (199S). Non-cartesian sums: Philosophies and the African American experience. In,

Blackness visible: Essays on philosophy and race (pp. 1-20). Ithica, NY: Cornell
University Press.

Neuman, W. L. (2006). Social research methods: Qualitative and quantitative approaches. Toronto, Canada: Pearson.

SI

Ontario College of Teachers. (2006). Transition to teaching 2006. Retrieved from http://www.oct.ca/publications/pdfltransitions06_e.pdf

Ontario College of Teachers. (2008). Transition to teaching 2008. Retrieved from http://www.oct.ca/publicationsIPD F/transitions08_ e. pdf

Ontario College of Teachers. (2009). 2008 annual report. Retrieved from http://www.oct.ca/annual_reportl2008/enlstats_applications.html

Ontario College of Teachers. (201Oa). Transition to teaching 2009. Retrieved from http://www.oct.ca/publicationsIPDF/transitions09_ e. pdf

Ontario College of Teachers. (201Ob). 2009 annual report. Retrieved from http://www.oct.ca/annualJeportl2009/enlstats_ downloads.html

Ontario College of Teachers. (2011). Transition to teaching 2010. Retrieved from http://oct.ca/publicationsIPDF/transitionsI0_e.pdf

Peeler, E., & Jane, B. (2005). Mentoring: Immigrant teachers bridging professional practices.

Teaching Education, 16(4), 325-336.

Phillion, J. (2003). Obstacles to accessing the teaching profession for immigrant women.

Multicultural Education, 11(1),41-45.

82

Puar, J. K., & Rai, A. (2004). The remaking of a model minority: Perverse projectiles under the specter of (counter)terrorism. Social Text 80, 22(3), 75-104.

Schick, C. (2000a). 'By virtue of being white': Resistance in anti-racist pedagogy. Race

Ethnicity and Education, 3(1), 83-102.

Schick, C. (2000b). White women teachers assessing dominance. Discourse: Studies in the

Cultural Politics o/Education, 21(3),299-309.

Schmidt, C. (2010). Systemic discrimination as a barrier for immigrant teachers. Diaspora,

Indigenous, and Minority Education, 4(4),235-252.

Solomon, R. P. (1997). Race, role modeling, and representation in teacher education training.

Canadian Journal o/Education, 22(4),395-410.

Thiessen, D. (1996). The changing place of racial minority immigrant teachers. In D. Thiessen, N. Bascia, & I. Goodson (Eds.), Making a difference about difference: The lives and

careers o/racial minority immigrant teachers (pp. 138-156). Toronto, Canada:
University of Toronto.

Thiessen, D., Bascia, N., & Goodson, I. (1996). Making a difference about difference: The lives

and careers o/racial minority immigrant teachers. Toronto, Canada:
REMTELIGaramond Press.

83

Wang, T. (2002). Cultural dissonance and adaptation: A study of Chinese immigrant teachers coping with cultural differences in Toronto schools (Ontario). (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of Toronto, Canada.

Wilkins, E. A., & Clift, R. T. (2007). Building a network of support for new teachers. Action in

Teacher Education, 28(4),25-35.

Yau, M., & O'Reilly, J. (2007). 2006 census, grades 7 -12: System overview. Retrieved from http://www.tdsb.on.ca/wwwdocumentslabout_uslextemal_research_applicationldocsl200 6StudentCensusSystemOverviewl.pdf

84

Appendix A: Recruitment Flyer
MENTORING PARTNERSHIPS FOR SUCCESS · · · · Are you a visible minority internationally-educated teacher certified by the Ontario College of Teachers? Are you a Canadian-experienced teacher and volunteer mentor? Have you both been part of a mentoring relationship at Skills for Change, Toronto? Are you interested in sharing your mentoring experiences for a study on the impact these relationships have on internationally-educated teachers' professional identities and sense of belonging in Ontario school communities?

If you and your mentoring partner answered yes to the questions above, you might be eligible to participate in this graduate degree study for Ryerson University, Toronto. DETAILS OF THIS STUDY This study is designed to explore the role of mentoring relationships between internationallyeducated and Canadian-experienced teachers on the re-establishment of internationally-trained teachers' professional identities, as well as their sense of inclusion in the teaching profession in Ontario. This study will focus on and examine the experiences of certified visible minority internationally-educated teacher mentees and Canadian-experienced mentors in these relationships. WHAT PARTICIPANTS ARE ASKED TO DO Mentee and mentor participants in this study will be involved in one mentoring pair interview and one individual interview. Internationally-educated teacher participants will also keep a hand-written or electronic reflective journal with their thoughts and experiences on the mentoring relationship. Suggested topics for the journal will be based upon the internationally-educated teachers' roles and experiences as well as their experiences in the mentoring relationships. HOW YOU CAN GET MORE INFORMATION For more infonnation about this study, including its requirements for participation, benefits, potential risks, confidentiality, costs and compensation, please contact the research investigator at the number given below.

Patricia Robertson Graduate Student and Research Investigator JVS Toronto 416.787.1151 ext. 211 85

Appendix B: Telephone Script

Hello (participant name), this is (staff name) at Skills for Change. How are you?

I am calling today to see if you would be interested in an opportunity to be part of research study on the role ofmentoring relationships on internationally-educated teachers' professional identities and feelings of belonging in the teaching profession.

The investigator of this study is Patricia Robertson, a former Facilitator and Counsellor at Skills for Change that worked with internationally-educated teachers in the Teach in Ontario STIC 7 program. Patricia is currently a graduate student at Ryerson University in the Immigration and Settlement Studies program. This research study is part of her final requirements for her master's study.

Patricia is looking for mentoring pairs to participate in this study. Eligible mentoring pairs would have completed our Skills for Change mentoring program, and have one certified internationally-educated teacher mentee from a visible minority group and one Canadianexperienced teacher mentor. I am calling you today because I know that you meet the criteria for this study.

Patricia's study will focus on the experiences of both the mentees and mentors in these relationships. Interested mentoring pairs for this study will be asked to be involved in one mentoring pair interview with their mentee or mentor, and one individual interview. The interviews will only require a total of 3 hours and can be arranged at a location and time

7 The Teach in Ontario Sector-Tenninology. Infonnation and Counselling (STIC) program was a provincially· funded orientation program for internationally-educated teachers at Skills for Change, Toronto, which ran from 2004 to 2008.

86

convenient to the participants. Internationally-educated teacher mentees will also be asked to keep a hand-written or electronic reflective journal with their thoughts on their previous and present teaching experiences and roles as teachers, as well as their thoughts on their mentoring relationship. Topics for written reflections will be suggested, and the journal can be done at any time that suits the mentee.

(For mentor recruitment only) At this stage in the recruitment process, I have spoken to your former mentee (name) and they are willing to participate in this study if you too are interested.

If you and your mentoring partner are interested in this opportunity to participate, Patricia would be happy to provide you with more details about the study. She can explain more information about the requirements of this study, its benefits, potential risks, confidentiality, costs and compensation. Please let me know if I can pass your contact information to Patricia to get in touch with you.

Skills for Change supports this study and our clients' participation. We believe the results of this research will provide participants, and immigrant service providers like Skills for Change, more insight into the benefits of mentoring programs to internationally-trained professionals.

Thank you.

87

Appendix C: Mentee Consent Form

Ryerson University Consent Agreement

Mentoring Partnerships for Success: The Role of Mentoring in Reconstructing Professional Identities and Creating a Sense of Belonging for Internationally-Educated Teachers of Visible Minority Groups in Greater Toronto Area School Communities You are being asked to participate in a research study. Before you give your consent to be a volunteer, it is important that you read the following information and ask as many questions as necessary to be sure you understand what you will be asked to do. Investigator Patricia Robertson, Graduate Student with the Immigration and Settlement Studies Graduate Department at Ryerson University, Toronto Research Supervisor Carmen Schifellite, Assistant Professor with the Sociology Department at Ryerson University, Toronto Purpose of the Study This study is designed to explore the role of mentoring relationships between internationallyeducated and Canadian-experienced teachers on the re-establishment of internationally-trained teachers' professional identities, as well as on their sense of inclusion in the teaching profession in Ontario. Specifically. this study will focus on and examine the experiences of certified visible minority internationally-trained and Canadian-experienced teachers in th,ese relationships. For the purposes of this research, I am interested in recruiting four (4) mentoring pairs from a mentoring program at Skills for Change, Toronto. Each mentoring pair needs to include an Ontario College of Teachers certified internationally-trained teacher mentee of a visible minority group that is currently unemployed, underemployed or employed in the teaching profession, as well as a Canadian-experienced teacher volunteer mentor. The pairs required for this study will have completed their mentoring partnerships with Skills for Change, Toronto. Description of the Study As a participant in this study, I will ask you to be involved in the following activities: · An in person pair interview with your mentor. This interview with the investigator and your mentor will be one and a half (l Yl) hours in duration and be at Skills for Change, Toronto, or another location of your choice.

88

·

An in person individual interview. This one-on-one interview with the investigator will be one and a half (I Yl) hours in duration and be at Skills for Change, Toronto, or another location of your choice. A reflective journal. The reflective journal will include thoughts you might have about your experiences as a teacher, your experiences in the mentoring relationship, and how this relationship may have influenced your development as a teacher. The reflective journal will be hand-written in a notebook or done electronically. Suggested topics for writing will be provided by the investigator. Writing in the reflective journal will be done at your own convenience and pace. Entries made in the reflective journal will be submitted to the investigator at the end of the study.

·

The interviews in this study will have questions about your experiences in the mentoring relationship, including your initial expectations of the partnership, the benefits gained from the relationship, challenges you may have encountered, and the partnership's affect on your identity as a teacher. ' Overall, your participation in this study will involve a total of two (2) interviews or approximately three (3) hours. The time spent on the reflective journal will be dependent upon what you can allow and your interest in this activity. What is Experimental in this Study None of the procedures used in this study are experimental in nature. The only experimental aspect of this study is the gathering of information from participants for the purpose of analysis. Risks or Discomforts Some of the questions that will be asked in the pair and individual interviews may be personal in nature and may cause you to reflect on unpleasant memories or experiences. If at any time you begin to feel uncomfortable, you are free to discontinue participation in the interview, either temporarily or permanently. Benefits of the Study Potential benefits from this study are numerous. As a participant in this study, you can benefit from the knowledge and experiences shared in the interviews, and well as from reflecting on prior and new understandings of the role and practices of a teacher in Ontario that you have gained from your mentoring partnership. The results of this study can provide immigrant service providers further insight into the experiences of their clients and help them to improve their mentoring programs. Immigrant service providers may additionally benefit from the support of this research in developing future mentoring programs that meet the diverse needs of internationally-trained professionals. The study's outcomes are also highly important to Ontario's public school boards' goals to enrich the racial and cultural diversity of their teaching staff, promote inclusion in schools, and meet all students' educational needs. Lastly, this study will add to recent academic literature on the role of mentoring partnerships in the successful employment integration 'of internationally-trained professionals in Ontario. .

89

While I hope that you can gain from your involvement in this research, I cannot guarantee that you will receive any benefits from participating in this study. Confidentiality All data collected in this research will be securely stored in the investigator's home, either locked in a filing cabinet or protected behind a computer password. A coding system will be used when transcribing interview digital audio-tape recordings and reflective journal entries to protect participants' names and identities. Participants will be asked to review and edit transcripts prior to any publication. Transcriptions of reflective journal entries and digital audio-taped interview recordings will be kept for five (5) years, after which they will be destroyed. Hand-written or electronic reflective journal entries and digital audio-tape recordings will be kept for one (1) year and then destroyed. Only the investigator and research supervisor will have access to data from this study. Incentives to Participate Those involved in this study will not be paid or offered any incentives for their participation. Costs and Compensation for Participation Your participation in this study might.involve transportation costs for travel to the agreed upon interview locations. I will compensate you for any public transit costs that you may acquire. I will also provide you with a notebook for your reflective journal if needed. Voluntary Nature of Participation Participation in this study is voluntary. Your choice of whether or not to participate will not influence your future relations with Ryerson University or Skills for Change, Toronto. If you decide to participate, you are free to withdraw your consent and to stop your participation at any time, without penalty or loss of benefits to which you are allowed. At any point in the study, you may refuse to answer any particular question or stop participation altogether. Questions about the Study If you have any questions about the research now or at a later date, please contact me at my workplace for more information. Patricia Robertson NS Toronto 74 Tyeos Drive, Toronto, ON M6B 1V9 416.787.1151 ext 211 If you have questions regarding your rights as a human subject and participant in this study, you may contact the Ryerson University Research Ethics Board for more information. Research Ethics Board c/o Office of the Vice President, Research and Innovation Ryerson University 350 Victoria Street, Toronto, ON M5B 2K3 416.979.5042 90

Agreement Your signature below indicates that you have read the information in this agreement and have had a chance to ask any questions you have about the study. Your signature also indicates that you agree to be in the study and have been told that you can change your mind and withdraw your consent to participate at any time.

Name of Participant (please print)

Signature of Participant

Date

Signature of Investigator

Date

Your signature below indicates that you understand your interviews as part of this study will be digital audio-taped and transcribed. Your signature also indicates that you agree to edit and review the transcripts before publication.

Name of Participant (please print)

Signature of Participant

Date

Signature of Investigator

Date

You have been given a copy of this agreement. You have been told that by signing this consent agreement you are not giving up any of your legal rights.

91

Appendix D: Mentor Consent Form

Ryerson University Consent Agreement

Mentoring Partnerships for Success: The Role of Mentoring in Reconstructing Professional Identities and Creating a Sense of Belonging for Internationally-Educated Teachers of Visible Minority Groups in Greater Toronto Area School Communities You are being asked to participate in a research study. Before you give your consent to be a volunteer, it is important that you read the following information and ask as many questions as necessary to be sure you understand what you will be asked to do. Investigator Patricia Robertson, Graduate Student with the Immigration and Settlement Studies Graduate Department at Ryerson University, Toronto Research Supervisor Carmen Schifellite, Assistant Professor with the Sociology Department at Ryerson University, Toronto Purpose of the Study This study is designed to explore the role of mentoring relationships between internationallyeducated and Canadian-experienced teachers on re-establishing internationally-trained teachers' professional identities, as well as their sense of inclusion in the teaching profession in Ontario. Specifically, this study will focus on and examine the experiences of certified visible minority internationally-trained and Canadian-experienced teachers in these relationships. For the purposes of this research, I am interested in recruiting four (4) mentoring pairs from a mentoring program at Skills for Change, Toronto. Each mentoring pair needs to include an Ontario College of Teachers certified internationally-trained teacher mentee of a visible minority group that is currently unemployed, underemployed or employed in the teaching profession, as well as a Canadian-experienced teacher volunteer mentor. The pairs required for this study will have completed their mentoring partnerships with Skills for Change, Toronto. Description of the Study As a participant in this study, I will ask you to be involved in the following activities:
· An in person pair interview with your mentee. This interview with the investigator and your mentee will be one and a half (1 ~) hours in duration and be at Skills for Change, Toronto, or another location of your choice.

92

·

An in person individual interview. This one-on-one interview with the investigator will

be one and a half (1 Yl) hours in duration and be at Skills for Change, Toronto, or another location of your choice. The interviews in this study will have questions about your experiences in the mentoring relationship, including your initial expectations of the partnership, the benefits gained from the relationship, challenges you may have encountered, and the partnership's affect on your identity and role as a teacher. Overall, your participation in this study will involve a total of two (2) interviews or approximately three (3) hours. What is Experimental in this Study None of the procedures used in this study are experimental in nature. The only experimental aspect of this study is the gathering of information from parti.cipants for the purpose of analysis. Risks or Discomforts Some of the questions that will be asked in the pair and individual interviews may be personal in nature and may cause you to reflect on unpleasant or sensitive experiences. If at any time you begin to feel uncomfortable, you are free to discontinue participation in the interview, either temporarily or permanently. Benefits of the Study Potential benefits from this study are numerous. As a participant in this study, you can benefit from the knowledge and experiences shared in the interviews, and well as from reflecting on prior and new understandings of internationally-educated teachers' experiences, and the role and ~ practices of teachers in Ontario, that you have gained from your mentoring partnership. The results of this study can provide immigrant service providers further insight into the experiences of their clients and help them to improve their mentoring programs. Immigrant service providers may additionally benefit from the support of this research in developing futUre mentoring programs that meet the diverse needs of internationally-trained professionals. The study's outcomes are also highly important to Ontario's public school boards' goals to enrich the racial and cultural diversity of their teaching staff, promote inclusion in schools, and meet all students' educational needs. Lastly. this study will add to recent academic literature on the role of mentoring partnerships in the successful employment integration of internationally-trained professionals in Ontario. While I hope that you can gain from your involvement in this research, I cannot guarantee that you will receive any benefits from participating in this study. Confidentiality All data collected in this research will be securely stored in the investigator's home, either locked in a filing cabinet or protected behind a computer password. A coding system will be used when transcribing interview digital audio-tape recordings and reflective journal entries to protect participants' names and identities. Participants will be asked to review and edit transcripts prior to any publication. Transcriptions of reflective journal entries and digital audio-taped interview 93

recordings will be kept for five (5) years, after which they will be destroyed. Hand-written or electronic reflective journal entries and digital audio-tape recordings will be kept for one (1) year and then destroyed. Only the investigator and research supervisor will have access to data from this study. Incentives to Participate Those involved in this study will not be paid or offered any incentives for their participation. Costs and Compensation for Participation Your participation in this study might involve transportation costs for travel to the agreed upon interview locations. I will compensate you for any public transit costs that you may acquire. I will also provide you with a notebook for your reflective journal if needed. Voluntary Nature of Participation Participation in this study is voluntary. Your choice of whether or not to participate will not influence your future relations with Ryerson University or Skills for Change, Toronto. If you decide to participate, you are free to withdraw your consent and to stop your participation at any time, without penalty or loss of benefits to which you are allowed. At any point in the study, you may refuse to answer any particular question or stop participation altogether. Questions about the Study If you have any questions about the research now or at a later date, please contact me at my workplace for more information. Patricia Robertson JVS Toronto 74 Tycos Drive, Toronto, ON M6B IV9 416.787.1151 ext 211 If you have questions regarding your rights as a human subject and participant in this study, you may contact the Ryerson University Research Ethics Board for more information. Research Ethics Board c/o Office of the Vice President, Research and Innovation Ryerson University 350 Victoria Street, Toronto, ON M5B 2K.3 416.979.5042

94

Agreement Your signature below indicates that you have read the information in this agreement and have had a chance to ask any questions you have about the study. Your signature also indicates that you agree to be in the study and have been told that you can change your mind and withdraw your consent to participate at any time.

Name of Participant (please print)

Signature of Participant

Date

Signature ofInvestigator

Date

Your signature below indicates that you understand your interviews as part of this study will be digital audio-taped and transcribed. Your signature also indicates that you agree to edit and review the transcripts before publication.

Name of Participant (please print)

Signature of Participant

Date

Signature ofInvestigator

Date

You have been given a copy of this agreement. You have been told that by signing this consent agreement you are not giving up any of your legal rights.

95

Appendix E: Interview Questions
Questions for Mentee Interviews 1. Tell me about your previous teaching experiences in your country of origin. 2. What were your experiences in the teaching field when you came to Ontario? 3. Tell me about your experiences in regaining your license as a teacher in Ontario, and in looking for employment or opportunities in the field. 4. How did you feel about yourself as a teacher at this time? 5. Describe your experience in the mentoring partnership. 6. What expectations did you have of your mentor in this partnership? 7. What challenges, if any, did you encounter in the relationship? 8. How has this relationship influenced your perceptions of the teacher's role in Ontario school communities? 9. How has the relationship changed the way you feel as an internationally-educated teacher in Ontario? 10. How has this relationship affected you in looking for employment and in your dealings with local school boards and teachers in the profession? 11. What benefits have you experienced from entering into the mentoring relationship? 12. What has been the greatest lesson that you have learned in the relationship? 13. What would you recommend to other internationally-trained teachers entering into a mentoring partnership with a Canadian-experienced teacher? Questions for Mentor Interviews 1. Tell me about your previous dealing with, or your knowledge of, internationally-educated teachers and their experiences. 96

2, What do you understand are the primary challenges that internationally-trained teachers face in seeking teacher licensing and employment in Ontario? 3, Describe your experience in the mentoring partnership. 4. What expectations did you have of your mentee in this relationship? 5. What challenges, if any, did you encounter in the relationship? 6. In what ways do you feel the mentoring relationship has impacted your mentee as a teacher? 7. How has this relationship influenced your perception~ of the teacher's role in Ontario school communities? 8. How has the relationship changed the way you feel as a teacher? 9. What benefits have you experienced from entering into the mentoring relationship? 10. What has been the greatest lesson that you have learned in the relationship? 11. What would you recommend to other Canadian-experienced teachers entering into a mentoring relationship with an internationally-trained teacher? Questions for Mentoring Pair Interviews 1. Why did you choose to enter into a mentoring partnership? 2. What did you hope to gain from this partnership? 3. Describe your experiences in this mentoring relationship? 4. What have been the benefits to your participation in this relationship? 5. How has this relationship influenced your perceptions of the teaching profession and your role in school communities? 6. Has this relationship changed the way you both feel as teachers and life-long learners?

97

Appendix F: Suggested Topics for Reflective Journal Entries
The following are suggested topics for reflective journal entries. Whiles these suggestions offer several writing ideas, these are only recommendations and you are not limited to these topics. You are free to reflect upon any thoughts or experiences you have had while in your mentoring relationship or in the teaching profession. whether in your country of origin or here in Canada. · Compare your present role as a teacher in Ontario to the role you had in your country of origin. Has this role changed, and if so, what do you think are the reasons for this change? · Describe what you feel are your strengths as a teacher. Have these strengths developed or changed since you moved from your country of origin? What influenced these developments or changes? What additional skills have you gained? · What do you feel were some of the major challenges that you faced in becoming a teacher in Ontario? What did you do to overcome these challenges? What can you recommend to other internationally-educated teachers with similar obstacles? · Describe a time when you were a mentor to another teacher. Do you see similarities or differences between your work as a mentor and your recent mentor's work in your relationship? · What differences did you find between being a mentor to another teacher and being a mentee in this relationship? · Describe what you gained from your mentoring relationship. Did you experience any challenges in this relationship? How have they influenced you as a teacher? · What more would you have liked to have gained from your mentoring relationship? Why would this have been important to your development as a teacher?

98

