Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2007

A framework for life cycle assessment of concrete bridge decks
Fouad Taki
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Civil and Environmental Engineering Commons Recommended Citation
Taki, Fouad, "A framework for life cycle assessment of concrete bridge decks" (2007). Theses and dissertations. Paper 152.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

A FRAMEWORK FOR LIFE CYCLE ASSESSMENT OF CONCRETE BRIDGE DECKS

by
Fouad Taki
M.ASc. Civil Engineering, Baghdad, Iraq, 1991

A thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Applied Science in Civil Engineering

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2007 © Fouad Taki 2007
PROPERTY OF

RYERSON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

11

Ryerson University requires the signature of all persons using or photocopying this thesis. Please sign below, and give address and date.

Name and signature

Address

Date

111

A FRAMEWORK FOR LIFE CYCLE ASSESSMENT OF CONCRETE BRIDGE DECKS

Fouad Taki Master of Applied Science, Department of Civil Engineering Ryerson University, 2007

ABSTRACT
The construction industry is the largest contributor to environmental loading, and while development will require more infrastructure to achieve its goals, this will require more construction and hence more pollution. In order to achieve a sustainable development, the construction industry has to reduce its

environmental loading and consumption of energy and raw materials. The methodology of Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) can help in quantifying the cradle to grave impact of construction on the environment.

This study was performed to develop a model that uses LCA methodology to estimate the environmental impact of concrete bridge decks in North America. The model traces the emissions during the life cycle of a concrete bridge deck, and then calculates the impact of these emissions on the environment. The model also calculates the energy and raw materials that are consumed during the life cycle of a concrete bridge deck. This model can be used by designers to evaluate alternative bridge deck designs to select the environmentally sound one.

IV

AKNOWLEDGEMENT

I wish to express my gratitude to my supervisor Dr. M. Lachemi, and my cosupervisors Dr. F. Sadeghpour and Dr. A Hossain. I am deeply grateful for their vital directions, valuable discussions, helpful comments and encouragement during the course of research. Gratitude is also extended to all friends and colleagues who helped me in a certain way while preparing this thesis. Our discussions and their opinions were very helpful in the production of this thesis. Finally, special thanks are expressed to my wife and children for their patience, understanding during the course of work.

v

