ACCEPTED ATTITUDES: PHOTOGRAPHY'S APPEARANCE IN JANSON'S HISTORY OF ART

.~

N

by
Adam Shennan B.A. Political Science, Huron College, 2006 A thesis presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment for the degree of Masters in the Program of Photographic Preservation and Collections Management

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2008

© Adam Sherman 2008

\

AUTHOR'S DE CLARATION
I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis or dissertation.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis or dissertation to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis or dissertation by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or=individuals for the purpose of scholarly research .

w

.

~.

_.

1

.:.

ii

./

ABSTRACT ACCEPTED ATTITUDES: PHOTOGRAPHY'S APPEARANCE IN JANSON'S

HISTORY OF ART
Masters in Photographic Preservation and Collections Management, 2008, Adam Sherman, Ryerson University

Horst W. Janson's History ofArt - often known simply as Janson - has been considered the "bible" in the art history textbook market since it was first published in 1962. This thesis ~~nes how mstori.~aLand cOIlt~porary photo~~~~y_~,!s~ consider~ and discussed in the seven editions and three revised editions of History ofArt, published between 1962 and 2007. The thesis provides a description of the successive editions, discusses what changes and what remains constant, and the sketches the larger context in which these changes occurred. The thesis contains an appendix that provides a comprehensive list of each of the editions of the History of Art, and records in order of their appearance, all of the reproductions of photograph.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I wish to thank Alison Nordstrom, Marta Braun, David Harris, and my parents for their support with this thesis.

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction First Edition Revised First Edition Second Edition Third Edition Fourth Edition Fifth Edition Revised Fifth Edition Sixth Edition Revised Sixth Edition Seventh Edition Conclusion Bibliography Appendix 1

.............................................................

1

............................................................ ............................................................
............................................................

4 8
8

............................................................ ............................................................ ............................................................ ............................................................ ............................................................ ............................................................
............................................................

12 21 22 23 23 23
24

............................................................

27

............................................................
............................................................

29
33

v

INTRODUCTION
It is interesting to speculate to what extent Janson's History of Art reflected
scholarly tastes and standards. By following the trajectory of the appearance of historical and contemporary photography in Janson's different editions, we can discuss when and how photography took its place with painting, sculpture. and architecture. and we can trace the way in which certain photographs became part of the canon of the art history [ survey text. We can, with some certainty, say that History of Art's authors lagged behind in their estimation of photography compared to other contemporary authors of art history surveys. such as Helen Gardner. and we can investigate why. Like all survey texts,

History ofAn is a digest and summary of scholarly articles and books that have been
previously written. The authors have absorbed, summarized, and then re-presented material, research, and complex arguments in a simpler and more accessible form for non-specialists. The construction of Janson's History ofArt, and how photography is presented and understood, is in no way neutral. It adopts the standard way of considering painting, sculpture, and architecture.

History ofArt - often known simply as Janson, after its author, Horst W. Janson
(1913-1982) - has been considered the "bible" in the art history textbook market since it was fIrst published in 1962. 1 H.W. Janson's areas of specialties were ~enaissance SCUlpture, Medieval and Renaissance iconography, and modem art. Janson was a
/

professor and chairman of the Department of Art at New York University, and at various times in his career the President of the College Art Association, and the editor of Art
I H.W. Janson's wife, Dora Jane Janson, is listed as a co-author of History 0/ Art. Her name disappears from the title page after the second edition. Prior to History 0/ Art they co-authored three books: The Picture History 0/ Painting: From Cave Paintings to Modem Times (1954), The Story 0/ Painting/or Young People: From Cave Painting to Modern Times (1957), and Key Monuments o/the History 0/ Art: A

Visual Survey (1959).

1

/'

Bulletin. He is acknowledged for "bridging the gap" between European art history and
American art history.2 The book's popUlarity has much to do with its well-organized and clearly written text, and an elegant production that includes high quality, large reproductions - many of them in color - of important works. Though renowned as a textbook, History ofArt was also intended for the general public. According to H.W. Janson's son, Anthony F. Janson, the book "was originally written for anyone to buy--the average person who had a year or two of college and some nascent interest in art.,,3 This may explain why the book's readership has extended beyond scholars and university students to include the general public. 4

History ofArt's subtitle, A Survey of the Major Visual Arts from the Dawn of Art to the Present, makes it clear that we are dealing with a survey text. According to
Mitchell Schwarzer, "the survey text embodies the nineteenth-century vision of history to unify the art of the past into a coherent and relevant story for the present ... the survey text asks us to believe that the immeasurable diversity of art can be brought together into a great chain of meaning."s Mark Miller Graham considers three concepts common to the survey text's structure - canonicity, chronology, and closure. Canonicity is the belief that ultimately there is a "consensual body of work" that is worthy of consideration. Chronology, in Graham's view, is the notion that history is written in a linear sequence-

3

Peers. "Canon Fodder," ARTnews lIS, no. 2 (February 2006): 124. Cited in Zoe Ingalls, "A Classic Is Revised," The Chronicle of Higher Education, August 11, 1995. 4 Idem. S Mitchell Sewaner, "Origins of the Art History Survey Text," Art Journal 54. no.3 (Autumn 1995): 24.
2 Alexandra

2

"points marking a line.,,6 Closure exists because we want "resolution," a survey places art into a "causal chain" with a "satisfying end.,,7 Janson does not discuss photography as an art form in the first (1962) and second (1977) editions of his History of Art. Though he never explained why he excluded photography, one can speculate. He was likely skeptical of its status as an independent art form. In a 1979 interview published in Women Artists News, for example, Janson stated "'The works that I have put in the book are representative of achievements of the imagination, let us say, that have one way or another changed the history of art."s Photography, in Janson's view, may have lacked the lineage and proof of influence he=demanded and, perhaps even more crucially, lacked the vital spark of human imagination. Perhaps he may have also thought it too young to gain admittance into the canon comprised of that solid triumvirate: painting, sculpture, and architecture. Certainly there was a reputable history of photography readily available to furnish Janson with material and evidence of its institutional acceptance as an art form: By 1962, three editions of Beaumont Newhall's The History of Photography had been published, the leading art history survey text, Helen Gardner's Art Through The Ages, had already included a chapter on photography, and the Museum of Modem Art in New York had been exhibiting photography for twenty-five years.

6 Mark Miller Graham, "The Future of Art History and the Undoing of the Survey," Art Joumal54, no.3 (Autumn 1995): 30. 7 Ibid, 31. 8 Cited in Eleanor Dickinson, "Sexists Texts Boycotted," Women Artists News 5, no. 4 (September/October 1979): 12.

3

FIRST EDITION
Why was the flrst edition of History of Art written? What was the state of art history and art education in 1962? Art history courses had become common in the 1930s. For one reason, several notable art historians. including Janson, left Germany for the United States and Britain, after the rise of Nazism. 9 In addition, perhaps at such a horriflc time, the world was looking for a distraction. As Scwarzer points out. ''The art history survey promised to teach development not of the human race and mind, but of the more restricted traditions of artistic technique and style."IO In 1962, professor Manuel Barkan. of Ohio State University. wrote an article in

Art Education, in which he discussed the current state of teaching art history in American
universities 11 Barkan explains that in the 1940s, art appreciation was taught in all art programs. This consisted of, as Barkan puts it, the study of "tiny prints ... of well known paintings." They were works from the Renaissance up until the middle of the nineteenth century. Students studied the images in order to be able to identify the names of the artists, their birth and death dates, the subjects in the paintings. and their titles, all of which they were expected to memorize for examinations. 12 Barken emphasizes the "poverty" and "general absence" of good art reproductions in most schools. He states 'There is a growing emphasis among some art teachers on the importance of sustained and continuous contact with great works of art.... It stems from the discovery and

9 H.W. Janson left Germany in protest over the Nazi's expulsion of Jewish art historian Erwin Panofsky " from Hamburg University. 10 Scwarzer maintains early art history texts could be divided into two groups: contextual (guided by a higher order) and formalist (descriptive). Twentieth-century survey texts removed the "hierarchical, international overtones" of nineteenth-century survey. But what is left, as Scwarzer puts it, is "incoherent formalism." Scwarzer, 27-28. 11 Manuel Barken, "Transition In Art Education: Changing Conceptions of Curriculum and Teaching," Art Education 15, no.7 (October 1962): 12. 12 Ibid, 14.

4

realization that the capacity for sensitive and knowledgeable judgment rests in large part on insights gained through acquaintance with and careful study of great works of art." Barken discusses the "renewed" attention to the "teaching of insightful observation of works of art." He stresses new teaching materials and courses that will be based on the "rich research" of scholars like Etienne Gilson, Rene Huyghe, and E.H. Gombrich. 13

In 1962, the year of Janson's first edition, there was little interest among art
educators in the subject of photography. Van Deren Coke, a professor at the University of New Mexico, in his 1960 article, "The Art of Photography in College Teaching," notes that the history of photography was being offered in advance courses by only two American instructors: Beaumont Newhall in the art departments at the Rochester Institute of Technology and the University of Rochester, and Henry Smith in the Department of Fine Arts at Indiana University. As Coke points out, these courses were for a small "specialized" set of students. There was only one art history textbook that contained a separate chapter on the history of photography as an art form, and that was the fourth edition of Helen Gardner's Art Through The Ages (1959). Coke sees Gardner's fourth edition as a sign of photography's growing legitimacy. Ac,?ording to Coke, the fact that the book was "designed for use by large groups of lower division students, would seem to imply that this medium has at last received its cue to come on stage academically with the other visual artS.,,14 In his original 1962 edition, Janson discusses painting, sculpture and architecture, and in his introduction, he briefly discusses "applied arts." He sees those lacking the skills and talents required for painting, sculpture, or architecture entering the applied arts
13
14

Ibid, 15. , Van Deren Coke, "The Art of Photography in College Teaching," College Art Joumal19, no. 4 (Summer 1960): 332.

5

to beautify things that are used every day. However, he does not list photography as an applied art. Within the text, he mentions photography a few times. He writes of a wooden device that Albrecht DUrer created to draw with perspective, which was the first step towards the principle of the photographic camera. 15 To distinguish painting from what he clearly sees as the lesser form, photography, he notes that Jean Auguste Dominique Ingres (1780-1867) was the last great portrait painter in a field soon to be dominated by the camera. According to Janson, it is "deceptive" to think Ingres' work looks like a "kind of super-photograph." Janson highlights the differences between Ingres' preliminary pencil drawing and his finished painting of Louis Bertin (1832), and describes the changes Ingres made to give the portrait more personality.16 Janson states that Edouard Manet "rescued" painting from its competition with photography. 17 The only photograph reproduced in this edition is Alexander Liberman's photographic portrait of Pablo Picasso sketching the figures from Manet's Luncheon on the Grass. This photograph is used to illustrate Janson's belief that art is causal and that one great artist influences another. IS (Refer to Appendix 1 for a full listing of all photographs reproduced in the different editions of History ofArt). Helen Gardner's Art Through The Ages (1959), was another art history survey text that included photography.19 This 4th edition was revised by members of Yale University's art history department. In Art Through The Ages. the photography chapter

-

IS H.W. Janson, History of Art: A Survey of the Major Visual Artsfrom the Dawn of History to the Present Day (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1962),392. 16 Ibid, 486. 17 Ibid, 492. 18 Ibid, 16. 19 First published in 1926, it was revised in 1936 and 1948. just before Gardner's death.

6

shares equal status with the painting, sculpture, and architecture chapters, under the general heading 'Modem Art.' The opening lines of the chapter on photography state:

In photography, science and art merge to create new kinds of pictorial experience. This relatively new method of picture-making requires its own criteria of analysis and criticism. It is not enough that a photograph should, in its general composition and distribution of values or of color remind us of similar qualities in a painting; it must present a different kind of design, and a different realization of values and of color peculiar to the technical nature of the medium itself. The development of such new qualities constitutes the artistic history of photography.20

Art Through The Ages does not fully analyze its included photographs. The
works of David Octavius Hill and Robert Adamson are praised for their "interpretation of character" and for their "play of light and shade".21 Eugene Atget is praised for the detail that comes from the clarity of his images.22 But for the most part, Art Through The Ages goes through the history of photography in terms of technological advances and new photographic processes. Headings include: The Daguerreotype, The Calotype, Wet Plates, and Dry Plates and Films. The book provides technical details, describing, for . example, the required temperature of mercury when developing a daguerreotype, the chemicals used to make paper light-sensitive, and the technique Eadweard Muybridge employed to capture the galloping horse. 23
It is interesting to note, however, that every reproduction in Janson's History 0/

Art is in fact a photographically-derived image. The paintings, sculptures, and
architecture described are all visible through photographs of them. Andre Malraux wrote in his 1953 The Voices o/Silence that "art history has been the history of that which can 20 Helen Gardner, Art Through the Ages, 4th ed. rev under the editorship of Summer M. Crosby by the Dept. of the History of Art, Yale University. (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1959),737. 21 Ibid, 741. ' . 22 Ibid, 747. 23 Ibid, 738.

7

be photographed.,,24 Janson may have seen photography as a medium of reproduction, and not as an aesthetic practice.

REVISED FIRST EDITION
The revised 1969 first edition of History ofArt contains no new mentions or reproductions of photography.

SECOND EDITION

In his 1977 edition, H.W. Janson acknowledges photography as an aid to create
paintings. He reproduces Larry Rivers' 1958 painting Europe II and includes a vernacular photograph of Rivers' great uncle and cousins from the late 1920s upon which the painting based. 25 Janson includes Rivers in History ofArt, not because Rivers is an artist who bases his paintings on photographs. but because Janson feels his work displays the transition from Action Painting to Pop Art. Yet the photograph has significance. According to Janson, the viewer has the sense that Rivers' painting is "built on an older image that keeps asserting itself underneath." Janson also includes a painting by Don Eddy, New Shoes for H
(1973~ 74).

and his 1973 photograph upon which the painting is
,

based. Janson classifies Eddy's painting as an example of Photo Realism?6 Janson points out the differences between the Eddy photograph and painting. Unlike the photograph. Eddy paints everything in even focus; he accentuates what the photograph loses in its

24 Andre Malraux. The Voices of Silence. trans. by Stuart Gilbert (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1953). 30. 25 H.W. Janson, History of Art: A Survey of the Major Visual Artsfrom the Dawn of History to the Present Day. 2nd ed. (New York: Harry N. Abrams. 1977), 675. 26 Ibid. 678.

8

';"

shadows. and most importantly, gives "pictorial coherence" by using a bright color scheme throughout the entire painting. 27 Janson was only interested in the use of photographs by painters, while other scholars at the time investigated the broader relationship between paintings and photographs. In 1964, Van Deren Coke had organized an important traveling exhibition and accompanying catalogue titled The Painter And The Photograph. 28 The fIrst half of Coke's catalogue essay is a brief history of this subject beginning with the invention of photography, and reveals how artists used photographs as representations of the material world and also for their technical strangeness. 29 The second half of the catalogue es~ay explores contemporary artists' use of photographs and includes statements by painters such as Jane Wilson and Alfred Young. Coke contrasts the "covert" use of photographs by painters in the nineteenth century, to the "overt" use of photographs by contemporary artists. In 1972, the catalogue was expanded, updated, and published as The Painter And

The Photograph: from Delacroix to Warhol. In this version, the paintings and
photographs are loosely arranged by subject matter into chapters, such as portraits, genre, landscapes, and mixed media. The 1964 edition includes a painting by Larry Rivers and the photograph upon which it is based.
30

In Coke's expanded and updated edition of

Tllbid, 679. 28 The exhibition was shown during 1964 and 1965 at Rose Art Museum, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts; Museum of Art, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana; The Art Gallery. The State University ofIowa, Iowa City, Iowa; Isaac Delgado Museum of Art, New Orleans. Louisiana; The Art Gallery, The University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico; Santa Barbara Museum of Art, Santa Barbara, California. 29 Jean-Baptiste Camille Corot, for example, began to base his painting upon photographs after the invention of the medium, and changed the style of his landscapes from hard-edged to more blurry because the daguerreotype and calotype process records trees hazy due to long exposure times and halation. Van Deren Coke, The Painter And The Photograph: from Delacroix to Warhol, rev. and enl. ed. (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1972), 195. . 30 Bar Mitzvah Photograph (oil, 1960) and photograph of the artist's aunt, uncle, and cousins (1936). Van Deren Coke, The Painter And The Photograph, (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1964),38:

9

1972, another Rivers' painting, Europe II, and its accompanying photograph are also reproduced. Significantly, Europe II is used in the 1977 edition of Janson's History of
Art.

Janson and Coke differ as to how painters use photographs. Janson acknowledges that from the time photography was invented, painters made use of photographs, but believes "they were no more than a convenient substitute for reality." 31 Coke, on the other hand, states that a photograph "functions not as a crutch but as a means of expanding the painter's vision, permitting him to see aspects of a situation previously overlooked, or beyond the range of the human eye." 32 Coke's view of the complex relationship between the painting and the photograph, first expressed in 1964, had seemingly little effect on Janson, beyond provided evidence of how photographs were used by painters. This position remained until the fourth edition (1991). In 1965 art critic Aaron Scharf reviewed The Painter And The Photograph, stating, "Coke deplores any attitudes which seek to isolate art from photography, photography from art. He insists that it is by their interaction and not by their alienation that art and photography can fertilize each other.,,33 Scharf's own book, Art and
Photography (1968), also explores the interconnectedness of the two media. But while

Coke focused mostly on twentieth century and especially contemporary painting, Scharf turns his attention to nineteenth century art. Coke emphasizes American work; Scharf looks at the art of England and France.

31 H.W. Janson, 2nd ed., 678. 32 Coke, The Painter And The Photograph. 5.
33 Aaron Scharf. review of The Painter And The Photograph by Van Deren Coke. The Burlington Magazine 107, no. 753 (December 1965), 635.

10

f
Scharf contends that since the invention of photography, no artist can approach his or her work without an "awareness" of the new medium. This is a two way street: the "consciousness" of photographers must likewise consider the work of the other visual artS. 34 The idea of a "symbiosis" between painting and photography is excluded from

History of Art. Janson provides only two examples where a specific photograph was used
to help create a specific painting. Scharf discusses an array of influences; for instance, the influence of Eadweard Muybridge and Etienne-Jules Marey on Futurist painters and on artists such as Marcel Duchamp and Paul Klee. 35 While Janson ignored photography at this time, the medium was making inroaas into modernist practice. In January 1966, The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, for example, opened the exhibition The Photographic Image, consisting of thirty-two works by seven artists. While some of the artists - Suzi Gablik, Robert Rauschenberg, and An~y W arhol- actually used photographic images in their work, others - Richard Artschwager, Lynn Foulkes, Malcolm Morley, and Joseph Raffaeles - simulated photography's effect. The exhibition's curator, Lawrence Alloway, wrote in the exhibition's publication that
,

the work shown defines photography "neither as art's invisible servant nor as straight quotation." He also stated, '''The photographic traces are identified fully with the flat surface of the canvas.,,36 Alloway contends that photography does not destroy the modernist, medium specificity flatness of the painting. He goes on to state that Rauschenberg, "by means of silk-screens, replaced the real objects of his combines with

Scharf, Art and Photography (London: Allen Lane, 1968). XI. Ironically Scharfs 1968 book, Art and Photography was criticized for stating that art and photography are separate. As Carl Chiarenza wrote, "The title and much of the text imply. then. that photography is not included under the heading, ARTI The book is about Art AND something else called photography." Carl Chiarenza, review of Art and Photography by Aaron Scharf, Art Journal3l. no. 3 (Spring 1971): 338. 36 Lawrence Alloway, The Photographic Image (New York: The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1966).
3S

34 Aaron

11

an analogous array of images.,,37 Alloway argued that Gablik "relies on collages, but uses it deceptively, not as montage. Her collage protectively imitates adjacent pigment and her paint impersonates photographic areas to produce a single plane of fused imagery.,,38 Scharf, Coke, and Alloway all included work by Rauschenberg in their exhibitions or publications. Janson also reproduces an "assemblage" (Odalisk 1955-58) by Rauschenberg in his 1977 edition. 39 Janson states that Rauschenberg uses collage, among other techniques, and pastes photographs and images from picture magazines together. 40 Rauschenberg's work marks an important change in the art world because it uses strategies that are not modernist - mixing media and appropriating images. While Janson does not include a formal bibliography in History ofArt, he does include a list of "books for further reading" for each chapter. In this edition, he includes both Scharf's Art and Photography (1968) and Coke's The Painter And The Photograph:

from Delacroix to Warhol (1972).

THIRD EDITION
H.W. Janson died in 1982. His book had sold a remarkable two million copies and had been translated into more than fourteen languages. 41 For the "revised and expanded" third edition (1986) H.W. Janson's son, Anthony F., took over as author. With slight amendments, A.F. Janson preserved the original text. However, he revised the introduction and most significantly, added three new sections on photography, one in the

Idem. Idem. 39 H.W. Janson, 2nd ed., 695. 40 Ibid, 677. 41 For example, all the editions had been published in England by Thames and Hudson, indicating th~ ~ide distribution and availability of History ofArt. In addition, History of Art was published in French, German, Spanish, and Portuguese.
37

38

12

"Neoclassicism and Romanticism" chapter, one in the "Post-Impressionism" chapter, and an entire chapter dealing with twentieth-century photography as an art form. Perhaps photography was included because a new author was at the helm of

History ofArt. But it is more likely that the major changes taking place in the art world
determined photography's inclusion in the art history canon. As artists such as Rauschenberg who used photography in a new, non-modernist way had become prominent, photography's place in the art world also changed. Throughout the 1970s, there was an enormous growth in the photography market, along with the opening of photography galleries. There was an increase in the number of institutional and private collections devoted to photography. Artists, whose backgrounds were in painting and sculpture, began making photographs, while photographers were shown in nonphotography spaces where painting and sculpture were more the standard. University courses were created to address the new and growing interest in the history of photography, as higher numbers of doctoral students chose that area of study, and academic positions were created to specifically teach the history of photography within art history departments in the United States, including the University of New Mexico (Beaumont Newhall in 1971), Princeton University (Peter Bunnell, 1972), the University of Chicago (Joel Snyder, 1976), the University of California, Santa Barbara (Ulrich Keller, 1982),· and the University of Rochester (Carl Chiarenza, 1986). 42
,..

42 In addition, the following professors brought the history of photography into the curriculum of modem and American art history: William Innes Homer (University of Delaware), Eugenia Parry Janis (Wellesley), Alan Trachtenberg (Yale), Carol Armstrong (University of California, Irvine), Abigail Solomon-Godeau (University of California, Santa Barbara), Rosalind Krauss and Benjamin Buchloh (Columbia), Anne McCauley (University of Massachusetts, Boston), Mary Warner Marien (University of Syracuse), and Kim Sichel (Boston University). Douglas R Nickel, "History of Photography: The State of Research," The Art Bulletin 83, no. 3 (September 2001): 558.

13

A number of books reflected photography's gradual infiltration into the academic world of art history. and can be seen as paving the way for History of Art's third edition.

In 1979, H.W. Janson and Robert Rosenblum decided to co-author a book on nineteenthcentury art. Janson wrote the chapters on sculpture; Rosenblum, on painting. 19'''-

Century Art, published in 1984, two years after Janson's unexpected death, contains no
illustrations of photography, nor does Janson mention photography anywhere in his sections. But Rosenblum does: he discusses Louis-Jacques-Mande Daguerre, whose importance as a painter was overshadowed by the fame he received as a pioneer of photography,43 and Paul Delaroche, who declared, in the frrst year of the Daguerreotype's invention that photography could be an important asset to painters by supplying them with true copies of reality. According to Rosenblum, Delaroche's "quasi-photographic style" actually anticipates photography. Art in the 1830s, a "parallel manifestation" to photography, was resolute about epitomizing an "empirical vision" that showed the "literal truth".44 Edouard Manet's painting of Emile Zola (1868), with a black and white photograph of Manet's own painting Olympia in the background, reveals the importance for Manet of the new ubiquitous imagery provided by photography.45 Rosenblum also points out that the British academic painter Atkinson Grimshaw based his paintings upon photographs.46 In the book's preface, Rosenblum identifies various cultural aspects of the nineteenth-century, such as "the flood of popular illustrations and photography as a background to the high art of the century", that now need to be considered in any account

Robert Rosenblum, Jf/ -Century An (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1984), 127. 44 Ibid, 162. 45 Ibid, 289., 4<i Ibid. 367.

43

h

14

of its art practices.47 It is significant that a book on painting and sculpture now acknowledges photography's existence, providing glimpses, albeit briefly, of its importance. Though he made it clear that in his estimation, photography is not a high art, Rosenblum nevertheless suggested that much more could be learned about art of the nineteenth century by looking into at the torrent of photography produced during that century.48 At the same time, publications on photography proliferated. In addition to the fifth edition of Beaumont Newhall's highly respected The History of Photography (1982), there were a number of other histories of photography that were published at this time: Gisele Freund's 1980 Photography and Society (a translation of her Photographie .

et societe, 1974); Ian Jeffrey's Photography: A Concise History (1981); Iean-Luc Daval's Photography: History of an Art (1982); Helmut Gernsheim's The Origins of Photography (1982); and Naomi Rosenblum's A World History of Photography (1984).
Other survey texts were written to rival History ofArt, and these included brief discussions of photography. In their first edition of The Visual Arts: A History (1982). Hugh Honour and John Fleming briefly discuss Thomas Wedgwood. Nicephore Niepce, and William Henry Fox Talbot, noting they were "motivated by an urge akin to that of contemporary landscape painters ... to capture single spots of space and time ...49 The book also mentions Eadweard Muybridge's influence on Giacomo Balla. Richard Hamilton's collage Just What Is It That Makes Today's Home So Different. So

Appealing? (1956) and a silkscreen by Andy Warhol are the only photographs

Ibid, np. Idem. 49 lohn Fleming and Hugh Honour, The Visual Arts: A History, (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1982),495.
47 48

15

reproduced. The second edition (1986) fares somewhat better, including reproductions, in addition to those mentioned above, of work by Gilbert and George, and Cindy Sherman.
In the preface to the third edition, A.F. Janson observes that photography's

"status" as an art "is still challenged.,,50 He adopts an inquisitive stance: "Is photography

art?" he asks, and responds, "the fact that we still pose the question testifies to the
continuing debate.,,51 The debate, he believes, revolves around the shifting definitions of

art. Photography, he claims, is a medium, like paint, and not intrinsically art. Janson
contends that art is distinguished from a craft not by how it is done, but why it is done. Photography and art share creativity because they both involve the imagination. A photograph tells us about the photographer's internal and external "worlds." In addition. both photography and art involve the process of "seek-and-find." 'The photographer," J anson writes, "may not realize what he responded to until after he sees the image that has been printed. ,,52 Janson believes that because photography is dependent on a mechanical process, it has always been "tainted" as the product of a new technology. There is no "active intervention" needed from the artist's hand to express his idea. You merely push a button. Because of this, the camera is seen as a recording device. But Janson writes that photography is not a "neutral medium" because it does not reproduce reality faithfully and can "reinterpret" the world around US. 53 In this edition, Janson compares photography to painting and sculpture, though he never compares any painti~gs or sculptures to photography. He often compares a specific

50 Anthony F. Janson and H.W. Janson, 3d ed., np.
!l2

Ibid,613. I dem. 53 Idem.
51

16

photograph to a specific painting or sculpture that he discusses elsewhere in the book. This approach is typical of the survey style of H.W. Janson and continued by his son whereby the history of art is seen as a continuum and where, in the words of art's writer Alexandra Peers, "style and innovation descend from one great artist to the next."S4 A.F. Janson begins his discussion on photography in the "Neoclassicism and Romanticism" chapter with the "Founding Fathers" - Nicephore Nit.~pce, Louis-JacquesMande Daguerre, and William Henry Fox Talbot. According to Janson, all three were looking for an "artistic medium," and not a tool of "practical utility." Niepce's discovery was an outgrowth of his trying to extend the lithographic process; Daguerre, who was~a skilled painter, wanted to use the camera to enhance the illusion in his painted dioramas; and Talbot was looking for a substitute to drawing. Janson states, ''The interest that all these men had in the artistic potential of the medium they had created is reflected in their photographs."S5 He says that Daguerre's first photograph mimics a type of still life invented perfected by the eighteenth century French painter Jean-Baptiste Simeon Chardin. and that the image reproduced by Talbot is very similar to English marine paintings of his day.s6 In his attempt to contextualize the invention of photography within the history of art, Janson points out that the camera obscura - a precursor to the photographic camerawas used for drawings at around the same time (the 1720s) that silver salts were found out to be light-sensitive. He believes that it took one hundred years to put these two together and thus enable the invention of photography, because photography was not

54 Peers, 124. 55 Anthony F. Janson and H.W. Janson, 3d ed., 614.
S6ldem.

17

"inevitable" to the history of technology and not "necessary" to the history of art.57 To Janson, it would have been unfeasible, on artistic grounds, for photography to have been invented one hundred years earlier. The eighteenth century was too dedicated to fantasy to be attracted to the "literalness" of photography. For example. Rococo portraiture was more concerned with creating a flattering image than with a truthful likeness. Janson states that "the invention of photography was a response to the artistic urges and historical forces that underlie Romanticism.,,58 He gives examples of "images made by Nature", such as Alexander Cozens' made-by-chance ink-blot compositions (1784-6), one of which is reproduced earlier in the book.59 Regarding portraiture, Janson observes that Sarah Bernhardt's expression and pose, in a 1859 photograph by Nadar, is similar to the "soulful maidens" depicted in nineteenth-century painting. Janson contends that Nadar photographed Bernhardt in "sculptural terms," using and light and drapery to create something "reminiscent" of popular sculptural portrait busts of the time. 60
It must be emphasized that A. F. Janson only discusses photographs that can be

judged on their purely aesthetic values, which allows them to be compared with contemporary and earlier paintings and sculptures. Janson observes that when Romantic painters such as Theodore Gericault (Raft of

the 'Medusa', 1818-19) and Eugene Delacroix (Massacre at Chios, 1824) began
57

Janson's account is the standard one at this time. and other histories of photography, such as those of Newhall and Gernsheim, set out the discovery of photography in similar terms. In his exhibition catalogue for BeJore Photography: Painting and the Invention oj Photography. Peter Galassi argued that photography "was not a bastard left by science on the doorstep of art, but a legitimate child of the Western pictorial tradition" and provided a thorough critique of the standard theories of photography' s invention. See Peter Galassi, BeJore Photography: Painting and the Invention of Photography (New York: Museum of Modern

Art, 1981). 12.

Anthony F. Janson and H.W. Janson. 3d ed., 614. Ibid. 615. 60 Idem.
58

59

18

representing contemporary events, their endeavors eventually led to a new application and use of photography - photojournalism. 61 Janson compares Alexander Gardner's photograph Home of a Rebel Sharpshooter, Gettysburg (1863) to Jacques Louis David's much earlier painting Death of Marat (1793); both, Janson believes, share the same "harsh realism.,,62 Discussing pictorialism, Janson sees a continuum between Oscar Rejlander's The

Two Paths of Life (1857), and William Hogarth's much earlier Rake's Progress series
(1732-33) and explains how Henry Peach Robinson imitated contemporary genre painting in his photographs. 63 Janson notes in the "Post-Impressionism" chapter that

an

early study of the actress Ellen Terry, (1864), by Julia Margaret Cameron "has the lyrics and grace of the Pre-Raphaelite aesthetic" and compares it to Dante Gabriel Rossetti's painting Ecce Ancilla Domini (1849-50).64 Peter Henry Emerson's photography, he believes, was based on scientific principles and John Constable's landscapes. Aesthetic qualities can be discerned in these photographs, and therefore these photographs can be put in the same tradition as painting, SCUlpture, and architecture. These are only a few examples; suffice to say that Janson draws a connection between painting and nearly every photograph reproduced in History ofArt. In his chapter ''Twentieth-Century Photography," Janson points out that Eugene Atget, who photographed Paris, was ignored by art (pictorial) photographers, because they had no interest in his commonplace subjects. But the "fathers of modem art" - Georges Braque, Pablo Picasso, Marcel Duchamp, and Man Ray - were all patrons of Atget's studio; like

Ibid, 616. Ibid, 617. 63 Ibid, 662. 64 Ibid, 663.
61

62

19

Atget, they too found inspiration in their own environments, rather than in "magical realms of the imagination.,,65 Janson places Atget in the journalistic tradition of Mathew Brady, Nadar, and Jacob Riis; yet the "distinct nature" of his photographs can be only fully understood in relation to paintings from the late nineteenth-century. Janson states: "His [Atget's] pictures of neighborhood shops and street vendors, for example, are virtually identical with slightly earlier paintings by minor artists whose names are all but forgotten today.,,66 Janson contends that Brassai"s "Bijou" of Montmartre (1933) is comparable to Henri De Toulouse-Lautrec's earlier painting At The Moulin Rouge (1892-95) since both show the "typically aberrant." Janson also notes how Cartier-Bresson was interested in composition "for its own sake", and connects his aesthetic to modern abstract painting. 61 In discussing twentieth-century documentary photography, Janson argues that the imagery of the mother holding her child in W. Eugene Smith's Tomoko in Her Bath (1972) draws upon the tradition of the theme of the German Gothic Piela (representing the Virgin Mary grieving over the dead Christ), reproduced in the book by an early fourteenth-century wood sculpture. Janson also compares dramatic lighting and realism in the photograph to Jacques Louis David's Death of Marat, a painting depicting another "martyr" in a bathtub. 68 Finally Janson observed that Hockney's approach to his photographic collages were entrenched in modern painting's history, drawing on Picasso's faceted views, Duchamp's "sequential action," and Liubov Popova's "dynamic energy." Typically, A. F.

Ibid, 769. Ibid, 769. 67 Ibid, 770. 68 Ibid, 783.
6S

66

20

Janson argued that photography's "power to extend our vision" came not from a photographer, but from the painter, Hockney.69 At this point, a reader may reasonably ask why Janson is so insistent on making these detailed comparisons between photography and painting. Does he feel the need to justify photography as an art form by linking it to painting, an older art whose inclusion in the canon is undisputed? Do his comparisons reflect a reluctance to treat photography as a stand-alone, independent, art? Janson does not accord photography its own aesthetic qualities, and fails to discuss composition, lighting, cropping, tone, color, etc. Janson's list of "books for further reading" for the "Neoclassicism and Romanticism" chapter includes Newhall's The History of Photography (1982) and several other history of photography surveys by Helmut Gemsheim, J. Jeffrey, Peter Pollack, and William B. Welling.70 For the "Post-Impressionism" chapter, Janson includes Scharf's Art and Photography (1968) and Coke's The Painter And The Photograph: from Delacroix to Warhol (!972). along with books on specific photographers. For the ''Twentieth-Century Photography" chapter, Janson includes several books specializing on photography from that time period, as well as books on many of the specific photographers that he discusses.

FOURTH EDITION
In this 1991 edition, there are no significant changes made to Janson's discussion
of photography in his chapter on "Neoclassicism and Romanticism" and the "PostImpressionism" chapter. Janson adds a section titled "Artists as Photographers", to the
69

Ibid. 784.

70

Willaim B. Welling. Photography in America: The Formative Years, 1839-1900 (New York: Crowell,

1978).

21

''Twentieth-Century Photography" chapter, where he again discuses the work of David Hockney, and includes that of Annette Lemieux.

FIFfH EDITION
In addition to the three chapters of photography, History of Art's fifth edition
(1995) contains a new chapter on post-modernism. By this point, post-modem art and criticism had been at the forefront of the art world for close to two decades. Janson argues that in the post-modernist world the long-standing art forms of painting and sculpture are too strongly "identified" with the modernist tradition. Photography and installation art - "nontraditional forms" at the "forefront" of post-modernism - have become more relevant to our daily experience. 71 Post-modem photographers tend to rephotograph images and use text in their work.72 A.F. Janson discusses the work of Annette Lemieux, Barbara Kruger, and Cindy Sherman, and refers to Sherman's work as "in-between" because she does not use text and does not re-photograph; her work is staged to imitate movie stills from the past.73 He is simply reiterating what the art world has already arguing for years. Douglas Crimp, for example, had started to write on artists that re-photographed or appropriated images fifteen years earlier. 74 Once again, History

ofArt summarizes the work of other more specialized research and publications for a
general readership, but discussing post-modernism only in 1995 is shockingly late.

71 Anthony F. Janson and H.W. Janson, History ofArt, 5th ed. (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1995),886.

is about fifteen years after Douglas Crimp began writing on this topic. Anthony F. Janson and H.W. Janson, 5 lh ed., 886. 74 See Crimp's 1977 exhibition Pictures held at Artist Space in New York, or his article "The Photographic Activity ofPostmodemism," October 15 (Winter 1980): 91-101.
73

72 This

22

REVISED FIFfH EDITION and SIXTH EDITION
The revised fifth edition (1997) and the sixth edition (200 1) add nothing to the photography sections. repeating the same illustrations and infonnation on photography as the fifth edition (1995).

REVISED SIXTH EDITION
In the "revised and expanded" sixth edition (2004). Janson contends that art
history has recently gone through "fundamental changes." For a long time, it was limited to the study of "the so-called fine arts" - painting, sculpture, and architecture - but now includes new media. Photography "was admitted to the field of study a few decades ago".75 In this edition, in the "Post-Impressionism, Symbolism, and Art Nouveau" chapter, Janson includes a new paragraph on the "impact of photography on art." (This is a reversal of the older view that painting and sculpture influenced photography.) Janson contends that "artists" could respond to the "challenge" that photography's realism created in two different ways: They could either imitate photography's "precision" or they could "admit defeat" - because no painting could ever be as exact as a photograph and adopt a style that emphasized the materials and processes of painting. Janson writes, ''To those painters. an image became first and foremost an aesthetic object independent of nature, one that demands to be judged on its artistic and expressive merits alone.,,76

75 Anthony F. Janson and H.W. Janson, History of Art: The Western Tradition: 6rb ed .· rev. (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice~Hall, 2004), 17. 76 Ibid. 801. 23

SEVENTH EDITION The seventh edition (2007) is the first to include Janson in the title - "Janson's History of Art" - and the first not to have a Ianson associated with it. Six new authors have worked on this edition77 ; Joseph Jacobs78 wrote the introduction to and all the modern art sections. In this edition, all media are discussed together in chronological sections, as opposed to being discussed in their own chapters. In this edition, Jacobs has finally given photography its due recognition as an art. The introduction to this edition includes a section "Photography as Art," where Jacobs explains that the first, 1962 edition of History of Art did not include photography because the medium was perceived to not have enough "artistic merit" to be seen in the company of the "fine arts" because anyone could take a photograph. He notes that four decades later the "artistic merit of photography seems self-evident." "Artistic merit" is just another way for Jacobs to say formalist aesthetics. He then gives a brief history of photographers who have tried to end its "popular, mechanical stigma." In 1890s, pictorialist photographers such as Gertrude Kasebier tried to deny the "hard, mechanical look" of photography by making her prints look "soft. delicate. and fluid". At the start of the twentieth-century, Paul Strand and other modernist photographers started to embrace the "hard-edge detail" of black-and-white photography. They also used creative cropping to achieve more abstract results. By the 1940s, black-and-white photography had achieved some acceptance as an art form, but did not become an "important" part of the

77

Penelope J.E. Davis, Walter B. Denny, Frima Fox Hofrichter, Joseph Jacobs, Ann Roberts, and David L. Simon. 78 Joseph Jacobs is an independent scholar and former curator of American Art at the Newark Museum of Art. '

24

art school curriculum until the 1960s when it began to take its "place as one of the major art forms." It has taken even longer for color photography to be seriously seen as an art form. Today in Jacobs' opinion, black-and-white and color photography are considered an "important medium." Museums are "rushing" to create photography departments and build important collections. 79 To reveal how photography can compete with painting and sculpture in "artistic merit" or formalist aesthetics, Jacobs provides a detailed analysis of Lee Friedlander's Albuquerque (1972), describing in detail the photograph's "asymmetrical" composition, and drawing attention to its "eerie geometry... strong verticals ... intersecting diagonals ... cylinders, rectangles, and circles.,,8o He notes how the photograph has been "brutally cropped".81 To help us appreciate the artistry involved, Jacobs writes:

Friedlander did not just find this composition. He very carefully selected it and he very carefully made it. He not only needed the sun, he had to wait until it was in the right position (otherwise, the shadow of the fire hydrant would not align with the street). When framing the composition, he very meticulously incorporated a fragment of the utility cover in the left lower foreground, while axing a portion of the car on the right. Nor did the geometry of the picture just happen, he made it happen. Instead of a soft focus that would create an atmospheric blurry picture, he has used a deep focus that produces a sharp crisp image filled with detail, allowing, for example, the individual rectangular bricks in the pavement to be clearly seen. 82 Here Jacobs adopts a modernist analysis of photography that John Szarkowski, Director of Department of Photography at the Museum of Modern Art had espoused. Jacobs' description of Friedlander's Albuquerque is the kind of text that one might write using Szarkowski's terms as he had set them out in his 1966 publication The
79 Joseph Jacobs, "Modern Art." In Janson's History ofArt, ed. Sarah Touborg, 7 th ed. (Englewood Cliffs,

N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 2007), xxix.
80

81
82

Idem. Idem.
Ibid, xxx.

25

Photographer's Eye83 , All five of the basic formal characteristics of a photograph - the
thing itself, the detail, the frame. time, and vantage point - are mentioned in Jacobs' description.

It is ironic then, that later in this edition, in a section of primary sources, Jacobs
includes a lengthy paragraph from Rosalind Krauss' essay 'The Originality of the AvantGarde: A Postmodernist Repetition" (1981). Krauss states: The historical period that the avant-garde shared with modernism is over. That seems an obvious fact. What makes it more than a journalistic one is a conception of the discourse that has brought it to a close. This is a complex of cultural practices. among them a demythologizing criticism and a truly postmodernist art, both of them acting now to void the basic proposition of modernism. to liquidate them by exposing their fictitious condition. It is thus from a strange new perspective that we look back on the modernist origin and watch it splintering into 84 endless replication. According to Krauss, "a demythologizing criticism and a truly postmodernist art" have fragmented our perspective on twentieth century modernist art. Jacobs provides an entirely modernist analysis of photography, while citing Krauss who states that such a formalist perspective is over. The Friedlander example is typical of Jacobs' approach to photography. Jacobs states that Carleton Watkins was able to create a sense of drama in his Yosemite Valley

from the Best General View (1865-1866) by "creating powerful value contrasts and a
composition of forceful diagonals descending from right to left.,,85 While A.F. Janson had found it difficult to see the artistry in Atget, Jacobs argues that the "craftsmanship" in Eugene Atget's work was high - "he was able to obtain lush textures and a remarkable

John Szarkowski, The Photographer's Eye (New York: Museum of Modern Art), 1966. 84 Cited in Jacobs, 1111. Rosalind Krauss, "The Originality of the Avant-Garde: A Postmodernist Repetition," October 18 (Autumn 1981): 66. 8j Jacobs, 894. '

83

.

26

range of tones and play of light and shadow".86 Jacobs describes Henri Cartier-Bresson as a "master of strong value contrasts," and places photographers alongside painters working at the same time. 87 For example, under the heading "The City and Industry," Jacobs discusses Paul Strand and Margaret Bourke-White alongside painters Charles Demuth and Stuart Davis. Jacobs says Strand's work is "sharply focused, high-contrast", and comments on Bourke-White's use of cropping. 88 Throughout Jacobs is using a modernist and formalist critical apparatus to describe photographs. The list of "books for further reading" for this edition mainly includes history of art books dealing with specific time periods. The photography books from the earlier editions are no longer listed. For the "Post-Modernism" chapter, Jacobs includes the following photography books: Susan Sontag's On Photography (1977). Victor Burgin's

Thinking Photography (1982), William J. Mitchell's The Reconfigured Eye: visual truth in the post-photographic era (l992), and Miles Orvell's American Photography (2003).

CONCLUSION
While originally reluctant to accept photography as a legitimate art form, History

ofArt's authors eventually do acknowledge photography's own beauty and aesthetics.
But it took twenty-four years before photography could take its place beside the canon of painting, sculpture, and architecture in History ofArt. The reason why it took so long for the History of~rt to consider photography as . an art form is complex. It is clearly attributable to accepted, inherently conservative attitudes of the time. By eventually constructing the history of photography as an art
Ibid, 999. Ibid, 1000. 88 Ibid, 1018.
86 87

27

history of photography, by selecting specific photographs that could be discussed with the same tenninology as painting and, to a lesser extent, sculpture were - in short. by appropriating photography and integrating it into a modernist history of art -photography could finally be included in the art history survey text. But. ironically. under the terms of post-modernism, the art history survey text no longer has much value. and neither does an aesthetic history of photography.

28

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alloway, Lawrence. The Photographic Image New York: The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1966. Barken, Manuel. ''Transition In Art Education: Changing Conceptions of Curriculum and Teaching." Art Education 15, no.7 (October 1962): 12-28. Coke, Van Deren. "The Art of Photography in College Teaching." College Art Journal 19, no. 4 (Summer 1960): 332-342. Coke, Van Deren. The Painter And The Photograph. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1964. Coke, Van Deren. The Painter And The Photograph: from Delacroix to Warhol. Rev.-and enl. ed. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1972. Chiarenza, Carl. Review of Art and Photography by Aaron Scharf. Art Journal 31, no. 3 (Spring 1971): 338-350. Crimp, Douglas. "The Photographic Activity of Postmodemism." October 15 (Winter 1980): 91-101. Daval, Jean-Luc. Photography: History of an Art. New York: Rizzoli, 1982. Dickinson, Eleanor. "Sexists Texts Boyc_otted." Women Artists News 5, no. 4 . (September/October 1979): 12. Eisinger, Jod. Trace & Transfonnation: American Criticism Of Photography In The Modernist Period. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1995. Fleming, John and Hugh Honour. The Visual Arts: A History. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1982. Fleming, John and Hugh Honour. The Visual Arts: A History. 2nd· ed. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1986. Freund, Gisele. Photographie et societe. Paris: Editions duo Seuil, 1974. Freund, Gisele. Photography and Society. Boston: D. R. Grodine, 1980. Galassi, Peter. Before Photography: Painting and the Invention of Photography. New York: Museum of Modem Art, 1981.

29

Gardner, Helen. Art Through the Ages. 4th ed. rev under the editorship of Summer M. Crosby by the Dept. of the History of Art, Yale University. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1959. Gemsheim, Helmut. The Origins of Photography. New York: Thames and Hudson, 1982. Gombrich, E.H. The Story of Art. 15th ed., enl. and rev. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: PrenticeHall, 1989. Graham, Mark Miller. "The Future of Art History and the Undoing of the Survey." Art Journal 54, no.3 (Autumn 1995): 30-34. Ingalls, Zoe. "A Classic Is Revised." The Chronicle of Higher Education. August 11, 1995. Jacobs, Joseph. "Modem Art." In Janson's History ofArt, edited by Sarah Touborg. t ed. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 2007. Janson, Anthony E, and H.W. Janson. History ofArt. 3d ed. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1986. Janson, Anthony F., and H.W. Janson. History of Art. 4th ed. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1991. Janson, Anthony F., and H.W. Janson. History ofArt. 5th ed. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1995. Janson, Anthony F., and H.W. Janson. History ofArt. 5 th ed.,rev. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1997. ' Janson, Anthony F., and H.W. Janson. History of Art: The Western Tradition. 6th ed. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 2001. Janson, Anthony E, and H.W. Janson. History ofArt: The Western Tradition. 6 th ed., rev. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 2004. Janson, H.W. and Dora Jane Janson. History of Art: A Survey of the Major Visual Arts from the Dawn of History to the Present Day. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1962. Janson, H.W. and Dora Jane Janson. History ofArt: A Survey of the Major Visual Arts from the Dawn of History to the Present Day. Rev. and enL ed. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1969. Janson, H.W. and Dora Jane Janson. History ofArt: A Survey of the Major Visual Arts from the Dawn of History to the Present Day. 2nd ed. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1977.
h

30

Janson, H.W. and Dora Jane Janson. Key Monuments of the History of Art: A Visual Survey. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1959. Janson, H.W. and Dora Jane Janson. The Picture History of Painting: From Cave Paintings to Modem Times. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1954. Janson, H.W. and Dora Jane Janson. The Story of Painting for Young People: From Cave Painting to Modem Times. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1957. Janson, H.W. and Robert Rosenblum. 19h-Century Art. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1984. Janson, H.W. "The Myth of the Avant-Garde:' In Art Studies For An Editor: 25 Essays in Memory of Milton S. Fox, edited by Frederick Hartt. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1975: 167-175. Jeffrey, Ian. Photography: A Concise History. New York: Oxford University Press, 1981. Krauss, Rosalind. "Photography's Discursive Spaces: LandscapeIView." Art Joumal42, no. 4 (Winter 1982): 313-319. Krauss, Rosalind. ''The Originality of the Avant-Garde: A Postmodemist Repetition." October 18 (Autumn 1981): 47-66. Levine, David A. and Larry Silver. '''Quo Vadis, Hagia Sophia?' Art History's Survey Texts." caa.reviews. (January 2006). http://www.caareviews.orglreviews/950. Lynes, RusselL Good Old Modem: An Intimate Portrait of the Museum of Modem Art. New York: Atheneum, 1973. Malraux, Andre. The Voices of Silence. Translated by Stuart Gilbert. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1953. McCauley, Anne. "Writing Photography's History Before Newhall." History of Photography 21 (Summer 1997): 87-101. Newhall, Beaumont. The History of Photography: from 1939 to the present. 5 th ed. New York: Museum of Modern Art. 1982. Nickel, Douglas R. "History of Photography: The State of Research." The Art Bulletin 83, no. 3 (September 200 1): 548-558. Peers, Alexandra. "Canon Fodder." ARTnews 115, no. 2 (February 2006): 124. Phillips, Christopher. ''The Judgment Seat of Photography." October 22 (Autumn 1982): 27-63.

31

Rosenblum, Naomi. A World History of Photography. New York: Abbeville Press, 1984. Scharf, Aaron. Art and Photography. London: Allen Lane, 1968. Scwarzer, Mitchell. "Origins of the Art History Survey Text." Art Journal 54, no.3 (Autumn 1995): 24-29. Szarkowski, John. Photography Until Now. New York: Museum of Modem Art, 1989. Szarkowski, John. The Photographer's Eye. New York: Museum of Modem Art, 1966. Welling, William B. Photography in America: The Formative Years, 1839-1900. New York: Crowell, 1978.

32

Appendix 1
This appendix provides a comprehensive list of each of the editions of the History of An, and records in order of their appearance, all of the reproductions of photograph. This list includes both photographs themselves and photographically derived materials, and includes the information found in the accompanying captions.

Janson, H.W. and Dora Jane Janson. History of Art: A Survey of the Major Visual Arts from the Dawn of History to the Present Day. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1962.
Pablo Picasso with sketches after Manet's Luncheon on the Grass. 1954 (Copyright Alexander Liberman).

Janson, H.W. and Dora Jane Janson. History ofArt: A Survey of the Major Visual Artsfrom the Dawn of History to the Present Day. Rev. and en). ed. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1969.
Pablo Picasso with sketches after Manet's Luncheon on the Grass. 1954 (Copyright Alexander Liberman).

Janson, H.W. and Dora Jane Janson. History ofArt: A Survey of the Major Visual Arts from the Dawn of History to the Present Day. 2nd ed. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1977.
Pablo Picasso with sketches after Manet's Luncheon on the Grass. 1954 (Photograph copyright Alexander Liberman). The Great Uncle and Cousins of Larry Rivers in Poland. C. 1928. Photograph. Don Eddy. Photograph for New Shoes for H. 1973. Don Eddy. New Shoesfor H. 1973-74. Acrylic on canvas.

33

Robert Rauschenberg. Odalisk. 1955-58. Construction.

Janson, Anthony F., and H.W. Janson. History of Arl. 3d ed. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1986.
Nicephore Niecpe. View from his window at Le Gas. 1826. Heliograph. Louis-Jacques-Mande Daguerre. Still Life. 1837. Daguerreotype. William Henry Fox Talbot. Sailing Craft. c. 1845. Nadar. Sarah Bernhardt. 1859. Honore Daumier. Nadar Elevating Photography to the Height ofArt. 1862. Lithograph. Timothy O'Sullivan. Ancient Ruins in the Canon de Chelle. N.M.In a Niche 50 Feet above the Present Canon Bed. 1873. Albumen Print.

Tsar Cannon Outside the Spassky Gate, Moscow. Second half 19th century. Stereophotograph.
Alexander Gardner. Home of a Rebel Sharpshooter. Gettysburg. 1863. Wet-plate photograph. Jacob Riis. Bandits' Roost. c. 1888. Gelatin-silver print. Oscar Rejlander. The Two Paths of Life. 1857. Combination albumen print. Henry Peach Robinson. Fading Away. 1858. Combination print. Julia Margaret Cameron. Portrait of Ellen Terry. 1864. Albumen print. Peter Henry Emerson. Haymaking in the Norfolk Broads. c. 1890. Platinum print. Gertrude Kasebier. The Magic Crystal. Platinum print. Edward Steichen. Rodin with His Sculptures "Victor Hugo" and «The Thinker." 1902. Gum Print. Eadweard Muybridge. Female Semi-nude in Motion, from Human and Animal Locomotion, vol. 2. pI. 271. 1887. Etienne-Jules Marey. Man in black suit with white stripes down arms and legs. walking in front of a black wall. c. 1884. Chronophotograph.

34

Photograph of Great Uncle and Cousins of Larry Rivers in Poland. c. 1928. Joseph Kosuth. One and Three Chairs. 1965. Photograph of Chair, wood folding chair, photographic enlargement of dictionary definition of chair. Don Eddy. Photograph for New Shoes for H. 1973. Robert Rauschenberg. OdaUsk. 1955-58. Construction. Don Eddy. New Shoesfor H. 1973-74. Acrylic on canvas. Audrey Flack. Queen. 1975-76. Acrylic on canvas. Louis Lumiere. Young wdy with an Umbrella. 1906-1910. Autochrome. Eugene Atget. Pool, Versailles. 1924. Gold-toned printing-out paper. Andre Kertesz. BUnd Musician. 1921. Gelatin-silver print. Brassal. "Bijou" of Montmartre. 1933. Henri Cartier-Bresson. Mexico, 1934. 1934. Gelatin-silver print. Robert Doisneau. Side Glance. 1953. Gelatin-silver print. Alfred Stieglitz. The Steerage. 1907. Alfred Stieglitz. Equivalent.' 1930. Chloride print. Edward Weston. Pepper. 1930. Ansel Adams. Moonrise, Hernandez, New Mexico. 1941. Margaret Bourke-White. Fort Peck Dam, Montana. 1936. Edward Steichen. Greta Garbo. 1928. Wayne Miller. Childbirth. "Family of Man" exhibition, 1955. Albert Renger-Patzsch. Potter's Hands. 1925. Gelatin-silver print. August Sander. Pastry Cook, Cologne. 1928. Robert Capa. Death of a Loyalist Soldier. 1936. Dorothea Lange. Migrant Mother, California. 1936.
-

-

35

Herbert Bayer. lonely metropolitan. 1932. Photomontage. John Heartfield. As in the Middle Ages, so in the Third Reich. 1934. Poster, photomontage. Man Ray. Rayograph. 1924. Gelatin-silver print. Uszlo Moholy-Nagy. Untitled. Photogram, silver-bromide print. Bernice Abbott. Transformation of Energy. 1939-58. Aaron Siskind. New York 2. 1951. Minor White. Ritual Branch. 1958. Jerry Uelsmann. Untitled. 19721 Joanne Leonard. Romanticism Is Ultimately Fatal, from "Dreams and Nightmare." 1982. Positive transparency selectively opaqued with collage. W. Eugene Smith. Tomoko in Her Bath. 1972. Gelatin-silver print. Robert Frank. Santa Fe, New Mexico. 1955-56. Gelatin-silver print. David Hockney. Gregory Watching the Snow Fall. Kyoto, Feb. 1983. Photographic collage.

Janson, Anthony F., and H.W. Janson. History ofArt. 4th ed. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1991.
Nicephore Niecpe. View from his window at Le Gas. 1826. Heliograph. Louis-Jacques-Mande Daguerre. Still Life. 1837. Daguerreotype. William Henry Fox Talbot. Sailing Craft. c. 1845. Nadar. Sarah Bernhardt. 1859. Honore Daumier. Nadar Elevating Photography to the Height of Art. 1862. Ijthograph. Timothy O'Sullivan. Ancient Ruins in the Canon de Chelle, N.M. In a Niche 50 Feet above the Present Canon Bed. 1873. Albumen Print.

36

Tsar Cannon Outside the Spassky Gate, Moscow. Second half 19th century. S tereophotograph.
Alexander Gardner. Home of a Rebel Sharpshooter, Gettysburg. 1863. Wet-plate photograph. Jacob Riis. Bandits' Roost. c. 1888. Gelatin-silver print. Oscar Rejlander. The Two Paths of Life. 1857. Combination albumen print. Henry Peach Robinson. Fading Away. 1858. Combination print. Julia Margaret Cameron. Portrait of Ellen Terry. 1864. Albumen print. Peter Henry Emerson. Haymaking in the Norfolk Broads. c. 1890. Platinum print. Gertrude Kasebier. The Magic Crystal. c. 1904. Platinum print. Edward Steichen. Rodin with His Sculptures "Victor Hugo" and "The Thinker." 1902. Gum Print. Eadweard Muybridge. Female Semi-nude in Motion. from Human and Animal Locomotion, vol. 2. pI. 271. 1887. Etienne-Jules Marey. Man in black suit with white stripes down arms and legs, walking in front of a black wall. c. 1884. Chronophotograph. Richard Hamilton. Just What Is It That Makes Today's Home So Different, So Appealing? 1956. Collage. Photograph of Great Uncle and Cousins of Larry Rivers in Poland. c. 1928. Andy Warhol. Gold Marilyn Monroe. 1962. Synthetic polymer paint. silkscreened, and oil on canvas. Don Eddy. New Shoes for H. 1973-74. Acrylic on canvas. Don Eddy. Photograph for New Shoes for H. 1973. Audrey Flack. Queen. 1975-76. Acrylic on canvas. Robert Rauschenberg. Odalisk. 1955-58. Construction. Joseph Kosuth. One and Three Chairs. 1965. Photograph of Chair, wood folding chair. photographic enlargement of dictionary definition of chair.

.:.

37

Louis Lumiere. Young Lady with an Umbrella. 1906-1910. Autochrome. Eugene Atget. Pool, Versailles. 1924. Gold-toned printing-out paper. Andre Kertesz. Blind Musician. 1921. Gelatin-silver print. Brassal. HBijou" of Montmartre. 1933. Henri Cartier-Bresson. Mexico, 1934. 1934. Gelatin-silver print. Robert Doisneau. Side Glance. 1953. Gelatin-silver print. Alfred Stieglitz. The Steerage. 1907. Alfred Stieglitz. Equivalent. 1930. Chloride print. Edward Weston. Pepper. 1930. Ansel Adams. Moonrise, Hernandez, New Mexico. 1941. Margaret Bourke-White. Fort Peck Dam, Montana. 1936. Edward Steichen. Greta Garbo. 1928. Wayne Miller. Childbirth. "Family of Man" exhibition. 1955. James Van Der Zee. The Wife of the Reverend Becton, Pastor of Salem Methodist Church. 1934. Albert Renger-Patzsch. Potter's Hands. 1925. Gelatin-silver print. August Sander. Pastry Cook. Cologne. 1928. Robert Capa. Death of a Loyalist Soldier. 1936. Dorothea Lange. Migra.nt Mother, California. 1936. Herbert Bayer. lonely metropolitan. 1932. Photomontage. John Heartfield. As in the Middle Ages, so in the Third Reich. 1934. Poster. photomontage. Man Ray. Rayograph. 1924. Gelatin-silver print. Laszlo Moholy-Nagy. Untitled. Photogram. silver-bromide print.

38

Bernice Abbott. Transformation of Energy. 1939-58. Aaron Siskind. New York 2. 1951. Minor White. Ritual Branch. 1958. W. Eugene Smith. Tomoko in Her Bath. 1972. Gelatin-silver print. Robert Frank. Santa Fe, New Mexico. 1955-56. Gelatin-silver print. Bill Brandt. London Child. 1955. Jerry Uelsmann. Untitled. c. 1972. Joanne Leonard. Romanticism Is Ultimately Fatal, from "Dreams and Nightmare." 1982. Positive transparency selectively opaqued with collage. David Hockney. Gregory Watching the Snow Fall, Kyoto, Feb. 1983. Photographic collage. Annette Lemieux. Truth. 1989. Latex and acrylic on canvas.

Janson, Anthony F., and H.W. Janson. History of Art. 5th ed. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1995.
Nicephore Niecpe. View from his window at Le Gas. 1826. Heliograph. Louis-Jacques-Mande Daguerre. Still Life. 1837. Daguerreotype. William Henry Fox Talbot. Sailing Craft. c. 1845. Calotype. Nadar. Sarah Bernhardt. 1859. Honore Daumier. Nadar Elevating Photography to the Height ofArt. 1862. Lithograph. Timothy O'Sullivan. Ancient Ruins in the Canon de Chelle, N.M. In a Niche 50 Feet above the Present Canon Bed. 1873. Albumen Print. Tsar Cannon Outside the Spassky Gate. Moscow. Second half 19th century. Stereophotograph. Alexander Gardner. Home of a Rebel Sharpshooter, Gettysburg. 1863. Wet-plate photograph. Jacob Riis. Bandits' Roost. c. 1888. Gelatin-silver print.

39

Oscar Rejlander. The Two Paths of Life. 1857. Combination albumen print. Henry Peach Robinson. Fading Away. 1858. Combination print. Julia Margaret Cameron. Portrait of Ellen Terry. 1863. Carbon print. Peter Henry Emerson. Haymaking in the Norfolk Broads. c. 1890. Platinum print. Gertrude Kasebier. The Magic Crystal. c. 1904. Platinum print. Edward Steichen. Rodin with His Sculptures "Victor Hugo" and "The Thinker." 1902. Gum Print. Eadweard Muybridge. Female Semi-nude in Motion, from Human and Animal Locomotion, vol. 2. pI. 271. 1887. Etienne-Jules Marey. Man in black suit with white stripes down arms and legs, walking in front of a black wall. c. 1884. Chronophotograph. Romare Bearden. The Prevalence of Ritual: Baptism. 1964. Collage of photomechanical reproduction, synthetic polymer, and pencil on paperboard. Richard Hamilton. Just What Is It That Makes Today's Home So Different, So Appealing? 1956. Collage on paper. Andy Warhol. Gold Marilyn Monroe. 1962. Synthetic polymer paint, silkscreened, and oil on canvas. Don Eddy. New Shoesfor H. 1973-74. Acrylic on canvas. Don Eddy. Photograph for New Shoesfor H. 1973-74. Richard Estes. Food Shop. 1967. Oil on Iirien. Audrey Flack. Queen. 1975-76. Acrylic on canvas. Robert Rauschenberg. Odalisk. 1955-58. Construction. Joseph Kosuth. One and Three Chairs. 1965. Photograph of Chair, wood folding chair, photographic enlargement of dictionary definition of chair. John Baldessari. Art History, from Ingres and Other Parables. 1972. Photograph and typed text. Louis Lumiere. Young Lady with an Umbrella. 1906-1910. Autochrome.

40

Eugene Atget. Pool, Versailles. 1924. Albumen-silver print. Andre Kertesz. Blind Musician. 1921. Gelatin-silver print. Brassai'. "Bijou" of Montmartre. 1933. Henri Cartier-Bresson. Mexico, 1934. 1934. Gelatin-silver print. Robert Doisneau. Side Glance. 1953. Gelatin-silver print. Alfred Stieglitz. The Steerage. 1907. Alfred Stieglitz. Equivalent. 1930. Chloride print. Edward Weston. Pepper. 1930. Ansel Adams. Moonrise, Hernandez, New Mexico. 1941. Margaret Bourke-White. Fort Peck Dam, Montana. 1936. Edward Steichen. Greta Garbo. 1928. Wayne Miller. Childbirth. "Family of Man" exhibition, 1955. James Van Der Zee. The Wife of the Reverend Becton, Pastor of Salem Methodist Church. 1934. Albert Renger-Patzsch. Potter's Hands. 1925. Gelatin-silver print. August Sander. Pastry Cook, Cologne. 1928. Josef Sudek. View from Studio Window in Winter. 1954. Gelatin-silver print. Robert Capa. Death of a Loyalist Soldier. September 5, 1936. Dorothea Lange. Migrant Mother, California. 1936. Herbert Bayer. lonely metropolitan. 1932. Photomontage. John Heartfield. As in the Middle Ages, so in the Third Reich. 1934. Poster, photomontage. Man Ray. Rayograph 1928. 1928. Gelatin-silver print. Uszl6 Moholy-Nagy. Untitled. Photogram, silver-bromide print.

41

Bernice Abbott. Transformation of Energy. 1939-58. Aaron Siskind. New York 2. 1951. Minor White. Ritual Branch. 1958. Gelatin-silver print. W. Eugene Smith. Tomoko in Her Bath. 1971. Gelatin-silver print. Robert Frank. Santa Fe, New Mexico. 1955-56. Gelatin-silver print. Bill Brandt. London Child. 1955. Jerry Uelsmann. Untitled. c. 1972. Joanne Leonard. Romanticism Is Ultimately Fatal, from "Dreams and Nightmare." 1982. Positive transparency selectively opaqued with collage. David Wojnarowicz. Death in the Cornfield. 1990. Silver print. David Hockney. Gregory Watching the Snow Fall. Kyoto, Feb. 1983. 1983. Photographic collage. Barbara Kruger. Untitled ( .. You Are a Captive Audience"). 1983. Gelatin-silver print. Annette Lemieux. Truth. 1989. Latex and acrylic on canvas. Cindy Sherman. Untitled Film Still #2. 1977. Photograph.

Janson, Anthony F., and H.W. Janson. History of Arl. 5th ed., rev. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1997.
Nicephore Niecpe. View from his window at Le Gas. 1826. Heliograph. Louis-Jacques-Mande Daguerre. Still Life. 1837. Daguerreotype. William Henry Fox Talbot. Sailing Craft. c. 1845. Calotype. Nadar. Sarah Bernhardt. 1859. Honore Daurmer. Nadar Elevating Photography to the Height ofArt. 1862. Lithograph. Timothy O·Sullivan. Ancient Ruins in the Canon de Chelle, N.M. In a Niche 50 Feet above the Present Canon Bed. 1873. Albumen Print.

42

Tsar Cannon Outside the Spassky Gate, Moscow. Second half 19th century. Stereophotograph.
Alexander Gardner. Home of a Rebel Sharpshooter, Gettysburg. 1863. Wet-plate photograph. Jacob Riis. Bandits' Roost. c. 1888. Gelatin-silver print. Oscar Rejlander. The Two Paths of Life. 1857. Combination albumen print. Henry Peach Robinson. Fading Away. 1858. Combination print. Julia Margaret Cameron. Ellen Terry, at the Age of Sixteen. c. 1863. Carbon print. Peter Henry Emerson. Haymaking in the Norfolk Broads. c. 1890. Platinum print. Gertrude Kasebier. The Magic Crystal. c. 1904. Platinum print. Edward Steichen. Rodin with His Sculptures "Victor Hugo" and "The Thinker." 1902. Gum Print. Eadweard Muybridge. Female Semi-nude in Motion, from Human and Animal Locomotion, vol. 2. pI. 271. 1887. Etienne-Jules Marey. Man in black suit with white stripes down arms and legs, walking in . front of a black wall. c. 1884. Chronophotograph. Romare Bearden. The Prevalence of Ritual: Baptism. 1964. Collage of photomechanical reproduction, synthetic polymer, and pencil on paperboard. Richard Hamilton. Just What Is It That Makes Today's Home So Different, So Appealing? 1956. Collage on paper. Andy Warhol. Gold Marilyn Monroe. 1962. Synthetic polymer paint, silkscreened, and oil on canvas. Don Eddy. New Shoes for H. 1973-74. Acrylic on canvas. Don Eddy. Photograph for New Shoesfor H. 1973-74. Richard Estes. Food Shop. 1967. Oil on linen. Audrey Flack. Queen. 1975-76. Acrylic on canvas. Robert Rauschenberg. Odalisk. 1955-58. Construction.

43

Joseph Kosuth. One and Three Chairs. 1965. Photograph of Chair, wood folding chair, photographic enlargement of dictionary definition of chair. John Baldessari. Art History, from Ingres and Other Parables. 1972. Photograph and typed text. Louis Lumiere. Young Lady with an Umbrella. 1906-1910. Autochrome. Eugene Atget. Pool, Versailles. 1924. Albumen-silver print. Andre Kertesz. Blind Musician. 1921. Gelatin-silver print. Brassal. "Bijou" of Montmartre. 1933. Henri Cartier-Bresson. Mexico, 1934. 1934. Gelatin-silver print. Robert Doisneau. Side Glance. 1953. Gelatin-silver print. Alfred Stieglitz. The Steerage. 1907. Alfred Stieglitz. Equivalent. 1930. Chloride print. Edward Weston. Pepper. 1930. Ansel Adams. Moonrise, Hernandez, New Mexico. 1941. Margaret Bourke-White. Fort Peck Dam, Montana. 1936. Edward Steichen. Greta Garbo. 1928. Wayne Miller. Childbirth. "Family of Man" exhibition, 1955. James VanDer Zee. The Wife of the Revere.nd Becton, Pastor of Salem Methodist Church. 1934. Albert Renger-Patzsch. Potter's Hands. 1925. Gelatin-silver print. August Sander. Pastry Cook, Cologne. 1928. Josef Sudek. View from Studio Window in Winter. 1954. Gelatin-silver print. Robert Capa. Death of a Loyalist Soldier. September 5, 1936. Dorothea Lange. Migrant Mother, California. 1936. Herbert Bayer. lonely metropolitan. 1932. Photomontage.

44

John Heartfield. As in the Middle Ages, so in the Third Reich. 1934. Poster, photomontage. Man Ray. Untitled (Rayograph). 1928. Gelatin-silver print. Laszlo Moholy-Nagy. Untitled. Photogram. silver-bromide print. Bernice Abbott. Transformation of Energy. 1939-58. Aaron Siskind. New York 2. 1951. Minor White. Ritual Branch. 1958. Gelatin-silver print. W. Eugene Smith. Tomoko in Her Bath. 1971. Gelatin-silver print. Robert Frank. Santa Fe. New Mexico. 1955-56. Gelatin-silver print. Bill Brandt. London Child. 1955. Jerry Uelsmann. Untitled. c. 1972. Joanne Leonard. Romanticism Is Ultimately Fatal, from "Dreams and Nightmare." 1982. Positive transparency selectively opaqued with collage. David Wojnarowicz. Death in the Cornfield. 1990. Silver print. David Hockney. Gregory Watching the Snow Fall, Kyoto. Feb. 1983. 1983. Photographic collage. Barbara Kruger. Untitled ( .. You Are a Captive Audience"). 1983. Gelatin-silver print. Annette Lemieux. Truth. 1989. Latex and acrylic on canvas. Cindy Sherman. Untitled Film Still #2. 1977. Photograph.

Janson, Anthony F., and H.W. Janson. History ofArt: The Western Tradition. 6th ed. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 2001.
Nicephore Niecpe. View from his window at Le Gas. 1826. Heliograph. Louis-Jacques-Mande Daguerre. Still Life. 1837. Daguerreotype. William Henry Fox Talbot. Sailing Craft. c. 1845. Calotype.

45

Nadar. Sarah Bernhardt. 1859. Honore Daumier. Nadar Elevating Photography to the Height of Art. 1862. Lithograph. Timothy O'Sullivan. Ancient Ruins in the Canon de Chelle, N.M. In a Niche 50 Feet above the Present Canon Bed. 1873. Albumen Print. Tsar Cannon Outside the Spassky Gate, Moscow. Second half 19th century. Stereophotograph. Alexander Gardner. Home of a Rebel Sharpshooter, Gettysburg. 1863. Wet-plate photograph. Jacob Riis. Bandits' Roost. c. 1888. Gelatin-silver print. Oscar Rejlander. The Two Paths of Life. 1857. Combination albumen print. Henry Peach Robinson. Fading Away. 1858. Combination print. Julia Margaret Cameron. Ellen Terry, at the Age of Sixteen. c. 1863. Carbon print. Peter Henry Emerson. Haymaking in the Norfolk Broads. c. 1890. Platinum print. Gertrude Kasebier. The Magic Crystal. c. 1904. Platinum print. Edward Steichen. Rodin with His Sculptures "Victor Hugo" and "The Thinker. " 1902. Gum Print. Eadweard Muybridge. Female Semi-nude in Motion, from Human and Animal Locomotion, vol. 2. pI. 271.1887. Etienne-Jules Marey. Man in black suit with white stripes down arms and legs, walking in front of a black wall. c. 1884. Chronophotograph. Romare Bearden. The Prevalence of Ritual: Baptism. 1964. Collage of photomechanical reproduction, synthetic polymer, and pencil on paperboard. . Richard Hamilton. Just What Is It That Makes Today's Home So Different, So Appealing? 1956. Collage on paper. Andy Warhol. Gold MarilynMonroe. 1962. Synthetic polymer paint, silkscreened, and oil on canvas. Richard Estes. Food Shop. 1967. Oil on linen. Audrey Flack. Queen. 1975·76. Acrylic on canvas.

46

Robert Rauschenberg. Odalisk. 1955-58. Construction. Joseph Kosuth. One and Three Chairs. 1965. Photograph of Chair, wood folding chair, photographic enlargement of dictionary definition of chair. John Baldessari. Art History, from lngres and Other Parables. 1972. Photograph and typed text. Louis Lumiere. Young wdy with an Umbrella. 1906-1910. Autochrome. Eugene Atget. Pool, Versailles. 1924. Albumen-silver print. Andre Kertesz. Blind Musician. 1921. Gelatin-silver print. Brassal. "Bijou" of Montmartre. 1933. Henri Cartier-Bresson. Mexico, 1934. 1934. Gelatin-silver print. Robert Doisneau. Side Glance. 1953. Gelatin-silver print. Alfred Stieglitz. The Steerage. 1907. Alfred Stieglitz. Equivalent. 1930. Chloride print. Edward Weston. Pepper. 1930. Ansel Adams. Moonrise, Hernandez, New Mexico. 1941. Margaret Bourke-White. Fort Peck Dam, Montana. 1936. Edward Steichen. Greta Garbo. 1928. Wayne Miller. Childbirth. "Family of Man" exhibition, 1955. James Van Der Zee. At Home. 1934. Albert Renger-Patzsch. Potter's Hands. 1925. Gelatin-silver print. August Sander. Pastry Cook, Cologne. 1928. Josef Sudek. View from Studio Window in Winter. 1954. Gelatin-silver print. Robert Capa. Death of a Loyalist Soldier. September 5, 1936. Dorothea Lange. Migrant Mother, California. February 1936.

47

Herbert Bayer. lonely metropolitan. 1932. Photomontage. John Heartfield. As in the Middle Ages, so in the Third Reich. 1934. Poster. photomontage. Man Ray. Untitled (Rayograph). 1928. Gelatin-silver print. Laszlo Moholy-Nagy. Untitled. Photogram, silver-bromide print. Bernice Abbott. Transformation of Energy. 1939-58. Aaron Siskind. New York 2. 1951. Minor White. Ritual Branch. 1958. Gelatin-silver print. W. Eugene Smith. Tomoko in Her Bath. 1971. Gelatin-silver print. Robert Frank. Santa Fe, New Mexico. 1955-56. Gelatin-silver print.

Bill Brandt. wndon Child. 1955.
lerry Uelsmann. Untitled. c. 1972. loanne Leonard. Romanticism Is Ultimately Fatal, from "Dreams and Nightmare:' 1982. Positive transparency selectively opaqued with collage. David Wojnarowicz. Death in the Cornfield. 1990. Silver print. David Hockney. Gregory Watching the Snow Fall. Kyoto. Feb. 1983. 1983. Photographic collage. Barbara Kruger. Untitled (Ilyou Are a Captilje Audience"). 1983. Gelatin-silver print. Cindy Sherman. Untitled Film Still #2. 1977. Photograph.
Janson, Anthony F.., and ILW. Janson.llistory olArt: The WeNtern Tradition. 6 ed., rev. Englewood Cliffs, NJ.: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
th

Nicephore Nieq,e. View from his window at Le Gas. 1826. Heliograph. Louis-Jacques-Ma.nde Daguerre. StiLl life. 1837. Daguerreotype,
William Henry Fox Talbot. Sailing Craft. c. 184S.

48

Nadar. Sarah Bernhardt. 1859. Honore Daurmer. Nadar Elevating Photography to the Height ofArt. 1862. Lithograph. Timothy O'Sullivan. Ancient Ruins in the Canon de Chelle. N.M.ln a Niche 50 Feet above the Present Canon Bed. 1873. Albumen Print.

Tsar Cannon Outside the Spassky Gate. Moscow. Second half 19 century. Stereophotograph.
Alexander Gardner. Home of a Rebel Sharpshooter. Gettysburg. 1863. Wet-plate photograph. Jacob Riis. Bandits' Roost. c. 1888. Gelatin-silver print. Oscar Rejlander. The Two Paths of Life. 1857. Combination albumen print. Henry Peach Robinson. Fading Away. 1858. Combination print. Julia Margaret Cameron. Ellen Terry, at the Age of Sixteen. c.1863. Albumen print. Peter Henry Emerson. Haymaking in the Norfolk Broads. c. 1890. Platinum print. Gertrude Kasebier. The Magic Crystal. Platinum print. Edward Steichen. Rodin with His Sculptures "Victor Hugo" and "The Thinker." 1902. Gum Print. Eadweard Muybridge. Female Semi-nude in Motion, from Human and Animal Locomotion, vol. 2. pI. 271. 1887. Etienne-Jules Marey. Man in black suit with white stripes down anns and legs, walking in front of a black wall. c. 1884. Chronophotograph. Romare Bearden. The Prevalence of Ritual Baptism. 1964. Collage of photomechanical reproduction, synthetic polymer, and pencil on paperboard. Richard Hamilton. Just What Is It That Makes Today's Home So Different, So Appealing? 1956. Collage on paper. Andy Warhol. Gold Marilyn Monroe. 1962. Synthetic polymer paint, silk-screened, and oil on canvas. Richard Estes. Food Shop. 1967. Oil on linen. Audrey Flack. Queen. 1975-76. Acrylic on canvas.

th

49

Robert Rauschenberg. Odalisk. 1955-58. Construction. Joseph Kosuth. One and Three Chairs. 1965. Wooden folding chair, photographic copy of chair, and photographic enlargement of dictionary definition of chair. John Baldessari. Art History, from Ingres and Other Parables. 1972. Photograph and typed text. Louis Lumiere. Young lAdy with an Umbrella. 1906-1910. Autochrome. Eugene Atget. Versailles. 1924. Albumen-silver print. Andre Kertesz. Blind Musician. 1921. Gelatin-silver print. Brassal. "Bijou" of Montmartre. 1933. Henri Cartier-Bresson. Mexico, 1934. 1934. Gelatin-silver print. Alfred Stieglitz. The Steerage. 1907. Chloride print. Alfred Stieglitz. Equivalent. 1930. Chloride print. Edward Weston. Pepper. 1930. Ansel Adams. Moonrise, Hernandez. New Mexico. 1941. Gelatin-silver print. Margaret Bourke-White. Fort Peck Dam, Montana. 1936. Edward Steichen. Greta Garbo. 1928. Wayne Miller. Childbirth. "Family of Man" exhibition. 1955. James VanDerZee. At Home. 1934. Albert Renger-Patzsch. Potter's Hands. 1925. Gelatin-silver print. August Sander. Pastry Cook, Cologne. 1928. Josef Sudek. View from Studio Window in Winter. 1954. Gelatin-silver print. Robert Capa. Death of a Loyalist Soldier. September 5, 1936. Dorothea Lange. Migrant Mother, California. February 1936. Gelatin-silver print. Herbert Bayer. lonely metropolitan. 1932. Photomontage.

so

John Heartfield. As in the Middle Ages, so in the Third Reich. 1934. Poster, photomontage. Man Ray. Untitled (Rayograph). 1928. Gelatin-silver print. Uszl6 Moholy-Nagy. Untitled. Photogram, silver-bromide print. Bernice Abbott. Transformation of Energy. 1939-58. Aaron Siskind. New York 2. 1951. Minor White. Ritual Branch. 1958. Gelatin-silver print. W. Eugene Smith. Tomoko in Her Bath. December 1972. Gelatin-silver print. Robert Frank. Santa Fe, New Mexico. 1955-56. Gelatin-silver print. Bill Brandt. London Child. 1955.
Jerry Uelsmann. Untitled. c. 1972

David Hockney. Gregory Watching the Snow Fall, Kyoto, Feb. 1983. 1983. Photographic collage. Joanne Leonard. Romanticism Is Ultimately Fatal. from "Dreams and Nightmare." 1982. Positive transparency selectively opaqued with collage. David Wojnarowicz. Death in the Cornfield. 1990. Silver print. Barbara Kruger. You Are a Captive Audience. 1983. Gelatin-silver print. Cindy Sherman. Untitled Film Still #2. 1977. Photograph. Andreas Gursky. Paris, Montpamasse. 1993. Chromogenic color print.

Jacobs, Joseph. "Modern Art." In Janson's History ofArl, edited by Sarah Touborg. 7th ed. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 2007.
Andy WarhoL Gold Marilyn Monroe. 1962. Synthetic polymer paint, silk-screened, and oil on canvas. Chris Ofili. The Holy Virgin Mary. 1996. Paper collage, oil paint, glitter, polyester resin, map pins, and elephant dung on linen.

51

Marcel Duchamp. Mona Lisa {L.H.O.O.Q.). (1919) Rectified readymade; pencil on a reproduction. Lee Friedlander. Albuquerque. 1972. Gelatin silver print. Augustus Washington. John Brown. ca. 1846-1847. Quarter-plate daguerreotype. Nadar. Theophile Gautier. 1854-1855. Albumen salted paper print, mounted on Bristol board. Carleton Watkins. Yosemite Valley from the Best General View. 1865-1866. Albumen print. John Thomson. The Crawlers. 1877-1878. Woodburytype. Timothy O'Sullivan. A Harvest of Death, Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, July 1863, from Alexander Gardner's Gardner's Photographic Sketchbook of the War. 1866. Albumen print (also available as stereocard). Julia Margaret Cameron. Sister Spirits. ca. 1865. Albumen print. Gustave Le Gray. Mediterranean Sea at Sete. 1856-1859. Albumen silver print from two glass negatives. Peter Henry Emerson. Poling the Marsh Hay. 1886. Platinum print. Getrude Kasebier. Blesses Art Thou Among Women. 1899. Platinum print on Japanese tissue. Edward Steichen. Rodin with His Sculptures "Victor Hugo" and "The Thinker", 1902. Gum Print. Alfred Stieglitz. The City ofAmbition, 1910. Photogravure on Japanese tissue mounted on paperboard. Jacob Riis. Five Cents a Spot, Unauthorized Lodgings in a Bayard Street Tenement. ca. 1889. Gelatin silver print Eadweard Muybridge. Untitled (Sequence photographs of the trot and gallop), from La Nature, December 1878. Gra~res. Etienne-Jules Marey. Man in Black Suit with White Stripes Down Arms and Legs, Walking in Front of a Black Wall. ca. 1884. Chronophotograph. (two photographs). Raoul Hausmann. ABCD. 1923-24. Photomontage.

52

Hannah Hoch. Cut with the kitchen knife Dada through the lD.st Weimar Beer Belly Cultural Epoch of Germany. ca. 1919. Collage. Man Ray. Champs dllicieux. 1922. Gelatin silver print. Eugene Atget. Pool, Versailles. 1924. Albumen-silver print. Henri Cartier-Bresson. Behind the Gare Saint-lD.zare. 1932. Gelatin silver print. Alexander Rodchenko. Advertisement: "Books!" 1925. Paul Strand. Wire Wheel. 1917. Platinum print from enlarged negative. Margaret Bourke-White. Fort Peck Dam, Montana. 1936. Edward Weston. Pepper. 1930. Gelatin silver print. Alfred Stieglitz. Equivalents. 1926. Gelatin silver print. James Van Der Zee. Couple Wearing Racoon Coats with a Cadillac, Taken on West 12th Street, Harlem, New York. 1932. Gelatin silver print. Manual Alvarez Bravo.lD. Buena Fama Durmiendo (Good Reputation Sleeping). 19381939. Gelatin silver print. Walker Evans. Graveyard Houses, and Steel Mill, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania. 1935. Film negative 8 x 10". Dorothea Lange. Migrant Mother, California. 1936. Gelatin. silver print. John Heartfield. As In the Middle Ages, So in the Third Reich. 1934. Poster, photomontage. Robert Rauschenberg. Odalisk. 1955-58. Mixed media. Richard Hamilton. Just What Is It That Makes Today's Homes So Different, So Appealing? 1956. Collage on paper. Joseph Kosuth. One and Three Chairs. 1965. Wooden folding chair, photographic copy of chair, and photographic enlargement of dictionary definition of chair. Robert Frank. Drug Store, Detroit. 1955. Gelatin-silver print. Romare Bearden. The Prevalence of Ritual Baptism. 1964. Collage of photomechanical reproduction, synthetic polymer, and pencil on paperboard.

53

Barbara Kruger. You Are a Captive Audience. 1983. Gelatin silver print. Cindy Shennan. Untitled Film Still #15. 1978. Gelatin silver print. Felix Gonzalez-Torres. Untitled. 1991. Billboard.

54


