   

60 Seasons
A Conversation Around the Future of Food
 by Jeannette Breward BFA (HONS.) Photography Ryerson University, Toronto Ontario, 2015.

A thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Fine Arts in the Program of Documentary Media. Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2017. © Jeannette Breward 2017

Submitted to: Pierre Tremblay Don Snyder Katy McCormick        



i



AUTHOR'SDECLARATION 
I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this MRP. This is a true copy of the MRP, including any required final revisions. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this MRP to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further advise Ryerson University to reproduce this MRP by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my MRP may be made electronically available to the public.  



ii



ABSTRACT
  ThecurrentstateoffoodproductionintheWesternworldisleadingtothe devastationofourland,soil,andair.Industrialfarmsarecontributingnotjustto poorhumanhealth,buttotheeverincreasingdepletionofournaturalresources,a reductioninthebiodiversityofplantsandanimalsandinthesustainabilityofthe planet.60Seasons­AConversationaroundtheFutureofFoodaimstostimulatethe dialoguearoundhealthyandsustainablemeansoffoodproductionbydepictingthe effortsoftwosmallgroupswithinNorthumberlandCounty,Ontario.Theiraimisto bringsustainablefarmingmethodstotheircommunity,whileexpandingthe discoursearoundenvironmentallysoundfoodproductionandprovidinghealthy foodchoicestothoseinneed.       



iii



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I would like to thank my supervisors, Pierre Tremblay Don Snyder and Sara Knelman, for their guidance and support throughout the course of the production of this work. I would also like to thank Tony and Linda Armstrong, Craig Smith and Peter Gabany, and all of the individuals involved with both Punk Rock Produce and the Port Hope Fare Share Food Bank for their graciousness and openness, as well as their eagerness to embrace this film and support its development. And above all, a thank you to my friends and family. To my mother ­ Laurie Stata, and my husband - Jordan Breward -without your constant reassurances and support, this entire accomplishment would never have come to fruition. And to my brother ­ Matt Stata ­ for the long hours of work and patience that he spent creating the beautiful score for the film.                           



iv

   

TABLE OF CONTENTS
AUTHOR'S DECLARATION..........................................ii ABSTRACT .................................................................................................. iii ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS.........................................................iv THE PROBLEM............................................................................................. 2
Industrial farms, monocultures and sterile seeds. Our current food crisis

THE SOLUTION ......................................................................................... 10
A LOOK AT PERMACULTURE AND SUSTAINABLE FARMING

THE NEED ................................................................................................... 16
a brief history of food banks in canada and their current state

DOCUMENTARY RELEVANCE .............................................................. 19 METHODOLOGY......................................................31 APPENDIX...............................................................39 WORKS CITED ........................................................................................... 42 ADDITIONAL RESOURCES................................................45

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1: Food Bank Use in Canada by the Numbers...............................19 Figure 2: Food Bank Use By Province................................................39 Figure 3: Individuals Accessing Food Banks Per Month...........................39 Figure 4: Headwaters Satellite Image..................................................40 Figure 5: Headwaters Location.........................................................40 Figure 6: Punk Rock Produce Satellite Image........................................41 Figure 7: Punk Rock Produce Location................................................41



1



 THEPROBLEM

The dominant means of food production in the western world today is run primarily by large corporations. The majority of the food that we consume is produced en masse by corporate owned, massive factory farms. This is a process that we as consumers, in general, are completely removed from, largely unaware of and unknowingly contributing to. These factory farms are not only producing potentially harmful food products ­ which include livestock that is full of hormones and antibiotics ­ they are also incredibly devastating to the surrounding environment. But it doesn't have to be this way. 60 Seasons is a portrait of the small community of Northumberland County ­ specifically focused on Port Hope, Ontario, and the efforts of two groups of individuals within the community to bring locally, ethically, and sustainably grown food to its citizens. Though these are just two small case studies, they are representative of a much larger movement that is growing in numbers. It is a movement of likeminded individuals who are passionate about food production and environmentalism: people who aim to turn the tables back to a time when food was grown and raised by individuals and families, not by corporations. They strive towards a food and farming revolution. Their goal is not just to improve the health of those consuming the food, but the health of the planet that we all share. They aim not only to help bring food security to the fellow members of their community by donating healthy produce to the local food bank, but also to raise



2

 awareness and knowledge of food production through workshops and seminars geared towards educating the population on the ease with which they can grow, preserve, and prepare their own food. We can, and should, take food production back into our own hands. The future of our planet may just depend on it. Headwaters Farm and Punk Rock Produce have made it their mission to do just that.

Humanity, as a whole, has seen a rather drastic shift in the way we produce our food since the beginning of the agricultural food revolution and the domestication of plants and animals. Although changes to our agricultural processes have been made in the name of progress, they are unfortunately causing much more harm than good. The modern model of capitalism has taken over the majority of food production. Capitalism's focus has always been on maximizing the amount of profit in the least amount of time. It is because of this focus on profit above all else that many other important factors in the sustainability of our food system and, in turn, of our planet, are being ignored. These outside factors are not considered important by corporate food producers, and are therefore not accounted for in their process of producing food en masse as cheaply as possible.

In order to maintain the delicate balance of our food system as well as the finite resources of the planet that we depend on, a change must be made. We need to move towards a more sustainable method of farming. This change must be made by individuals in their own food choices but more importantly, by our government. Farming subsidies that are in place from the government are currently given based on the highest level of



3

 production. Because of this, all of the government support is given to large factory monoculture farms. Small, sustainable farms have no way of competing with the production levels of giant, corporate run, monoculture farms, and are therefore unsupported financially by the government. Therefore, we are supporting the farms that are doing the most damage. Our current, dominant model of corporate, industrial agriculture is a major contributing factor to the current food crisis. The continued growth and support of large factory farms, the creation of genetically modified organisms and the steadily diminishing presence of smaller family run farms is damaging to our individual food. We have a strong and urgent need to support a movement towards a more sustainable system of agriculture within our culture.

In order to maintain both our planet's delicate ecosystem and our food sovereignty, a sustainable means of agriculture is required. This system of agriculture needs to not only provide us with the means to satisfy human hunger for the growing population or our planet, but it must also strive to maintain and enhance environmental quality, natural biological cycles and must aim to make the most effective use of our nonrenewable resources in order to maintain and enhance the sustainability of our planet. Although corporate-run monoculture factory farms, whose focus is on the production of only a few agricultural products, such as corn, wheat, and beef, do work to satisfy our growing food needs, they are most certainly not contributing to the other important aspects of sustainable agriculture; in particular, the enhancement and maintenance of the environmental quality of the planet. In these large-scale monocultures, the huge, daunting amounts of livestock being raised produce a staggering amount of waste on a



4

 much larger scale than ever before. In smaller-scale, sustainable farms, a closed loop system is utilized, where much smaller amounts of livestock waste are composted and used as fertilizer to both re-enrich the soil for future years of use, and to enhance the production of crops. 1 However, in large-scale factory farms, the vast amount of waste that is being produced from the staggering number of animals being raised is full of both antibiotics and hormones that have been fed to the livestock in order to gain faster growth of the animal or increased milk production. One such common additive is the Bovine Growth Hormone(rBGH). The addition of these additives to the livestock then, in turn, leads to environmental contamination of water, soil, and even the food crops as the waste from the animals still contains active forms of these supplied anti-bacterial agents. These hormones have harmful effects in humans through both the exposure to the contaminated environment and the consumption of meat and milk produced from these factory farmed animals. Furthermore, the animal waste then produces greenhouse waste and gas emissions.2 This agricultural model of the corporate-run factory farm is therefore a major contributor to planet-wide environmental concerns such as climate change and global warming, as well as a detriment to human health, and a large factor in the contamination of our environment. It is clear to see that our agricultural model is not only unhealthy for individuals who are consuming factory farmed food products as their sole means of

 1Koç,M.,Sumner,J.,Winson,A.(2012).CriticalPerspectivesinFoodStudies.Don Mills,Ontario:OxfordUniversityPress.  2Viegas,I.,Santos,J.M.L.,Barreto,A.,Fontes,M.A.(2011).MeatSafety:ABrief ReviewofConcernsCommontoScienceandConsumers.InternationalJournalof SociologyofAgricultureandFood,Volume19,275-288   5

 sustenance, but also for the continued growth and usability of our planet for future generations.

Another, more recent change to the way in which our food is produced is the invention and implementation of genetically modified organisms. This term refers to any plant or animal species that has been genetically engineered with DNA from other sources such as bacteria, viruses, or differing plants and animal species that are not crossed naturally within nature.3 This development is being touted as a means of progress due to it's ability to supposedly produce greater amounts of food for the population. These genetically modified seeds are purposefully being engineered to be resistant to pesticides, which allows for weeds to be eradicated within the fields with no effect on the crops around them. It is important to consider the detrimental effects of this new method of production. Firstly, these genetically modified seeds are purposefully engineered to be sterile. This means that fruit and vegetables grown from these seeds will not germinate and cannot be reused by farmers in future years. Saving seeds from a previous year's yield in order to reuse in next year's growing season is vital to smaller scale, sustainable, and family-run farms. It is key to a sustainable method of food production. It is clear that removing this seed saving potential from plants is entirely profit driven ­ farmers are forced to buy more seeds each year in order to continue to grow their crops. These seeds, known as "terminator seeds", then cross-pollinate and contaminate surrounding, non-sterile crops. It is clear that by producing these sterile plants, the future of our food supply is being put in immediate danger. It renders the  3Koç,CriticalPerspectivesinFoodStudies.  6

 practice of seed saving used and relied on by famers completely impossible, and often times even illegal as a violation of Monsanto's patent protection. GMO producer Monsanto is known to monitor fields in search of violating small farms to sue.4 Through the contamination of renewable seeds, eventually all seed production will belong to large companies like Monsanto, and be removed from the ownership of farmers themselves. New seeds will therefore need to be purchased by farmers again every year.5 This shows another clear example of how industrial agriculture is rapidly reducing our society's food sovereignty by taking control of the agricultural industry away from the people and placing it in the hands of large-scale corporations. It is unethical for a company to be able to own a plant, which is the course that Monsanto is on. As individuals, we have the right to grow, pick, and eat the food of our choosing. If this method of production continues, it will not be long before consumers no longer have the option of choosing to eat or to grow organic, non-GMO food. Seed sovereignty, or the right to own, save, and produce our own seeds for food production, is a key element in the future of sustainable farms. To take this right away from farmers is to make a drastic change to the way that food has been grown for centuries. It is something that needs to be halted before our food is solely owned and regulated by one company. It is a dangerous direction to be taking, and something that more attention needs to be drawn to.

 4Scanlan,S.T.(2013)FeedingthePlanetorFeedingUsaLine?Agribusiness, "Grainwashing"andHungerintheWorldFoodSystem.InternationalJournalof SociologyofAgricultureandFood,Volume20,357-382  5Koç,CriticalPerspectivesinFoodStudies.  7

 There is another important element to consider when discussing the downside and dangerous effects of the continued growth of the genetically modified food industry. As the development of pesticide resistant crops increase, the use of chemicals on fields to fight off weeds also increases. Monsanto provides a crop known as Roundup Ready canola. This strain of canola seeds is resistant to the weed killer Roundup, and it is rapidly monopolizing crops. The use of this seed allows more pesticides to be used on the fields in order to fight weeds and control pests. With this increased use of pesticides comes the pesticide treadmill effect. This is a term that is used to describe the evergrowing need for newer, and increased amounts of pesticides, as the pests that they are fighting off develop a resistance to the chemicals over time with their increased use.6 It is becoming clear that GMOs are putting our food security at risk, and posing long term negative effects to the future of our planet.

Furthermore, with the advancement of our current capitalist, industrial model of agriculture we are witnessing a steady decline in the prominence of the family farm, along with the elimination of such small productions by larger-scale production. As corporate-owned farm monopolies steadily tighten their hold on the agricultural industry, smaller, family-run farms will continue to suffer. As the introduction of new technologies is becoming more frequent, the need to expand their operations is ever rising, and the need to repurchase seeds with every new season as a result of their sterile nature, so family farmers are falling further into debt simply in an effort to keep up with the rapid growth of industrial agriculture. The small-scale farmer's current debt to income ratio is  6Koç,CriticalPerspectivesinFoodStudies.  8

 at an all-time high, with the average farmer owing $23 dollars of debt for each dollar of income that they earn.7 Naturally, this rapid increase in debt all but eliminates the appeal of taking over the family farming business for future generations. In a community where the majority of farms are typically passed down through generations in order to maintain their operations, it becomes easy to see why these small farms have all but vanished.8

Despite this growing agricultural crisis, our government continues to support corporate-run farms. They are still granting farm subsidies based solely on the size and production of the farm, thereby providing financial aid to corporate farms that are already thriving, while small productions continue to suffer. By reinvesting its money back into large-scale corporate-run farms, small family farms will continue to be undermined by their own government.9 As family farms still must rely heavily on the capitalist industry, their numbers will consistently dwindle as a handful of giant corporations increase their hold over the production of our food. Due to this model of production, our food choices are being drastically limited and our farming community is suffering.

Our currently dominant, capitalist-based model of industrial agriculture is in desperate need of reform. Though it was implemented as a supposed means of increasing the production of food, and touted as a way to help end hunger, its focus is not on the people it aims to feed, but rather is solely on profit. Many important factors in food production,  7Ibid. 8Bjørkhaug,H.,Ronningen,K.(2011).GlobalShocks,ChangingAgriculturalPolicy andtheViabilityofRuralCommunities.InternationalJournalofSociologyof AgricultureandFood,Volume21,1-6 9Koç,CriticalPerspectivesinFoodStudies.   9

 such as the potential harms to both the environment and to human health, are ignored in order to focus primarily on the increase in profitability. When looking at the continued growth and government support of corporate-run, large-scale monoculture farms, the creation and wide spread distribution of genetically modified organisms, and the rapid diminishing of family run farms, it becomes quite clear that our current agricultural model is a major contributor to the global food crisis. It is causing significant damage to both the world's food sovereignty and the planet's environmental sustainability.

THESOLUTION
As detailed above, the problems with the current dominant method of food production are clear. The purpose of 60 Seasons is to highlight some of the ways in which individuals are working to incite change towards a more natural and sustainable method of food production, both for our health as a species, and for the future of the planet as a whole. The goal is to enter a state where the world develops an ethical foodscape ­ that is, a realm where good food is not simply viewed as an individual indulgence, but as something that is connected to collective obligations we all have as a species such as sustainability, animal welfare and social justice. The UN issued a report titled "Our Common Future" in 1987, within which they defined sustainability as "meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations



10

 to meet their own needs".10 It is clear that this is not the focus of our current, corporaterun agricultural model. The devastating effects that this profit-driven system has on both the environment and our individual health will certainly have long-reaching consequences for future generations.

If we do not begin to act to bring about a food revolution, the impact on the planet will be far-reaching and long lasting. In 2014, on the first World Soil Day, a UN official of the Food and Agricultural Organization informed a forum that over one third of all of the world's usable soil has already been degraded. She warned that, without intervention and the adoption of new farming approaches, the world would only have sixty growing seasons left before all of the useable top soil is gone. 11 This is where the inspiration for the title of the film was drawn from. It is a number that hits home ­ this is not something that we can put off for future generations. It is not a problem that will only see disastrous results in some distant, easy to ignore, future. It is something that will be affecting many of us that are alive today ­ and certainly dramatically affecting the children of this generation. Change needs to be happening now, or it will be too late. When the message being put out to the world about food production is largely controlled by those who benefit from the current agricultural model, we must take action into our own hands to put out a counter message. This notion is something that the creators of  10Belott, Anne. "Modeling Sustainable Food Systems - The Permaculture Research Institute." The Permaculture Research Institute. 2016. http://permaculturenews.org/2016/11/24/modeling-sustainable-food-systems/.  11Arsenault, Chris. "Only 60 Years of Farming Left If Soil Degradation Continues." Scientific American. 2014. https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/only-60-years-offarming-left-if-soil-degradation-continues/.   11

 both Headwaters Community Garden and Punk Rock Produce are incredibly passionate about. To both, the solution is sustainable methods of food production and education of the community at large.

The method of farming used by Headwaters farm is one known as Permaculture. A combination of the words "permanent" and "agriculture", Permaculture is defined as "an approach to land management that creates high-yielding, low-energy, selfperpetuating systems by which the functions of animals, plants, humans, and Earth are integrated to maximize their value and create sustainable human habitats."12 The term itself was originally coined in 1972 by Bill Mollison - an Australian scientist, researcher and author.13 It was originally a term created and used within the farming community but its use has moved on to spaces outside of the conventional farm ­ including urban gardening, shelter design and architecture. It is now thought of more as a combination of the words "permanent" and "culture", as it expands far beyond simply agricultural applications. Permaculture is about more than simply farming. Beyond food production, it is also working within the areas of building structures and shelter, water, energy and waste management. Permaculture aims to "maximize a site's productivity, while maintaining ecosystems and restoring damaged land to a healthy, life-promoting state."14

The goal of permaculture is to make use of a closed-loop system ­ a system through which all matter and energy is maintained, contained, and reused within the  12Bortman, Marci, Peter Brimblecombe, and Mary Ann Cunningham. "Permaculture." Environmental Encyclopedia , Vol. 2. 3rd ed. Detroit: Gale, 2003. p1065-1067. 2003. 13Ibid. 14Ibid.  12

 growing cycle. It is an energy-efficient system where nothing is wasted. Waste products from plants and animals are reintroduced back into the system to enrich the soil and benefit future growth cycles. This re-enrichment of the soil is one of the most important elements when prolonging the usability of our earth's finite resources. As noted above, if we wish to have more than simply sixty seasons of usability left from the world's soil, we must work to prevent future degradation, as well as making a conscious effort towards reversing the damage that has already been done to the land. Furthermore, with permaculture gardening, self-seeding plants and perennials are utilized as they continue to perpetuate themselves through each year's harvest, and spread to become a natural `food forest'. This term refers to a wild garden bed that produces those plants that thrive and do well in the natural climate in which it is grown. These `food forests' are intended to consist entirely of edible plants that are able to maintain their growth cycle with minimal human intervention. In essence, permaculture gardens are defined by a few distinct factors. They are food systems that are designed to make the best possible use of the natural environment and systems that are already present, have minimal or no waste, and create a diversity of plant life within the space.

In turn with permaculture and food forest systems being put in place to grow crops, Headwaters and other sustainable farms also make use of a technique known as rotational grazing. With this method, the livestock of the farm are moved throughout the pastures each day. Typically, a smaller animal, such as chickens, would follow after the path of larger livestock species like cattle. By doing so, the chickens scratch through the waste left by the cattle, helping to release its nutrients back into the soil. At the same



13

 time, they are digging through the pasture and eating possible pests that could have a potentially negative impact on the usability of that space for future crops if they were not removed. The system also benefits the birds themselves as they have a wider access to natural food sources within the pasture, which in turn can aid with cutting down on feed costs for the farmers. This system is in direct opposition to the methods used in industrial agriculture.

In our prominent method of agricultural production utilized by large-scale factory farms, monocultures are grown ­ full fields of one specific type of crop, such as corn or soy. Permaculture argues that these types of systems cannot make full use of the resources and energy that are available within the growing space, and are therefore incredibly wasteful. Monoculture is also leading to a major reduction in the diversity of our plants and animals. As factory farms determine what they deem to be the most effective type of chicken to raise for meat, for example, that is the only meat bird that will be farmed. Industrial agriculture companies such as Monsanto claim that low-tech agricultural methods simply cannot produce enough food to feed the hungry of the world. Their solution is therefore to use technology-heavy and pesticide-based methods of farming in order to gain the most yield of a product from the land within the shortest time period. However, a lack of food is not the root cause of hunger. In fact, the UN Food and Agriculture Organization's studies show that our food supply is actually in a state of abundance, not one of scarcity.15 The problem, in fact, stems more from these industrial  15Kimbrell, Andrew. The Fatal Harvest Reader: The Tragedy of Industrial Agriculture. Washington: Published by the Foundation for Deep Ecology in Collaboration with Island Press, 2002.  14

 farms themselves. By displacing farmers from their land and working towards denying them the right to grow their own food through the production and regulation of sterile seeds, they are gradually decreasing the population's food independence. But beyond that, a problem arises with the choice of crops that these corporate farms are producing en masse. Rather than farming food staples that would feed the hungry, corporate-driven farms choose instead to focus on large fields of high profit food items such as beef, corn and soy that are typically exported to wealthy countries for maximum profit.16 So, land that could be used by small scale farms to grow diverse food staples to contribute to aiding the hungry in the community is instead bought out and taken over by corporate run monoculture farms. These farms are then growing high profit food items - most likely to be used as feed for animals - that are being exported to other countries.

It is obvious that this method of food production does not actually have the hungry of the world in mind. Not only is this method not striving to feed the hungry, it is also detrimental to the earth itself, and putting our soil at risk. By planting the same crops in the same place every year, monocultures deplete the soil of its natural nutrients, alter its structure and reduce its natural ability to retain water. In turn, this leaves the soil weak and unable to support future plant growth. This leads to the increased use of chemical fertilizers in an attempt to make the soil usable again, which further degrades the quality of the soil. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations has stated that

  16Ibid.  15

 "Soil degradation in agricultural systems is directly related to the overuse of fertilizers and pesticides, the removal of the crop residues from the soil surface and the use of heavy machinery. Additionally, nutrient depletion is related to the absence of the fallow period in intensive agricultural systems and to the practice of ... which deplete soil nutrients due to static nutrient demand. Therefore, crop rotation is critical to preserving and eventually improving soil health." 17 It is clear that our current dominant system of agriculture is broken. Not only is it not achieving its supposed goal ­ that of producing more food to feed the hungry ­ it is also creating long lasting, devastating effects to our natural world that will only lead to further hunger in the future as our earths soil becomes unusable.

THENEED
 As noted earlier, the need to reevaluate our food system is immense. The damage to our environment that is continuing at a rapid pace should be clear evidence that our current corporate -run, industrial agriculture model is failing the future of the planet. But beyond the environmental devastation that this farming system is perpetrating, it also is not succeeding at the one goal it claims as its prime motivating factor ­ feeding the hungry. Despite the ever-growing quantity of crops being produced, the increasing number of modifications to our seeds and produce and the chemical treatments being put into the earth, the problem of hunger is not being solved. Focusing on our own community specifically, hunger has not been decreasing in Canada with the introduction of genetically modified organism, industrial monoculture farms, or animals raised rapidly for consumption through the addition of hormones and antibiotics.  17FAO. "Soils Are the Foundation for Vegetation." (PDF File). Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 2015. http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4666e.pdf.   16



This can be seen by examining the creation of, and rise in need for, food banks within Canada. Originally established in the 1980s, these national charity systems aim to provide free food to those living with food insecurity across the country. They are run on a volunteer and donation basis, as there are no federally established programs to assist with either funding of the food banks, or with their food supply. In fact, volunteer-run food banks and charities are the only support system in place to aid those who are suffering from a lack of food security in Canada, as there are no government run food assistant programs in place.18 Upon their initial creation, food banks were originally established to be a temporary, emergency measure to help the population recover from a recent recession. However, despite this original intention, the need for food banks has not abated as the economy began to improve. In fact, the opposite has happened. Not only are food banks still abundant throughout the country, but also the need for their assistance has actually grown, not diminished. According to Food Banks Canada, over 850,000 individuals turn to food banks across Canada for assistance every month, with over 300,000 of those being residents of Ontario.19 (see Fig. 1) Looking specifically at data from the Food Banks Canada's Hunger Report, in March of 2016, 863,492 people received food from a food bank, which is up 1.3% from 2015, and a staggering 28% higher than in 2008, with 8 out of our 10 provinces seeing an increase in numbers.20

 18Tarasuk, Valerie, Dachner, Naomi, Loopstra, Rachel, (2014),"Food banks, welfare, and food insecurity in Canada", British Food Journal, Vol. 116 Iss 9 pp. 1405 ­ 1417  19"Food Banks Canada." Food Banks Canada. 2016. https://www.foodbankscanada.ca/.  20Food Banks Canada (2016). HungerCount 2016. Toronto: Food Banks Canada.  17

 Looking specifically at Northumberland County, the district of Ontario that is represented in 60 Seasons, its numbers have also jumped dramatically. When the Northumberland Fare Share Food Bank was first established in 1986, it fed 50 individuals. Now, in 2016, that number has jumped to 2,000 people. It is this food bank specifically that Craig Smith wanted to help support when he conceived the idea of Punk Rock Produce. With a strong desire to help his community and fill the gaps in food security that agribusinesses are causing, he set about providing organically grown, locally sourced food staples to the Northumberland Fare Share. In one growing season, in a small 600 square foot space that had formerly been a parking lot for a long-abandoned bar, he, with the help of community volunteers, managed to provide over 600 pounds of fresh produce to those in need. Imagine the success that could come from larger plots? Ones that have been given support from their local government to aid in the growing of sustainable food for their people? These are the movements that should be receiving funding: sustainable and permaculture farms, organic community gardens, places where real health is encouraged, real sustainability is promoted and taught, and where food security is the real goal.



18



 Figure 1 

DOCUMENTARYRELEVANCE
 Fromitsconception,thedocumentarymediumhasbeenusedforpurposesbeyond justthetellingofastory.Itisawaytoconveyamessage,drawattentiontoan issue,andreachalargeraudiencewithimportantinformation.Itisthisdesireto enactchange,inlargepart,thatsetsthedocumentaryformapartfromitsfictional filmcounterparts.Activismhasfoundamorewidespreadmeansofcommunication throughthedocumentaryfilm.Though60Seasonsisamultifacetedfilmthatdraws inspirationfromdifferentstylesofdocumentarywork,firstandforemost,itisan activistfilmbasedupontheidealsofenvironmentalismandsustainability.The primarygoalofthisfilmistoconveyamessage­oneabouttheimportanceof



19

 protectingourplanetthroughsustainablemeansoffoodproduction.Itisabout supportingthefoodsecurityofourfellowmanandprovidinghealthyfoodthatis healthynotjustfortheindividualeatingit,buthealthyfortheplanetweallinhabit.   Documentariesaddressingenvironmentalactivismhavebeengrowingin

numbers.WithfilmssuchasAlGore'sAnInconvenientTruth­adocumentary addressingthedangersofglobalwarming-bringinginmoremainstreamaudiences tothemedium,morefilmsinasimilarveinarebeingproduced.Asknowledge growsaboutthedangersofcorporatefarms,geneticallymodifiedseeds,andmass monoculturefarms,adesiregrowstofurtherthiseducationtoawideraudience. TherehasbeenaninfluxoffilmsgearedaroundthesetopicsfromwhichIhave drawninspirationfor60Seasons.ThesefilmsprovidenotonlyabasisofideasthatI foundsuccessfulandhelpfultothedirectionofmyownfilm,butalsothosewhose pathIfoundlesseffective,whichhelpeddeterminethekindoffilmthatIknewIdid notwanttobemaking.Thishelpedtohonethedirectionthat60Seasonswould take,andledtomecarvingoutthepaththatIwantedthefilmtotake.  Thereareanumberofrecentfilmsthattackletheproblemswithindustrial agriculture.OnesuchfilmisCowspiracy-TheSustainabilitySecret,adocumentary releasedin2014.Cowspiracyfollowsthejourneyofthedocumentarianand filmmakerKipAndersonashechallengesthecurrentmodelofindustrialagriculture andthedevastatingeffectsithasontheenvironment.Throughoutthefilm,Kip speakswithvariousindividualsintheagriculturalandenvironmentalworld,



20

 includingfarmers,andrepresentativesfromorganizationssuchasGreenpeaceand theRainforestActionNetwork.BothmyselfandKipclearlysharesomesimilar idealsabouttheneedforchangewithintheworldofagriculture.However,bothour approachestotacklingandportrayingtheissueonfilmandthesolutionsweseek differ.Thoughthisfilmdealswithsimilartopicsandissuesthat60Seasonsaimsto address,itdoessoinaveryaccusatoryandnegativemanner.Itthrowscriticismat theentiretyoftheagriculturalworld,andhasdrawnnegativeresponsefromsome audiencesduetostatisticsandfactsthat,inhindsight,seemtohavepotentiallybeen over-embellishedandinaccurate.Cowspiracyessentiallycallsforanendtothe entireprocessofeatingmeatinordertobringaboutchangeinagriculture.Though Ipersonallyamavegetarian,Ibelievethereareethicalandsustainablewaysto continuetoraiselivestocktofeedthehungrythatdon'tresultinwidespread environmentaldisasterandthegrossmistreatmentofanimals.  Myaimwith60Seasonsistonotsimplybombardanaudiencewithfacts aboutthedamagesthatfactoryfarmingiscausing,ortocallforanendtolivestock farming.Rather,itisacalltoreformthewayinwhichthebulkofourcropsand livestockareproduced,andtohandfoodproductionbackoverfromcorporate agribusinessestotheindividuals,thefamilies,andthesustainably-runfarms.Itaims tocreateacompellingandupliftingstoryabouttwogroupsofindividualswhoare actuallytakingactiontoaddresstheseissuesandarepassionateaboutalternate methodsoffarming.Itstrivestoshowtheaudiencethatobtainingfoodina sustainablewayisnotaschallengingasonemaythink,andthatpersonalfood



21

 productionisnotdauntingorscary­itissomethingthattheycantakeon themselves.60Seasonsstrivestohavetheaudienceleavethetheatrealready thinkingofwhattheywillbeplantingathomewhengrowingseasonrollsback around,andtobemoremindfulofwheretheyarebuyingtheirfoodandwhois producingit.UnlikeCowspiracy,60Seasons'missionisnottomotivatepeopleto takeactionandworktowardsachangeinthefoodindustrybyportrayingour currentmodelinanegativelightonly,buttodosobyshiningapositivelightonthe peoplewhoarealreadyontheforefrontofthischange.   Alongthisvein,anotherdocumentarythatfocusesonthechangeweneedto

makewithinourfoodsystemsis2009filmFood,Inc.CreatedbyAmerican filmmakerRobertKenner,Food,Inctacklesthetopicofcorporaterunfarms,and howafewcompaniesnowcontrolover80%ofmeatproductionintheUSA.This filmdealswithalotofissuesthatareattheheartofmyownfilm.Ittacklestheway thatagribusinessesarestrivingtoputsmall,sustainablefarmsoutofbusiness,the growingdangersofthefoodweeatduetoindustrialfarming'sdrivingmotivationof profitleadingtotheneedforuniformityandspeedofproductionofmeat,whichin turnleadstounsafeconditionsandthepresenceofcontaminatingbacteriasuchas E.Coli,andthefactthatthesemethodsanddangersarehiddenfromthepublicthat isconsumingtheseproducts.Food,Inclaysoutthewaythatfoodproductionhas changedsincetheinceptionoffastfoodwiththefirstMcDonald'srestaurant,and thewaythattherestaurantchaincreatedcorporate-likefoodproductionwithinits restaurants.Thesecorporatefarmsknowthattheidealversionofagriculturethat



22

 consumershaveintheirheadisthesmallfamilyfarm,withopenpastures,animals roaming,sunshining­andtheyusethisidealintheirmarketingandpackaging, despitethefactthatitcouldnotbefartherfromthetruthofhowtheirmeatis raised.  Food,Incaimstoputforththesameunderlyingmessageofmyfilm­thatour currentmodelofcorporaterunfoodproductionisfailingus,andfailingtheplanet. However,itdepictsthismessageinadifferentwayfrommyowndocumentary.The horrorsofthewaythatanimalsareraisedinfactoryrunfarmsareshownand focusedoninthefilm.StoriesofchildrenwhohavediedfromE.Colicontaminated meataredepicted,andimagesofchickenspackedintobuildings,neveronceseeing thesunandunabletostandduetotheiroversizedbodiesfillthescreen.Myfilm takesadifferentapproach.Idon'twishtoshowtheatrocitiesofindustrialfarms.I don'twanttobombardpeoplewithimagerythatmakesthemcringeandlookaway, whichisthereactionthatFood,Incachievedfrommeuponwatching.Instead,my filmfocusesontheactionsoftwosmallgroupswithinatinycommunitywhoare strivingtonotonlyproducesustainableproduceandlivestockfortheircommunity, buttospreadeducationabouttheimportanceofthismethodoffoodproductionfor thehealthofusallandofourplanet.  Ibelievethatshowcasingthepositivevisualsandimpactofthesefarming modelsthatdepictthewaythatfoodproductioncould,andshould,bedoneisthe bestapproachfor60Seasons.WhileFood,Incshowsfarmerswhoseemdefeated



23

 withfarmsthathavebeenboughtoutbycorporatemeatproducers,myfilmshows farmersandcommunitygardensthatanswertonoone-independentlyownedand run;positiveandhopeful. Itisapositivemessageatitsheart.Theknowledgeis growingaboutthedangersoffactoryfarmingalready,andIbelievethatshowing peoplethepracticalwaysinwhichtheycancombatitthroughtwogroupsof individualswhoaredoingjustthatisamuchstrongermotivatorthansimply condemningtheindustrialfoodproductionmodelthroughdisturbingimagery.The negativeimpactofagribusinesswillcomeacrossinmyfilmthroughtheinterview narrationcontentwithboththeownersofHeadwatersPermacultureFarmandthe creatorofPunkRockProduce,butwillnotbedepictedvisually.Rather,60Seasons isacasestudyofthesetwogroupsofindividuals,andahopefulstoryoftheways thatwecanallstrivetoturnthefoodindustryonit'shead,andsupportbothour individualhealth,andthehealthandlongevityofourplanet.  60Seasonsaimstoaddtoagrowingconversationaroundfoodforthosewho arealreadyquestioningtheviabilityofourcurrentagriculturalmodel,andtostart theconversationwiththosewhoareunaware.Itsgoalistomotivatepeopleto continuethisconversationamongsttheirpeerswellaftertheyhaveleftthetheatre. Myhopeisthatseeingindividualstakingtheirfoodproductionbackintotheirown hands,beingpassionateabouttheirfood,andencouragingotherstodothesame, willcompeltheaudiencetoreevaluatetheirownfoodchoices,andperhapsstirupa passiontoknow,anddomorethemselves.  



24

 Astheproductionofthisfilmcontinued,thepoliticalclimatechangedquite dramatically.Atthetimeofitsconception,60SeasonswasafilmthatIbelievedto bequiterelevantandtimely,asitisanissuethatneedstobeaddressedandbrought totheattentionofawideraudienceinaworldthatisaimingtobecomemore environmentallysustainable.However,asmyworkonthefilmcontinued,there wasashiftinpowerinoneoftheworld'smajorpoliticalplayers­theUnitedStates ­withtheelectionofDonaldTrump.Sincethattime,Ibelievethemessageofthis film,andenvironmentalistfilmsandartisticworksingeneral,ismoreimportant thanever.Environmentalissuesareamajorthemeinmanyartisticworkscoming outatthistime,myownincluded.Aclearexampleofthiswaspresentatthisyear's ScotiabankContactPhotographyFestival.Thework,titledIt'sAllHappeningSoFast, curatedbyMirkoZardinianddisplayedattheArtMuseumoftheUniversityof Toronto,projectsaclearmessageabouttheneedforenvironmentalchangeand protection.ItsfocusisontheCanadianenvironment,andtheexhibitionexploresa historyofCanada'srelationshipwiththelandsince194,5throughtheuseofboth historicandcontemporaryphotographsofCanada'slandscapes.21Thepiecestands asacalltoactionandaimstoillustratetheneedtotakeastandagainsttherising climatecrisis.  AnotherfellowCanadianartistwhoseworkisstronglygearedaround environmentalprotectionisphotographerEdBurtynsky.Hispowerfulaerial  21 "It's All Happening So Fast ­ Art Museum at the University of Toronto." Art Museum at the University of Toronto. Accessed 2017. http://artmuseum.utoronto.ca/exhibition/itsall-happening-so-fast/.  25

 photographsdepicttheCanadianlandscapeandthewaysinwhichhuman interventionhaschangeditinthenameofprogress,withthemestouchingonissues suchastheoilandminingindustriesandrecycling.22HisworktitledWaterisof particularrelevancetomyownpractice.Withthisseries,Burtynskyshowcases variousbodiesofwaterandtheinfrastructurebuilttomanagethisresource,and howthatwaterisused­andwasted-aroundtheglobe.Burtynskyhassaidthe followingofthework-"Wehavetothinkmorelong-termabouttheconsequencesof whatwearedoing,whilewearedoingit.Myhopeisthatthesepictureswill stimulateaprocessofthinkingaboutsomethingessentialtooursurvival,something weoftentakeforgranted­untilit'sgone.".23  BurtynskywasofasimilarmindsetwhencreatingtheseriesWatertomy ownmindsetwhencreating60Seasons.Themessageofaddressingafiniteresource ­inmycase,soilhealth-beforeitistoolateisanunderlyingcurrentinboththese productions,andalsoinotherenvironmentalartprojectsbeingproducedatthis time.Itisdiscouragingformeandotherlike-mindedindividualstoseeashiftaway fromtheprogressthathadbeenbeingmadetowardstheprotectionand sustainabilityofourplanet.Thestoriesaroundtheglobeofthedamagebeing inflictedontheeartharemultiplying.InAfrica,thedeforestationthreatisimmense; Europe'sandChina'sdemandfortheareasabundantnaturalresourceshascreated  22Burtynsky, Edward. "EDWARD BURTYNSKY." Edward Burtynsky. Accessed 2017. http://www.edwardburtynsky.com/. 23Rosenberg, David. "Incredible Photos of Water." Slate Magazine. September 19, 2013. Accessed 2017. http://www.slate.com/blogs/behold/2013/09/19/edward_burtynsky_water_examines_one _of_the_world_s_most_precious_resources.html.  26

 anunsustainableandsometimesevenillegalpracticethatisdestroyingthe biodiversityoftheregion.24  IntheNorthPacificOcean,theexistenceofacollectionofdebris-primarily consistingofplastics,thatismadeupof7milliontonsofwasteandspansanareaof watertwicethesizeofTexasand9feetdeep-theGreatPacificGarbagePatch standsasavisualrepresentationofhowwastefulweareasasociety.25Anditisnot theonlygarbagepatchinourbodiesofwater­itissimplythelargest.IntheUnited States,thepracticeknownas"fracking"breaksuprockformationsfromdeep undergroundinordertoobtainfossilfuels.Thisprocessisnotonlyincredibly water-intensive,itisalsoincrediblywater-polluting,asitcombineswaterwithtoxic chemicals,or"frackingfluid",andinjectsthemdeepintotheground,resultingin contaminatedwaterthatmakesitswayintodrinkingsuppliesandgroundwater. Notonlyisitclearlymoredangerousthanrenewableenergysources,itisalsomore expensive.26Asissuesofglobalwarmingandclimatechangecomemoretothe forefrontinpoliticaldiscussionsanddecisionsaroundtheworld,theneedfor positivechangestoprotectthefutureofourplanethasbecomemuchmore apparentandrecognized.   24 "Deforestation in the Congo Basin." WWF. Accessed 2017. http://wwf.panda.org/about_our_earth/deforestation/deforestation_fronts/deforestation_in _the_congo_basin/. 25"Garbage Patch - Facts." Garbage Patch - The Great Pacific Garbage Patch and other pollution issues. Accessed 2017. http://garbagepatch.net/greatpacificoceangarbagepatchfacts/. 26 "Fracking." Greenpeace USA. Accessed 2017. http://www.greenpeace.org/usa/globalwarming/issues/fracking/.  27

 Thereisanoverwhelmingconsensusamongstthescientificcommunityon notjustthefactthatglobalwarmingisareal,anddangerousoccurrence­butthatit isaphenomenonthatisoverwhelminglycausedbyhumanactivities.Infact,a staggering97percentofscientistsagreeonthisfact,andendorsethisstandpoint.27 Therateatwhichglobalwarmingisoccurringisunprecedented,anditseffectsare cleararoundtheplanet­fromtheriseinglobaltemperature,therapidriseofsea levelsandthewarmingandincreaseofacidificationoftheworld'soceans,toglacial retreat.TheissueisnotsomethingthatweareremovedfrominCanada.Infact, Canadahaswarmedatclosetotwicetheglobalratealonesince1950,withachange of-1.5degreesCelsius,asopposedtotheaverageof-0.85degreesCelsius worldwide,whichcanbeseeninthemeltingofthepermafrost,andincoastal erosion.28  Asthisissueprogresses,weseetheeffectsnotjustinthehealthofourplanet butinhumanhealthaswell.Evidencehasbeenmountingsince2008oftheeffects thatclimatechangeishavingonhumanhealth,andwillcontinuetohaveifleft unchecked.Climate-sensitivediseases,suchasLymeDisease,havebeenmoving furthernorthintoCanada,andwillcontinuetodosoasglobaltemperaturesrise.29  27 "Climate Change: Vital Signs of the Planet: Evidence." NASA. Accessed 2017. https://climate.nasa.gov/evidence/  28"ClimateChangeandEnergy."FriendsoftheEarthCanada.Accessed2017. http://foecanada.org/en/issues/climate-change-and-energy/. Warren, F.J. and Lemmen, D.S. (2014): Synthesis; in Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation, (ed.) F.J. Warren and D.S. Lemmen; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON, p. 1-18.
29



28

 Notonlythis,buttheextremeweathereventsthatoccurasaresultofglobal warming­suchaswildfiresandfloods,leavedeaths,injuries,andthedestructionof communitiesintheirwake.Thefutureofthemovementtowardsenvironmental changeonapoliticallevelseemedhopefulascountriesunitedtogetherintheParis AgreementinDecemberof2015.Thiswasaworldwideagreementtodramatically reduceemissions,strengthencountries'abilitiestodealwiththeimpactsofclimate changeandtoprovidesupportintheseareastodevelopingcountries,transparently trackingtheirprogresstowardsthesegoalsandaskingthemtobeheldaccountable, andtomeeteveryfiveyearstosetevenmoreambitioustargetsfortheyearsto comeasscientificresearchanddiscoveriescontinue.30  Thiswasamonumentalachievement­theunitingofalmosteverycountryin theworldtofinallytakeontheissueofclimatechangeonascalethatcouldactually bringaboutthechangeneededforthesustainabilityofourplanet­anditwas celebratedaroundtheglobeassuch.However,the2016electionbroughtona drasticturninthewaytheUnitedStateswasrunwiththeelectionofDonaldTrump. InMayof2017,adramaticandmuch-criticizedmovebythepresidentsawhim callingfortheUnitedStatestowithdrawitselffromtheParisAgreement.Itisjust onestringofmanysincehiselectionthatshowshislackofconcernforissues surroundingtheenvironmentandourplanet,andhisdenialofknownscience. AmongsthisotherinfractionsaretheguttingoftheEPA'sbudgetandtheclearingof   30"Paris Agreement," Climate Action - European Commission, February 16, 2017, , accessed 2017, https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/international/negotiations/paris_en.   29

 theirclimatechangewebsite31,andhisexecutiveorders-onetorollbackthe Obama-eraCleanPowerPlanthataimedtoreducecarbondioxideemissionsfrom powerplants32andonetoweakentheexistingCleanWaterActthatprotectsthe country'swaterwaysbyregulatingpollution.33Thesearesimplyafewclear examplesofTrump'scompleteneglectfortheenvironment­thelistisdaunting. Withsuchamajorpoliticalpowerbeingsooutspokenlyagainstenvironmental change,andinfactactivelydenyingthatclimatechangeisreal­Trumpactually callsitaconspiracytheorycreatedbyChina­weareinaveryscaryplace worldwide,onethatcouldseeustakingstepsbackwardoverthenextfouryears insteadofthedesperately-neededstepsforward.  Inthewakeofthetroublesfacingourplanet,60Seasonsstandsasan affirmativebodyofworkthataimstocreateapositivedepictionofsustainabilityin action.ThroughtheportraitsofTony,LindaandCraigandthepassionwithwhich theyspeakonthesubject,itaimstodepicthowmuchsenseitmakestostrive towardsthesegoalsonapersonal,humanlevel. 

 31A Running List of How Trump Is Changing the Environment," National Geographic, June 14, 2017, , accessed 2017, http://news.nationalgeographic.com/2017/03/how-trumpis-changing-science-environment/. 32Ibid. 33A Running List of How Trump Is Changing the Environment," National Geographic, June 14, 2017, , accessed 2017, http://news.nationalgeographic.com/2017/03/how-trumpis-changing-science-environment/  30



METHODOLOGY
60Seasonsisanenvironmentalistdocumentaryfilmthatcreatesavideo portraitoftwogrowingeffortswithinthecommunityofNorthumberlandCounty­ thatofHeadwatersPermacultureFarm,andPunkRockProduceCommunityGarden. Itdoessothroughsit-downinterviewswithTonyandLindaArmstrong,foundersof HeadwatersFarm,andCraigSmith,creatorofPunkRockProduce,alongwithcandid footageoftheseindividualsandtheirvolunteersupportatworkinthegardensand withintheircommunityatlarge.60Seasonsaimstoprovideacounter-narrativeto thecorporaterunagri-businessstorythatthemoreyouproduce,thebiggeryour fields,themorebeefandsoyandcornyougrow,themorepeopleyoufeed.Itaims toshinealightontherealitythatthisindustrial-runmodelofagricultureisnot sustainable,andwillnotbeabletocontinuetoprovidefoodfortheworldonalongtermbasis.  Thefilmprovidesadifferentperspectiveonfarmingthroughtheactionsand wordsofCraig,LindaandTony.Itportraystheirdesiretospreadthewordabout sustainable,healthymethodsoffarmingthroughouttheircommunityandtheworld atlarge,andtoencourageotherstopartakeinactionstohelpsupportnotonly healthygrowingmethods,butthefoodsecurityoftheirowncommunitiesaswell. Thefilmisasmuchaportraitpieceasitisanenvironmentalistone.Itaimstotell thestoryoftheseindividuals,theirpassionsandmotivations,andcreateapictureof thecommunitywithinwhichtheylive.



31

   Fromitsbeginnings,60Seasonshastrulybeenapassionprojectforme,one

thathasgrown,changed,andadaptedasIprogressedmywaythroughtheearly stagesofplanningandshooting.Thefirstseedsoftheprojectoriginallystarted growingwhenIwasworkingonmyundergradthesisformyBFAinPhotography fromRyersonUniversity.Duringmyfinalterm,Icreatedaseriesofstillimagesthat documentedthelifeofayoungcouplewhopurchased80acresoflandinthesmall communityofYarker,Ontario.Theybuilta700-square-footstrawbaleinsulated homeandbegangrowingasustainablelivestockfarmtofeedtheircommunityfrom thegroundup.TheirstorywasonethatIwasfascinatedby.Buildingasustainable homeandbeingmoreinvolvedintheproductionofthefoodthatIeatissomething thathasalwaysbeenadesireofmine,sonaturallyIwasdrawntothissubject.   WhenenteringintomyMFAatRyerson,Iappliedwiththissamephoto

series,titledFatoftheLand,withtheintentionofcontinuingtofurthertellthestory ofJustinandAndreaandtheirfarm.Thiswasthebasicbeginningsof60Seasons. Videoworkwasanewfieldforme,andonethatIwasnervoustoenter.Myoriginal planformythesiswastocreateacombinationofstillimagesandshortvideo vignettes,creatingamoreexperimental,poeticstyleoffilm,ratherthanonewitha straightnarrativethatwassolelyvideo-based.Ispentthestartoftheprogram experimentingwiththisidea.IvisitedFatoftheLandfarmandworkedon documentingspecificmomentsintheirlifeinbothstillsandvideo.Iwantedthe documentarytobepersonaltothetwoofthem,whilestillcreatingastorythatgave



32

 viewersinsightintohowtheyhadmadelivingoffthelandarealityforthemselves.I wantedtoprovideinformationtoacuriousaudiencewhowantedtobeabletolive moresustainablythemselves,whilestillcreatinganinterestingandpersonalstory.   ThatwastheheartofwhatIwantedtoaccomplishwithmythesiswork.AsI

beganexploringmoreofthedocumentaryworld,Ioriginallyfoundmyselfdrawnto theideaofturningFatoftheLandintoaninteractive,onlinedocumentary experience.Ifoundinspirationforthisideabyexploringotheronlinedocumentary projectssuchasClimateWisconsin­aninteractivedocumentaryhighlightingsmall storiesandvignettesofsmallcommunityfarmingexperiencesthroughaudio narration,stillimagesandvideoclips34.Iadmiredthatthispiecewasabletocreate smallstoriesthattheaudiencecouldexploreanddigestoneatatime,insmall sittingsorlongerexplorations,andthefactthattheaudiencecouldexperiencean interestingandengagingstory,whileatthesametimelearnvaluableinformation aboutthefarminglifestyleiftheychosetoexplorethatavenuemorethemselves.   However,asIprogressedthroughtheprogram,bothmyideaandmy

methodologyforcreatingitbegantoshift.Itstartedwithafeelingofstagnation, thatfocusingonFatofTheLandfarm,aprojectIhadalreadydevotedsomuchtime ofmyundergradto,wasfeelingsomewhatstale.IwantedtostartaprojectthatI couldtakeonfromitsbeginning­createsomethingfreshforbothmyselfandmy  34"Climate Wisconsin," Home | Climate Wisconsin, , accessed 2017, https://climatewisconsin.org/.   33

 audience.ButtheidealsbehindFatofTheLandwerestillonesthatIwantedto pursue,evenasthespecificsubjectofthedocumentarychanged.Thereweremany projectsbeginningtoemergethatwerehighlightingindividualswhowerelivingoff theland.Iwantedtotellastorythatwasdifferentandunique.Bytakingacloser lookattheworkandwhatmymotivationswerebehindit,Iwasabletoparseout whatmyprimaryconcernwithtellingthatstorywas.  Ihadalwaysbeenpassionateaboutenvironmentalismandsustainableliving. ItwasduringasociologyoffoodclassfrommyundergradyearsthatIbeganto learntherealdangersofourcurrentfoodsystems,andtherealneedforchangeto bothsupportthefutureoftheplanet,andthefoodsecurityofindividualsaroundthe globe.IrealizedthatthiswasthekeyelementfromFatOfTheLandthatIwasthe mostconnectedwith.Iwantedtoshowcaseindividualswhoweretakinghealthy andsustainablefoodproductionbackintotheirownhands,andshowthatchange waspossible.Smallscaleeffortscanevolveandgrowintosomethingbiggerthan themselves,andeventhesmallestofeffortsmakesadifferencewithinacommunity ­andeventually,whencombinedandspread,canmakeanimpactglobally.With thisinmind,Ibegandevelopinganewproject­onethatwouldbecome60Seasons.   Ilikedtheideaoffocusingonmyowncommunity,andalreadyknewoftwo

effortswithinNorthumberlandthatsharedtheidealsandvaluesthatIwantedto highlightinthefilm.PunkRockProduceisacommunitygardeninit'sveryfirst year,whoseaimistoprovidequality,organically-grownproducetoourlocalfood



34

 bankwhilemakinguseofvaluable,unusedspacewithinthedowntowncoreto producefood,andactingasahubtoeducatethecommunityontheeasewithwhich theycouldgrowtheirownfoodaswell.HeadwatersPermacultureFarmhadsimilar goals­toprovideeducationalopportunitiesaroundpermacultureand sustainability,andalsotoprovidehealthy,organicallyandethicallygrownfoodto theircommunity.Thesewerethetwoorganizationsthatwouldplayoutinthefinal iterationofthefilm,butoriginallyIhadplannedtoincludeathirdelementaswell­ Cultivate.Cultivateisafoodfestivalthatcelebrateditssecondyearin2016.Itis heldinPortHope,Ontario,andcelebrateslocal,organically-grownfoodthrough foodvendorsandeducationalseminars.Thiselementwaseventuallycutfromthe finalfilm.Ithadsimplybecometoobusy,thereweretoomanycharactersinvolved, andthefestival,whilewonderful,didn'taddalottotheconversationaroundthe desireandneedtosupportsustainablemethodsoffarming.    Afterdiscussionwithpeersandclassmates,Idecidedthatremovingthe

festivalfromthefilmwasthebestcourseofactioninordertostreamlinemy messagewithintheconfinesofashortdocumentaryfilm.Thisbringsmetothe changeinformatofthedocumentarywork.  Asstated,duringthepreliminarystages,Ihadbeenplanningtocreatean online,interactivedocumentarythatcombinedstillimagesandvideo.Withthe newdirectionofthesubjectmatterofthepiece,theformatwithwhichIwouldtell thestoryshiftedaswell.Withmuchdiscussion,Idecidedthatastructuredfilm



35

 wouldbethebestmethodtotellmystory.TherewasamessagethatIwantedto convey,andastoryaboutindividualsthatIwantedtocomethrough.Iwantedthe audiencetobeabletotakeawaythatmessageafteroneviewingoftheproject,andI worriedthatwithaninteractivepiece,viewerscouldseebitsandpiecesofthestory andthenmoveon,withouttherealmessagebeingconveyedtothem.Idecidedit wouldbemuchmorepowerful,andmoreeffectivetocreateapiecewithanarrative thatiswatchedandabsorbedfrombeginningtoendinonesitting,inthewayIwant ittobetold.  Goingforwardinthefuture,Iwouldstillliketocreateasupplementary, perhapsinteractive,onlinecomponenttotheproject.Thiswouldsimplyserveasa meansforpeoplewhoareinterestedinadoptingsomeofthepracticesdiscussedin thefilm,orlearningmoreabouttheissuesitaddresses,tohavearesourcetofind moreinformationthanisabletobeprovidedintheshortdocumentaryformatofthe film.But,unliketheoriginalplan,thefilmitselfisthecoreofthepiece,ratherthan anonlineinteractivedocumentary.   Comingintofilmmakingwithnopriorexperienceinvideowork,buta

backgroundinstillphotography,IknewIwantedmyfilmtobevisuallyengaging­ tohavefootagethatfeltaliveandactiveandwhichkepttheaudienceentertained whilestillconveyinganimportantmessage.Forthisend,Iwantedtokeepthe actualvisualsoftheinterviewfootagetoarelativeminimumandnothaveafinished piecethatwasprimarilytalkingheads.Becauseofthis,Ispentthemajorityofthe



36

 summeronlocationatbothHeadwatersandPunkRockProduceshootingallofthe goings-onandtheliveactionpracticesoftheissuesandtechniquesthatwouldbe discussedintheinterviews,inordertohavelotsofinterestingfootagetoworkwith alongsidetheaudiooftheinterviews.Thankfully,IhadmetbothTonyandCraig brieflypreviously,anduponapproachingthemwiththeideaofthefilm,bothwere incrediblyenthusiasticandexcitedtobeapartofit.Thisallowedmeamazingaccess tobothinitiatives,witheachofthemtellingmeIwaswelcometoshowupandfilm atanytime.TonyandLindabothhadawealthofknowledgeaboutboththethemes andmessageofthefilm,andalsoinitscreation,asbothofthemcomefromamedia productionbackground.Itwasbecauseofallofthesubjects'opennessand enthusiasmaboutthefilmthatitwasabletobecometheworkthatitis,and progressnaturallyintothestorythatdevelopedfromtheoriginalideaofFatofthe Land,intoit'sfinalformas60Seasons.   Themainchallengeintheproductionof60Seasonswas,forme,intheediting

room.Tacklingafilmwasabigchangefromshootingstillimagesnotjustinthe originalproduction,butinthepiecingtogetherofthefinalproduct.Manyhours werespenttranscribingdaysanddaysoffootageandinterviewsinordertopiece togetherthenarrativethatIwantedtotell.Keepingitwithina30minutetime framealsoprovedtobequitedaunting­thereweresomanythingstosaywiththe filmandsomanypointsthatIwantedtotouchon.Honinginonthemostimportant elementsandmessageofthefilm,andthencreatinganarrativeflowtotouchonall ofthoseissuesbothtookanincredibleamountoftimeandpatience.Intheend,I



37

 wantedthefocustobeonthestoryofthesethreeindividuals,andtheidealsthat theyhold­foodsecurityfortheircommunity,thesupportofsmallfarms,and ethicalandsustainablefoodproduction.Ibeganwiththismentalityinmindand usedthattofirstbuildapapereditoftheinterviewsthatIthenbuiltintotheaudio narrationbackboneofthefilm.Ihadendlesshoursofactionfootageorb-rolltouse ontopofthisnarrationsoitwasahardprocesstochoosethebestshotsandthe mostfittingvisualstogoalongwiththisunderlyingstory.WheneverItakeon somethingnew,Itendtothrowmyselfintothedeepend.Thisfilmwasno exception.Despitemylackofexperience,Idecidedtotakeontheentireediting processmyself­includingcolourgrading,storyeditingandcleaningupallthe audio.ThiswasmoreofahurdlethanIthoughtitwouldbewhenImadethe decision,butwithlotsofadvice,andmanytutorialswatched,itendedupcoming togetherintosomethingcohesivethatIamquiteproudof.AndIamgladtohave thesenewskillstomakeuseofwhenmovingforwardwithfuturefilmprojects.

  





38



APPENDIX  
Fig2.

Fig3.









39

 Fig4.

 Fig5.

 
 40

 Fig6.





Fig7.

 

 



41



 WORKSCITED
"A Running List of How Trump Is Changing the Environment." National Geographic. June 14, 2017. Accessed 2017. http://news.nationalgeographic.com/2017/03/how-trumpis-changing-science-environment/. Arsenault, Chris. "Only 60 Years of Farming Left If Soil Degradation Continues." Scientific American. 2014. https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/only-60-years-offarming-left-if-soil-degradation-continues/. Belott, Anne. "Modeling Sustainable Food Systems - The Permaculture Research Institute." The Permaculture Research Institute. 2016. http://permaculturenews.org/2016/11/24/modeling-sustainable-food-systems/. Bjørkhaug, H., Ronningen, K. (2011). Global Shocks, Changing Agricultural Policy and the Viability of Rural Communities. International Journal of Sociology of Agriculture and Food, Volume 21, 1-6 Bortman, Marci, Peter Brimblecombe, and Mary Ann Cunningham. "Permaculture." Environmental Encyclopedia , Vol. 2. 3rd ed. Detroit: Gale, 2003. p1065-1067. 2003. Burtynsky, Edward. "EDWARD BURTYNSKY." Edward Burtynsky. Accessed 2017. http://www.edwardburtynsky.com/. "Climate Change and Energy." Friends of the Earth Canada. Accessed 2017. http://foecanada.org/en/issues/climate-change-and-energy/. "Climate Change: Vital Signs of the Planet: Evidence." NASA. Accessed 2017. https://climate.nasa.gov/evidence/ "Climate Wisconsin," Home | Climate Wisconsin, accessed 2017, https://climatewisconsin.org Cowspiracy: The Sustainability Secret. Directed by Kip Andersen and Keegan Kuhn. USA: A.U.M. Films, June 26th, 2014. "Deforestation in the Congo Basin." WWF. Accessed 2017. http://wwf.panda.org/about_our_earth/deforestation/deforestation_fronts/deforestation_in _the_congo_basin/. FAO. "Soils Are the Foundation for Vegetation." (PDF File). Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 2015. http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4666e.pdf.



42

 FAO. Status of the World's Soil Resources. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2015. 2015. http://www.fao.org/documents/card/en/c/c6814873-efc341db-b7d3-2081a10ede50/. Food Banks Canada (2016). HungerCount 2016. Toronto: Food Banks Canada. "Food Banks Canada." Food Banks Canada. 2016. https://www.foodbankscanada.ca/. Food, Inc. Directed by Robert Kenner. USA: Magnolia Pictures, 2008. "Fracking." Greenpeace USA. Accessed 2017. http://www.greenpeace.org/usa/globalwarming/issues/fracking/. "Garbage Patch - Facts." Garbage Patch - The Great Pacific Garbage Patch and other pollution issues. Accessed 2017. http://garbagepatch.net/greatpacificoceangarbagepatchfacts/. "It's All Happening So Fast ­ Art Museum at the University of Toronto." Art Museum at the University of Toronto. Accessed 2017. http://artmuseum.utoronto.ca/exhibition/itsall-happening-so-fast/. Kimbrell, Andrew. The Fatal Harvest Reader: The Tragedy of Industrial Agriculture. Washington: Published by the Foundation for Deep Ecology in Collaboration with Island Press, 2002. Koç, M., Sumner, J., Winson, A. (2012). Critical Perspectives in Food Studies. Don Mills, Ontario: Oxford University Press. "Paris Agreement." Climate Action - European Commission. February 16, 2017. Accessed 2017. https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/international/negotiations/paris_en. Rosenberg, David. "Incredible Photos of Water." Slate Magazine. September 19, 2013. Accessed 2017. http://www.slate.com/blogs/behold/2013/09/19/edward_burtynsky_water_examines_one _of_the_world_s_most_precious_resources.html. Scanlan, S.T. (2013) Feeding the Planet or Feeding Us a Line? Agribusiness, "Grainwashing" and Hunger in the World Food System. International Journal of Sociology of Agriculture and Food, Volume 20, 357-382 Tarasuk, Valerie, Dachner, Naomi, Loopstra, Rachel, (2014),"Food banks, welfare, and food insecurity in Canada", British Food Journal, Vol. 116 Iss 9 pp. 1405 ­ 1417



43

 Viegas, I., Santos, J. M. L., Barreto, A., Fontes, M.A. (2011). Meat Safety: A Brief Review of Concerns Common to Science and Consumers. International Journal of Sociology of Agriculture and Food, Volume 19, 275-288 Warren, F.J. and Lemmen, D.S. (2014): Synthesis; in Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation, (ed.) F.J. Warren and D.S. Lemmen; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON, p. 1-18.    





44



ADDITIONALRESOURCES  
WWOOFing


https://www.workaway.info/ http://wwoof.net/

Headwaters
https://headwatersfarm.ca/

Punk Rock Produce
http://www.punkrockproduce.ca/

Permaculture
http://www.eonpermaculture.ca/ https://permaculture.org/





45


