QUEBEC NEWS-PRINT MEDIA PORTRAYALS OF IMMIGRANTS DURING THE REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS COMMISSION

By Jacqueline Hall B.A., Concordia University, 2006

A Major Research Paper presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in the program of Immigration and Settlement Studies

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2010

©> Jacqueline Hall, 2010

PROPERTY OF

RYERSON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

Author's Declaration I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this major research paper. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this paper to other institutions or individuals for the purpos~ of scholarlv research

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this paper by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

ii

QUEBEC NEWS-PRINT MEDIA PORTRAYALS OF IMMIGRANTS DURING THE REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS COMMISSION Jacqueline Hall Master of Arts, 2010 Immigration and Settlement Studies Ryerson University

Abstract Media and public discourses are constantly changing as a result of their effect on one another. The Consultation Commission on Accommodation Practices Related to Cultural Differences which roamed the province of Quebec in late 2007 was widely reported on in the mainstream news-media. This paper provides a critical content analysis of 105 articles in three Quebec daily newspapers (La Presse, Le Solei!, and The Gazette) during the months of September to December 2007 when the public forums discussing the reasonable accommodation of minority groups took place. By making theoretical linkages with the data collected, the findings show that the media discourses between the three newspapers vary slightly and are not accurate representations of the public discourses surrounding the issue of reasonable accommodations amongst the Quebec population.

Resume Les medias et les discours publics changent constamment en raison de leur effet un sur l'autre. La Commission de consultation sur les pratiques d'accommodement reliees aux differences culturelles qui a fait Ie tour de la province du Quebec vers la fin de 2007 ont ete largement rapportees dessus dans les journaux traditionels. Cet article fournit une analyse critique du contenu de 105 articles de trois quotidiens au Quebec (La Presse, Le Solei!, et The Gazette) du mois de septembre it decembre 2007 OU les forum publics discutant l'accommodement raisonnable des groupes minoritaires ont eu lieu. En faisant des liens theoriques avec les donnees de l'analyse, Ie n:sultat est que les discours des medias entre les trois journaux varient legerement et ne sont pas les representations precises des discours publics entourant la question des accommodements raisonnables parmi la population du Quebec.

Keywords: Reasonable accommodations . Quebec immigration . Media discourse . Public discourse' Quebec nation Mots cles: Accommodement raisonnables . Immigration Quebec . Discours mediatique . Discours publique . La nation quebecoise

iii

Acknowledgements It would be inappropriate to take full credit for this MRP and my Masters degree. In my personal life, my parents in particular have supported me throughout my academic and professional career; without your unconditional love and support I would never have achieved as much as I have. Thank you to my partner, Eric, who gave me the final push to make sure I saw this task to the end, and has travelled countless kilometres to help me do so; you are a wonderful man. I would also like to thank the rest of my family, my close friends, and my roommates who have helped me out over the years, and came to visit me or called me while I was studying 'abroad'. I'm not sure I would have had the confidence to take on this journey without all of your kind words. I love you all and thank you. To my Immigration and Settlement Studies professors and colleagues, thank you for the challenges and the wonderful memories I will take away with me. I look forward to reading all of your future work and hopefully working with some of you again in the future. Thank you to Marco Fiola, my supervisor, for keeping me on track, and for the laughs in your office when I was feeling the walls closing in on me. Also, with the most sincere respect, thank you to Doreen Fumia for challenging me academically and helping me through to the end. Last but not least, thank you to my close friend and colleague Anya Hussain, who helped me stay sane and occasionally lost her mind with me; I am happy to call you a friend. Thanks for the great times!

iv

Table of Contents 1 Introduction 2 Background 2.1 Reasonable Accommodations: History 2.2 Demographics of Quebec's Immigration 3 Literature Review

p. 1

p.3 p.3 p. 7
p. 11

4 Methodology
5 Results 5.1 Qualitative Analysis 5.2 Quantitative Analysis 5.2.1 Religion and Secularism 5.2.2 Socio-Economic and Cultural Integration 5.2.3 Tolerance, Diversity and Other 6 Discussion 6.1 La nation quebecoise (The Quebec Nation) 6.2 Religion 6.3 Language 7 Conclusion 8 Appendix 9 References

p. 18
p.22 p.22 p.28 p.29

p.33
p.35

p.38 p.40 p.41
p.43

p.45
p.51

p.58

v

1. Introduction The focus of this paper is to show how the public debate regarding the reasonable accommodations of immigrants I and cultural minorities in Quebec has been reported and influenced by different media discourses surrounding the Consultation Commission on Accommodation Practices Related to Cultural Differences. The emphasis will remain on print news-media, as this form of news-media is regarded both as a credible source of information and as an accurate representation about the world (Li, 2001). [have chosen to study print form rather than other forms of media such as television or radio news due to the time and resource constraints of this research study. By studying news-print media the analysis in focused on language, and ignores other factors such as body language, tone of voice, or visual setting (Fairclough, 1995). This kind of analysis would require greater resources in order to study accurately. Quebec is a heterogeneous society where French is the official and as well as the language of the majority, yet it is surrounded by English-speaking societies with their own media discourses. Like the makeup of the province, there are differing opinions on the subject of reasonable accommodations as well as different definitions of the 'Quebec nation', and hence there are competing discourses both in the media and the public on how to integrate newcomers into a society still in the process of defining itself (Bouchard, 1999). To guide me in my research several questions need to be addressed: What is the extent of difference in the media discourse between different media outlets? This question lies at the center of this research, in that the ultimate aim is to know if there are any differences between mainstream news-print media outlets. The answer to this question will allow me to answer the
1 The tenns 'immigrant' and 'newcomer' will be used interchangeably throughout this work. Both terms refer to persons who have migrated from a country other than Canada to Quebec, and does not include second-generation immigrants, who would be those born in Canada to immigrant or newcomer parents.

1

following questions: How do competing media discourses affect the overall public discourse? How may public discourse shape the media discourse in tum? Is there a disconnect between media and public discourse? These questions shall be answered by marrying the theory to the findings of the empirical research. The relationship between media discourse and public discourse is often explained in a causal manner, with one influencing the other. At other times, the relationship is viewed as symbiotic, where each discourse shapes and affects the other. News media outlets report on occurrences, and while their stated goal is to attempt to be objective and factual, Fairclough (1995) would argue that they inherently portray a one-sided image for a variety of reasons such as who own, controls, and creates the news media. These stories ignore the voice of the 'other', which for the purpose of this paper the focus is on the immigrant 'other'. As the result of Western, male-dominated mainstream media discourse, public discourse regarding immigration is changed, in part through the misinformation provided by this powerful participant. Yet, in the case where news media reports on events such as public consultations, it can be argued that the public discourse first shapes the media discourse 2, which then in turn reshapes public discourse based on how media has chosen to report, or not report, the public discourse. The relationship is rarely so clear though, as other actors such as politicians, celebrities, and institutions may interject with their own opinions which alter perhaps both the public and media discourses.

According to Foucault (1978), discourse is a series of symbols and statements which hold meaning and have power. In the context of this research study, the term discourse refers to the language used in the public and the media, and that language which is excluded in order to express a view held by those with the power to express such opinions.
2

2

2. Background
2.1 Reasonable Accommodations: History

Under Quebec's Charter o/Human Rights and Freedoms, the State, individuals or corporations are sometimes required to adjust the legitimate standards, practices or policies they apply to all people, without distinction, to take into account the particular needs of specific categories of people covered by a ground of discrimination. In Quebec and Canadian law, this duty of 'reasonable accommodation' (,reasonable' in the sense that it can be provided without 'undue hardship') is considered to be a 'natural corollary' of the right to equality (Bosset, 2005: 1). The demographic make-up of newcomers to Quebec has remained relatively similar since the signing of the Canada-Quebec Accord in 1990 which granted the province full control over the selection of immigrants destined for its territory. It is approximately at the same time that cases of requests for or denial of reasonable accommodations began to surface in Quebec's media discourse. There are several examples of such requests that have taken place in the last couple of decades which may provide a clearer understanding of the history of the reasonable accommodation debate in the province. In 1994 a Quebec-born girl and recent convert to the . Islamic religion named Emilie Ouimet was expelled from a French-language public high school for refusing to remove her hijab, a head covering worn by Muslim women, in the classroom. Several years later, in 2002, another debate began in the school system and attracted nation-wide attention and was later brought before the Supreme Court of Canada. This was the case of a LaSalle boy who was suspended from attending school for several months as a result of wearing a kirpan. A kirpan is a ceremonial dagger and religious symbol, much like the Catholic cross or Jewish kippa, carried by Sikh men and boys, not a potential weapon as the boy's school at the time was claiming (Hamilton, 2002; Thompson, 2006). Outside of the school system, the Hasidim, a branch of the Orthodox Judaic faith, have been a target of arguments against reasonable accommodation. In the Mile-End neighbourhood
3

of Montreal is one of the largest Hasidim populations in the province. In 2006, a Hasidim synagogue approached their YMCA neighbours in order to negotiate a way in which to accommodate both synagogue-goers and gym patrons. The Hasidim's complaint was that

women who exercised in tight and revealing clothing were viewable by boys attending religious classes at the synagogue, and that seeing women in such attire is against their religion. A solution based on reasonable accommodation was agreed on between both parties that the synagogue would pay to have the YMCA's windows frosted. The YMCA patrons contested this course of action with a petition, claiming it was up to those who may be offended by the women's attire to frost their windows or take another course of action which did not directly affect the female patrons who felt that they should not be penalized as a result of the unease of others (Ouimet, 2006). A month earlier, Montreal police were instructed to have male officers deal with Hasidic men. This followed the case of a Hasidim refusing to acknowledge the

authority of a female police officer when attempting to intervene following a traffic violation (Sutherland, 2006). These events are at the heart of Quebec's internal debate on how different members of society should interact with one another, and how the Quebec nation and its institutions should accommodate minority groups and individuals without losing their distinct Quebecois identity while allowing for the religious freedom and cultural expression of all. The notion of the Quebec nation and interest in preserving this collective identity as well as the respect for individual rights and freedoms shall be discussed in greater detail in later in this section. Following this series of stories of reasonable accommodation covered by the media, the small rural town of Herouxville in central Quebec passed a series of municipal Standards to take effect in 2007, which required potential immigrants were to abide by. While the authors of these

4

Standards deny that their aim was at all racist or discriminatory, the contents of the Standards

contained elements that demonstrated the stereotypical, racist and discriminatory beliefs they held; particularly in relation to Muslims. Some of the elements contained in this document highlighting these beliefs include the promotion of equality of the sexes, democratic values, and of integration into the host society. The assumption that Muslims and newcomers of other faiths and cultures hold views which are contradictory to those views held by the majority of
Quebecois is baseless, in that it was their own biases which informed the content of the Standards rather than research or other forms of reliable information. While such elements may

seem to uphold a liberal notion of justice, the document demonized the immigrant 'other' as well as highlighted many of the fears held in rural Quebec in particular. Nieguth and Lacassagne (2009) document that following the adoption of the Herouxville
Standards, which was widely discussed both within and outside Quebec media sources that the

provincial government decided to intervene and form the Consultation Commission on Accommodation Practices Related to Cultural Differences (hereafter referred to as the BouchardTaylor Commission3). The Bouchard-Taylor Commission was given the following mandate: Take stock of accommodation practices in Quebec; analyse the attendant issues bearing in mind the experience of other societies; conduct an extensive . consultation on this topic; and formulate recommendations to the government to ensure that accommodation practices conform to the values of Quebec society as a pluralistic, democratic, egalitarian society (Quebec, 2008). The two men selected to head this commission were Gerard Bouchard and Charles Taylor. At the time of appointment, Dr. Bouchard was a sociologist and historian, and a

professor at the Universite de Quebec

a Chicoutimi.

He is also the brother of former Parti

Quebecois leader and Quebec premier, Lucien Bouchard. He grew up in a French-speaking

3 The name 'The Consultation Commission on Accommodation Practices Related to Cultural Differences' was often shortened to 'The Bouchard-Taylor Commission' in the media, in reference to the two chairs of the Commission.

5

home in Jonquiere, a mid-sized city in the Saguenay region.

Dr. Taylor is an author and

philosopher, and is a professor at McGill University in Montreal. He was raised in a bilingual home in Montreal. As is typical in Quebec, in order to maintain ,the appearance of objectivity, Dr. Bouchard is a Quebec nationalist and Dr. Taylor is a Canadian federalist. Given the

controversial ethnic and religious nature of the commission in question, and in order to attempt providing it with greater legitimacy, the two commissioners were selected on two different sides of the religious debate as well: Dr. Bouchard is a secularist whereas Dr. Taylor is open about his traditional Catholic beliefs (Quebec, 2008). While the provincial government attempted to

represent the two largest groups in Quebec, both in terms of language and religious identification, it left those cultural and religious minorities who were being discussed \\-lthout any representation within the framework ofthe Commission or its commissioners. The selection of these two men as commissioners for this debate has been criticized as non-representative of those communities which were being targeted for the discussion. There is precedence for this criticism since the Quebec government has traditiortally had other forms of representation such as political, sex or gender. Given the mandate of the Bouchard-Taylor

Commission, various community groups have argued in front of the Commission that at least one of the following groups should have been represented in the body of one of the commissioners: women, immigrants, religious minorities, 'racial' minorities, persons with a physical handicap, or the LGBT community. There were several formats which were adopted in order to obtain information from the public on the subject. Individuals, groups, or organizations could submit deputations regarding their stance or stake in the issue, or could simply voice their opinion in a "regional citizens' forum" at any of the eighteen consultations that took place throughout the province. The

6

Commission received 335 deputations and held twenty public meetings (Quebec, 2008). The final report was complete in early 2008; however, to date the government has not implemented any of its recommendations. To elaborate, some of the report's recommendations included greater intercultural training in the workplace and classroom; the legislation of an official gender equality clause in the Quebec Charter; and various means of greater immigrant integration both through improved language training and recognition of skills and education' (Bouchard and Taylor, 2008).

2.2. Demographics of Quebec's Immigration The province of Quebec, with the metropolitan area of Montreal in particular, has always been one of the largest immigrant receiving centres in Canada. This urban area receives over 80 per cent of all immigrants to Quebec and 12 per cent of all immigrants to Canada (CIC, 2005b). Over the last 30 years it has become the primary destination for those immigrants coming from countries such as Haiti, France, and several North African nations, where French is one of the official languages (Quebec, March 2009). Prior to this period, when Quebec had virtually no control over immigration policy and had not yet enacted language laws intended at protecting the status of the French language such as the Charte de la langue jranr;aise, most immigrants integrated into the minority Anglophone community for a variety of reasons, including economic and social inclusion. However, with the province gaining control over selection of immigrants destined to settle within the province, as well as enacting laws streamlining immigrants into the Francophone school system, more recent cohorts of newcomers are increasingly integrating into the majority Francophone community (Quebec, 1990). Therefore, the debate over how to assist immigrants in the process of integration is a rather new one for the Francophone community, one

7

that had previously established Quebecois culture and collective identity. It is within this context that the debate over reasonable accommodations of ethnic, religious, and linguistic minorities commenced. The province of Quebec receives over 45,000 newcomers each year who speak over 150 languages, with origins in over 180 countries (Fall and Vignaux, 2008). 86.9 per cent of

immigrants settle in Montreal, an urban centre that represents only 45 per cent of the provincial population. This percentage has remained relatively unchanged for several decades (Quebec, 2009). For the period of 2004-2008, the economic immigrant class represented 61.3 per cent, with 3.6 per cent coming as entrepreneurs or investors; 22.1 per cent belonged to the family reunification class; 14.4 per cent came to Quebec as refugees; and the remaining 2.2 per cent fell under the "other" category (Quebec, March 2009). In comparison to the rest of the country, this represents the largest admission rate for the skilled worker class and the smallest family reunification category proportion (Grondin, 2007). Another major difference between Quebec immigration and immigration flows in the rest of Canada is the list of source countries or regions of these newcomers. In Canada, two out of three newcomers are from Asia, whereas this figure in Quebec in 2008 represented less than one in three. The majority (30.4 per cent) of newcomers to Quebec, since 2006, originate from Africa, over half of which come from North Africa. The Americas come in a close third for

continent of origin, with most immigrants from this region coming from Haiti or South America (Quebec, March 2009). Algeria, France, and Morocco have been the most important source

countries for Quebec immigrants, representing 23.6 per cent of the total number of immigrants to the province (Quebec, 2009). In complete contrast Canada's top three source countries for immigrants (China, including Hong Kong; India, and the Philippines) represent 33 per cent of the

8

total influx (CIC, 2005a). Of the top ten source countries for both Quebec and Canada, only two overlap: China and the Philippines, but with significant differences importance. Most newcomers to the province are under the age of 35 years (69.9 per cent) (Quebec, 2009), and more than 30 per cent have a university degree. In comparison to immigrants who settle elsewhere in Canada as well as the Canadian-born population, immigrants to Quebec are the youngest and most educated. Also, the proportion of immigrants with non-university, post10

their comparative

secondary training is also higher than the Canadian-born (CIC, 2005b). Thus immigrants to Quebec are generally younger and more highly educated and skilled than those who immigrate to any other province. Concerning French language skills, over 60 per cent of newcomers declared, based on self-declared French-language ability, that they had an understanding of the language, with this number rising to over 75 per cent for those who landed as skilled workers (Quebec, 2009). However, of those immigrants arriving in 2008, only 15 per cent of newcomers spoke French as their mother tongue and 23.4 per cent spoke only French at home prior to migrating (Quebec, March 2009). Immigrants to Quebec are somewhat less likely to have French-language skills upon arrival than immigrants to other provinces will have English-language skills, but this differential represents less than 5 percent. However, the language skill levels of immigrants to Quebec do compare to immigrants elsewhere in Canada within a few years of settlement primarily as a result of language training. The factor where we see the most difference is that it is more likely that in Quebec for immigrants to have English skills but no French skills, which is the official language in the province. This is different from the rest of the country where immigrants similarly have a

9

greater likelihood of having English rather than French skills, but this is not viewed as problematic as English is the language most often used by native-born Canadians in other provinces. In Quebec, 40 per cent of non-English speaking immigrants can speak English within six months of arrival while only 10 per cent of non French-speaking newcomers are able to speak French in all other provinces. It is also significantly more frequent for immigrants to Quebec to

be bilingual in both official languages than elsewhere in the country, with 36 per cent claiming
knowledge of both official languages in Quebec versus fewer than 10 per cent in the rest of Canada (Grondin, 2007). Often such numbers and statistics regarding immigrants are used by the media, political parties and other stakeholders to argue that such numbers of non-French speaking immigrants are a threat to the status of the language in Quebec. Similarly, such figures regarding source

countries illustrate an increased importance of non-Christian religions in population demographic, and are also used to portray such newcomers as a danger to the culture of the province. It is disappointing, because such figures as those shown in the language discussion above, show that most newcomers to the province are more often successful in integrating linguistically upon arrival than elsewhere in the country as well as are more often bilinguaL Rather than focus on such positive information as well as selected immigration figures, often political actors and the media that reports on their platforms give on-sided information (Mahtani, 2001). Therefore, the media is one player that has contributed to portrayal of an image of newcomers that led to the debate over reasonable accommodations and how much the nativeborn population should be willing to accommodate newcomers.

,.,

10

3. Literature Review Prior to undertaking this topic, I assumed that the representations of immigrants and visible minorities in the media would have been a widely studied topic, both in Quebec as well as elsewhere in the world. It has been surprising to see how little discussion there has been in the academic literature concerning to media portrayals of immigrants to Quebec in general, especially how much this subject is covered by the media. In this literature review, I will offer the various debates about what has been said about media portrayals of immigrants in Quebec and elsewhere, how the debate began, and how the debate in Quebec French media differs from discourses in other media outlets. The debate over reasonable accommodations is one that has always existed within the Canadian context. In The Making of the Afosaic (2000), this debate predates immigration as we know it today, back to the negotiations of how to accommodate the French Fact of Lower Canada into the Canadian Confederation during the 18th century. Although policymakers of the time would not have used the term 'reasonable accommodation', they were discussing how many protections should be awarded to the French Canadian population based on their unique language, religion (i.e. Catholicism), and legal code (i.e. civil law). The earliest official policy which attempted to appease the needs of French Canadians was the Quebec Act of 1774, and other protections have been allotted over the years in other policies, up until the modem day. In various other works, the reasonable accommodations debate is said to have begun with the 1985 Canadian Supreme Court case of the Ontario Human Rights
Commis~ion

v. Simpsons-

Sears (Nieguth & Lacassagne, 2009; McAndrew, 2010). These authors use this case as their starting point because it was the first instance where a legal intervention was required in settling the conflict between two groups regarding the accommodation of one's religious practices. Prior

11

to this case the legal institutionalization of the protection of religious rights, as enshrined in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, was non-existent and such a legal challenge would not have had any grounds upon which to build an argument. In Quebec there were a series of events including both legal challenges and news stories which led to the creation of the Bouchard-Taylor Commission on Reasonable Accommodations. As mentioned earlier, the cases of Emilie Ouimet and the adoption of the Herouxville Standards were two such incidents that were discussed widely in Quebec media discourse. There were also some individual cases of requests for accommodation, mostly requests relating to a request for religious accommodation, which were severely scrutinized in the media. While some authors acknowledge that these were not the first of such debates to exist in the province, the discourse surrounding these cases and the Commission in particular was very different from earlier public discourses on how to accommodate minorities, including immigrants (Nieguth & Lacassagne,
".~ I

'I

<,

"r

2009). The media plays a significant role in communicating discourses of identity, of both the self and the 'other' (Todd, 1998; Mahtani, 2001; Jiwani, 2005). This is important to remember, because while both producers and consumers of media are encouraged to believe that the purpose of media is to convey an objective and value-free representation of the world, media is inherently political and biased (Li, 2001; Mahtani, 2001). Below I discuss how this is demonstrated in a variety of media sources. Li (2001) argues that in a multicultural democracy such as Canada, racist discourses in the media are not overt in nature. Rather, Canadian media uses methods of "new racism", by which he means that the discourse will use coded terms (p. 78). Therefore, when discussing issues related to immigration the media will take for granted that Canadian mainstream culture is

12

a white, European, Judeo-Christian one, and as a consequence questions of diversity, or 'otherness', need to be negotiated since they are viewed in opposition to this norm and thus it is the requirement of the diverse ·other' which must be integrated into the mainstream. This is because it is assumed that immigrants from non-traditional sources ('them') have values and beliefs that are so much' different from the Canadian ones ('us'). Having taken a critical

discourse approaGh, the author warns that even when language appears more socially acceptable, the reader must always understand the hidden messages in the terms chosen as well as the context \vithin which these discourses arise.

Li also claims that the media use a variety of such techniques to 'other' immigrants and
visible minorities in covert ways that would not be considered obviously racist. He states, In this article, I examine the articulation of race in Canada's immigration discourse and argue that racial messages are often articulated subtly in a democratic society such that their nature, form, and effect are elusive. The use of racial subtext, that is, the hiding of racial signification in a penign discourse and conveying it in coded language, represents a sophisticated way of articulating 'race' in a democratic society that makes such articulation socially acceptable. (Li, 2001: 77-78) Opinion polls, conducted by private companies such Leger Marketing and Ipsos, are one such method incorporated by producers of media. These polls, based on the subjective responses given from an often uninformed populace, are then used to misinform the population on a topic with data that Li claims is not objective in nature. There is an argument to be made here that knowledge can never be objective. However, the knowledge being produced through such

methods as opinion polls is not based in research or theoretical understanding, but is generalized.
It is a vicious cycle, whereby the media take subjective information and pass it off onto an

unsuspecting public as objective truth, often further perpetuating the myth of the diverse and different 'other' in comparison to the normative "us". In addition, such opinion polls support the

13

use of racial categories in discourses about immigration. Finally, by using softer terms such as visible minorities as opposed to members of 'racial' categories, consumers of media are less likely to question the motives of the producer of the media. Mahtani (2001) states that 'traditional' forms of media do not allow for different or dissenting voices to be heard, rather than claiming that there is a hidden racist agenda. However, while the intent of producers of media is not necessarily to promote racist ideals, they do institutionalize racism through their ignorance and reinforcement of dominant discourses. There are two major problems she highlights in her article Representing lvlinorities: Canadian lvledia
and lvlinority Identities: under-representation and misrepresentation of minorities in media.

While her analysis is of visual media in particular, it could be transferred and applied to print media as well. In the case of the coverage of the Bouchard-Taylor Commission on Reasonable Accommodations, it is the latter misrepresentation which can be argued has been the greater problem. In this media discourse, immigrants as well as cultural and ethnic minorities were the topic du jour, where the discourse portrayed the levels of integration on the part of these popUlations as insufficient and therefore problematic.
It is common to hear people outside of academic circles say that the discourses about

immigration as a phenomenon and immigrants more specifically have changed since the attacks
> ""

of September 11th, 2001. Jiwani (2005) would seem to agree, in that the language used has changed in regards to 'us versus them'. Her emphasis was to focus on the language used about Muslims and Arabs in particular, and so her analysis does not apply to all immigrants to Canada.
It does reflect though how racism can become more overt even in a nation as 'tolerant', 'diverse',

or 'open' as Canada. She found that the language used in much of the media immediately following the September 11 th attacks emphasized the tolerance, democracy, and humanitarianism

14

of Canadians, while those who 'look like Muslims' (including Sikhs and Hindus, for example) did not exemplify such values. Therefore, the author's conclusion is that those values which Canadians hold dear are 'white' values, and even if the media did not make this point directly, the discourse which they created was that 'non-whites' will never be like
'US'.

According to the

literature explored above, the media can exert both covert and overt racist discourses. Certainly,. some of the claims made in the previous paragraphs apply in the context of Quebec media as well, although there are some differences. Thomas (1992) claims that while some of the differences in English and French-Canadian media are because of certain cultural and linguistic elements, the main reason for such difference can be explained through the institutionalized policy of media in Canada and Quebec. The Canadian Radio-television

Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) is the governing body of media for all regions including Quebec, although its regulations regarding the English and French sectors vary primarily in terms of content. These regulations, as well as dominant cultural interests, promote a greater emphasis on local news in Quebec in comparison to the rest of the country. Therefore, while English Canada receives most of its information from American and English Canadian media conglomerates, Quebec has its own media, therefore including a third source of information in the media mix. However, because the CRTC grants licensing to 'ethnic' media rather than regulating the inclusion of these voices in mainstream media, the opinions of newcomers are not readily available to either French or English Canadians through more mainstream channels. Todd (1998) and Helly (2004) have each done research, using content analysis and comparing French and English media, showing the differences in how French Quebecois and English Canadians obtain different information regarding the same debates. Through a

15

psychoanalytic lens, Todd investigates how English and French media discussed the right of wearing the hijab and other religious symbols in public schools in Quebec. In her analysis she discovered that the English daily in Montreal, The Gazette, listed Emily Ouimet's battle of the right to wear the hijab an issue of rights, briefly mentioned above. For a little background, Emily Ouimet was a 12-year-old convert to Islam who was forbidden to wear the hijab at her public high school, as all such symbols were not permitted. The French newspapers, Le Devoir and La

Presse, however were involved in a debate about confessional schools versus secular schools.
Their claim was that in Quebec's recent history of secularizing all state institutions, including public schools, that the right to any religious symbols should be banned outright.
It is

noteworthy that at the time Quebec was in the process of cutting education budgets and eliminating confessional school boards in lieu of secular, linguistic ones. Todd (1998) explains the difference in the following way. Debate in the French print media was a reflection of the greater debate which existed in Quebec at the time, where French-Quebecois were gaining greater control over their own nation-building project, and moving away from a history of domination and oppression. On the other hand, English newspapers were easy to jump to criticize anything said in the name of Quebec nationalism, and this debate fell under that discursive umbrella. In contrast to the above argument, Helly (2004) views French-Quebec media as being "less offensive and ambiguous" towards minorities, in this case Muslims, than English media in the rest of Canada (p. 19). The author interpreted that French news media often tended to include reasons for which the terrorist attacks of September 11 th happened, while English news media simply painted the terrorists as 'Islamic fundamentalists' who hate Western values. In regards to immigration policy, the Francophone news media were also less likely to make calls

16

for revision to current policies in order to protect 'us' from 'them'. This suggests that French media discourse tends to be more focused on the social context and understandings of an occurrence, and is inherently more open to critiquing the reasons for recent events in comparison to English language media in Canada. Such debates can affect the social integration of immigrants to Canada in several ways, both in forms of. pressures or barriers placed on newcomers as well as self-limiting actions. Esses et al. (200 1) explain how certain models or orientations of interaction between 'mainstream' society and 'out-groups', in this case immigrants, affect their ability to integrate. Immigrants may not be permitted to participate fully in their new society because members of the host society view 'them' as a threat or competition for scarce resources, as the authors explain through their Instrumental Model of Group Conflict. Media fuels such fears, especially among people whom the authors refer to as being of a Social Dominance Orientation, who believe in a natural hierarchy within the social order, where one group of individuals is superior to others for reasons that can include at best ability and intelligence, or at worst socially constructed differences such as 'race' and 'gender' for example. Once believed by enough people in the host society, these perceptions can affect policy or other factors which prevent the immigrant from full social integration. Greer and Jewkes (2005) as well as Wortley (2009) on the other hand would argue that it is through exclusion of newcomers into the 'mainstream' society that certain newcomers come to exhibit criminal or deviant behaviours. If newcomers are not permitted to fully participate in society, or even worse, face multiple discrimination barriers to accessing employment and so on, that they feel it necessary to commit crime in order to survive. This scenario is more common among underprivileged immigrant youth, who have very few outlets or resources to improve

1 I

I f

~

17

their social standing. Media contributes to the demonization of immigrants, portraying <them' as criminal, which further portrays the stereotype of newcomers as a threat. By further

institutionalizing such stereotypes, media allows for justification to treat newcomers as such. When media demonizes immigrants, it in essence it creates a self-fulfilling prophecy. The focus of this literature review has focused on the portrayal of immigrants and visible minorities, and therefore has emphasized the cultural debates surrounding the increased diversity in Canada as a result of immigration. While this has been the aim of this paper, Bauder (2008) would argue that this is not a fully accurate portrait of the debates surrounding immigration in this country. Based on his content analysis of English newspapers from across Canada,

excluding Quebec, he has found that the most important debates regarding immigration stems from both positive and negative opinions on the economic ramifications of existing policies and practices, humanitarian concerns, and worries about issues of national security. It remains to be seen if these debates are of similar importance in Quebec or, because of the nature of Quebec nationalism, if reasonable accommodations based on cultural practices are of greatet concern in the discourse on immigration policy.

4. Methodology
, !'"

To investigate how discourse differs between newspapers in the province in terms of the portrayal of immigrants as discussed in the reasonable accommodations debate, I will employ a content analysis of three newspapers: The Gazette, Le Solei!, and La Presse. The timeframe which will be analysed will cover the period of September 10th to December 14th, 2007, when the Bouchard-Taylor public consultations were taking place as well as one additional day of news following the final day of consultation to allow for any publishing delay. By juxtaposing the

18

discourses of English and French newspapers as well as between Montreal and regional newspapers, we may see how the reasonable accommodations debate in Quebec was portrayed differently within some of the different communities in the province. This method also allows for a broader understanding of what discourses existed in the province at the time, and provide some background to how such opposing discourses came about. Therefore, I have chosen to look at daily newspapers as they will have a more extensive coverage of the reasonable accommodations debate. For this reason, I draw on an English-language daily newspaper in Montreal, The Gazette (the only mainstream English daily in the province), the French-language daily newspaper La Presse (for an urban Francophone perspective) and, Quebec City'S largest daily, Le Solei! (for a regional perspective). In selecting my media sources, the hardest decision was settling on a French-language daily newspaper from MontreaL There are three mainstream daily French-language newspapers in Montreal: La Presse, Le Journal de Montreal, and Le
Devoir. I dismissed rather quickly the possibility of including Le Journal de Montreal as it is

commonly viewed as a 'tabloid' style of newspaper. This left me with the'other two to select from, however, La Presse has a larger circulation than Le Devoir among the population and hence its selection for my analysis. Overall, it has been found that La Presse is viewed as the preferred newspaper among people with higher levels of education and income, and hence compares more greatly to the readership of both The Gazette and Le Soleil does than either of the other French-language dailies I could have selected for this content analysis (Dunn, 1998). I have purposely chosen to exclude any newspapers that are viewed as 'ethnic' or 'alternative'. There are several reasons for this. First, there are no such newspapers in the province which are printed on a daily basis. Second, the readership of such newspapers is significantly less than the daily newspapers I have chosen to analyse. Finally, while all media

.

t .

J

i

~

I .

~

I

.~

19

generally have a target audience, 'ethnic' and 'alternative' media have a very specific target audience which means that much of the Quebec population has little or no access to them. Given that my goal is to study the mainstream media discourses, diverse media sources would be inappropriate for this research study, and would only lead to greater difficulty in understanding and critiquing the mainstream discourses. A content analysis, while not required to be of a mixed methods nature, often employs both quantitative and qualitative methods for data collection. I will begin quantitatively by taking count of how often keywords appear in all articles for the time period in the three selected newspapers. The initial list of keywords that I have chosen is simply reasonable

accommodations and Quebec, as well as its French equivalent accommodements raisonnables and Quebec. In order to search these keywords, I used two separate search indexes: Eureka in order to search within the two French-language papers, and Canadian Newsstand through Proquest to search The Gazette. The first point of analysis will be to determine the frequency at which these keywords appear and comparing this frequency between the three newspapers. It would be insufficient to employ solely such an analysis as it would not give a very descriptive account of how these issues are being discussed within the articles. Therefore, a second level of analysis is necessary. A qualitative analysis in the form of a critical discourse analysis of the contents of each article will follow and will allow for a greater understanding of themes found within the news articles containing the matching keywords (Fairclough, 1995; Chouliaraki and Fairclough, 1999). One of the main concerns for anyone employing a qualitative content analysis is the reliability of their results. This method is hard to replicate as the interpretation of the data, and even elements of the selection, are of a subjective nature in determining what themes and coding schemes

20

should be included. In order to ensure that my analysis is more reliable, I will summarize the selected articles using inductive category formation (Mayring, 2000). For example, given that I must first answer the question "What is the media discourse regarding reasonable accommodations in Quebec?" my first categories will be divided among the different discourses. Some themes that I suspect may arise would refer to social, economic, political and cultural integration, and that these articles would argue either favourably for reasonable accommodations of immigrants who require special accommodation, and articles which argued against such accommodations for newcomers. Once these initial categories have been determined, then a second level of analysis is done for each theme to divide them into more specific sub-themes. In this way, the interpretation of the data can be more specific and reliable, in that the steps could more easily be replicated by others which would lead to similar findings. In order to qualitatively analyse the media discourse within the selected newspapers, I will employ a critical discourse analysis approach. Fairclough (1995), the developer of this theoretical approach, argues that there is a symbiotic relationship between media and the society within which it is generated. Therefore when studying media discourse researchers must

perform an "intertextual analysis" whereby the discourse must be looked at with an understanding of the social. and cultural context from where it arises (p. 61). This is required regardless of the text being studied, which the author specifies can be anything found in media: images, written text, audio-visual, or any other vehicle through which the media discourse is being communicated (p. 58). Not only should media discourse be analysed with an

understanding of the context in which it is generated, but also it should be compared. To analyse simply one discourse allows for description, yet it lacks in-depth understanding without comparison to other discourse, either within media or social discourses.

21

Thus, the articles analysed in this literature review have been chosen because of their critical reading of existing media discourse. Some of the articles reviewed are not of a critical theoretical approach; however, they do contribute to a direct analysis of media discourse in regards to the creation of the 'other', and are therefore useful in this paper. Where possible, I have noted the lack of critical analysis in these works.

5. Findings
5.1 Quantitative Analysis

Figure 1· Articles Found with Selected Keywords

200 180 +-----...-----~----...

140 + - - - -..- - - - . 120 100 80
60
· Total Articles Found
!!If

Articles Selected for Analysis

40
;

'

..

20

o
The Gazette
La Presse LeSoleil

The first step of inputting my selected keywords, reasonable accommodations and Quebec, as well as the French equivalents, accommodements raisonnables and Quebec in the two search indexes, Eureka and Canadian Newsstand, yielded a total of 414 articles in the three

22

Thus, the articles analysed in this literature review have been chosen bl!cause of thl!ir critical reading of existing media discomse. Some of the articles reviewed are not of a critical theoretical approach; however. they do contribute to a direct analysis of media discourse in regards to
th~

creation of the 'other', and are therefore useful in this paper. Where possible, I

have noted the lack of critical analysis in these works.

5. Findings

5.1 Quantitative Analysis

Figure 1- Articles Found with Selected Keywords

200 180 160 140 120 100 80 60 40 20

~--------------------------------------~

+---------------~ +---------------~

· Total Articl es Found
· Articles Selec t ed for Analysi s

o
Th e Ga ze tte

La Presse

Le Sol ei I

The first step of inputting my selected keywords, reasonable accommodations and Quebec, as well as the French equivalents, accommodements raisonnables and Quebec in the two search indexes, Eureka and Canadian Newsstand , yielded a total of 414 articles in the three

22

newspapers for the selected dates. As can be seen from the above table (Figure 1) the number of articles in each newspaper varied slightly: La Presse published the most with 186 articles, The
Gazette published 129 related articles, and Le Solei! provided the least number of articles

containing the selected keywords with 99 articles. Given the similarity in the size of the three newspapers, the difference in the number of articles containing the keywords chosen could lead to the impression that La Presse was more interested in covering the Bouchard-Taylor Commission that was touring the province. However, after individually looking at each news article in order to determine those that pertained to the coverage of the Commission itself, the numbers between the three papers becomes much more comparable: La Presse published 38 articles, Le Solei! printed 36 relevant articles, and The Gazette published 31 articles covering the discussions held within the framework of the Bouchard-Taylor Commission. Syndicated news articles were also eliminated for the reason that I wanted to know how these newspapers covered the Commission, and syndicated articles are written by journalists from other newspapers. Therefore the total nUmber of articles kept for further analysis was 105 articles. When looking at the findings from the quantitative analysis it may be noted that while La
Presse perhaps was interested in the issue of reasonable accommodations in comparison to the

1

,

f

!

i f

~

~ " " ~

.

other newspapers, all three newspapers showed similar interest in providing coverage of the Commission itself. The original number of articles discussing reasonable accommodations

overall was higher in the former newspaper, but when controlling for only original articles covering the debate in the confines of the Bouchard-Taylor Commission, there was little variability between the newspapers. Given that the purpose of this paper is to analyze the newsprint media's coverage of a particular event, it can perhaps be explained that the coverage

23

*

we

wz=ro rr

correlates with the dates where a public consultation was held or when a large organization presented a written brief to the commissioners. With the articles for further analysis determined, a coding scheme was necessary in order to determine what some of the common themes may be. Because there was very little literature regarding the idea of reasonable accommodation and therefore a lack of a model which to follow or themes known to have arose in the past, it was decided that it would be wise to begin with larger themes. Therefore, in the initial stage of coding the four umbrella themes were religion and secularism; politics, rights and legislation; socio-economic and cultural integration; and tolerance, diversity and other (see Figure 2), These themes were then subdivided into smaller more specific categories afterward in order to allow for in-depth analysis within each theme and between the newspapers.

Figure 2· Coding Scheme

l. ~~.~.e'~.::~b:.~C(:::ddtions J
..
Relision and

,
'Politics. Rights an legjslation

I

Tolerance and

Sewlarism

OIver$it(, and,

:'merJ

I

I

24

com~lates

withLhe dates where a public consultation was held or when a large organization

presented a vvritten brief to the commissioners. \Vith the articles for further analysis determined, a coding scheme was necessary in order to determine what some of the common themes may be. Because there was very little literature regarding the idea of reasonable accommodation and therefore a lack of a model which to follow or themes known to have arose in the past, it was decided that it would be wise to begin with larger themes. Therefore, in the initial stage of coding the tour umbrella themes were religion and secularism; politics, rights and legislation; socio-economic and cultural integration: and tolerance, diversity and other (see Figure 2). These themes were then subdivided into smaller more specific categories afterward in order to allow for in-depth analysis within each theme and between the newspapers.

Figure 2 - Coding Scheme

Reisonabk- AC(Ollllllodatiom

R..1is ion and

Secularism

Politi(s. Rights and legislation

Soao-Economic and Cultural Integration

Tol .. ranc .. and

Oiversit/. and «ther

24

Based on how often certain themes were discussed in each paper, ignoring for now the analysis of the way in which they were discussed, La Presse and The Gazette seem to have more in common than either of them do with the coverage provided by Le Soleil. The latter newspaper discussed most themes less or equally as much as the other two newspapers with few exceptions (see Figure 3). Within the larger theme of political rights and legislation, Le Solei! discussed two subcategories more than the other two newspapers: voting rights and other political rights. In all of the subcategories within the religion theme Le Soleil provided less coverage, except when discussing issues of secularism, or lai'cite, with over 10 per cent more articles than the two Montreal newspapers. The last general theme, socio-economic integration, saw some

circumstances where the Quebec City daily discussed particular subcategories more frequently than The Gazette but less than La Presse: education and employment.

Figure 3· Percentage of Articles Dedicated to Each Theme in the Total Coverage

100% 90% 80% 70% 60% · Tolerance, Diversity, and Other

50%
40% 30%
~--o.

· Socio·Economic and Cultural Integration
~ Polities, Rights and Legislation

· Religionand Secularism 20% 10% 0% The Gazette La Presse leSoleil

25

Based on how often certain themes were discussed in each paper, ignoring for now the analysi s of the way in which they were discussed , La fresse and The Gazette seem to have more in common than either of them do with the coverage provided by Le Solei!' The latter newspaper discussed most themes less or equally as much as the other two newspapers with few exceptions (see Figure 3). Within the larger theme of political rights and legislation. Le Soleil discussed two subcategories mOJ:e than the other two newspapers: voting rights and other political rights. In all of the subcategories within the religion theme Le Solei! provided less coverage, except when discussing issues of secularism. or laYeite, with over 10 per cent more articles than the two Montreal newspapers. The last general theme, socio-economic integration. saw some

circumstances where the Quebec City daily discussed particular subcategories more frequently than The Gazelle but less than La Presse: education and employment.

Figure 3 - Percentage of Articles Dedicated to Each Theme in the Total Coverage

100% 90% 80% 70% 60% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0% The Gazette La Presse Lc Soleil · Tolerance, Div ersity, and Other

· Socio-Economic and Cultural Integration Politics, Rights and Legislation

· Religion and Secularism

25

The other two newspapers were similar in most categories, particularly within the themes of political rights and legislation, and religion (see Figure 4). For example, in regards to issues of language and linguistic integration, both The Gazette and La Presse saw nearly identical coverage in terms of the number of articles covering this debate. These numbers represent over twice as much coverage of these issues as discussed in Le Soleil. This is also the case for the coverage of issues discussing the gender equality sub-theme, The two newspapers differed from one another more greatly when looking at the subcategories within the social integration theme.
The Gazette published nearly twice as many articles as La Presse where discussions about the

ability of immigrants to integrate socially were the theme; this number was over twice as high when comparing with Le Soleil. The sub-theme of healthcare saw very little discussion by The
Gazette whereas La Pre sse discussed this topic over seven times more frequently.

Figure 4 - References per Newspaper, by Theme

100

90 80
70

~-----------------------

· Religion and Secularism

60
iii

Politics, Rights and Legislation

50 40
· Socio-Economic and Cultural Integration · Tolerance, Diversity, and Other

30

20 10

o
The Gazette La Presse LeSoleil

26

The other two newspapers were similar in most categories, particularly within the themes of political rights and legislation, and religion (see Figure 4). For example,
In

regards to issues

of language and linguistic integration, both The Gazette and La Pre sse saw nearly Identical coverage in terms of the number of articles covering this debate. These numbers represent over twice as much coverage of these issues as discussed in Le Solei!. This IS also the case for the coverage of issues discussing the gender equality sub-theme. The two newspapers differed from one another more greatly when looking at the subcategories within the social integration theme.
The Gazelle published nearly twice as many articles as La Presse where discussions about the

ability of immigrants to integrate socially were the theme; this number was over twice as hIgh when comparing with Le Solei! . The sub-theme of healthcare saw very little discussion by The
Gazelle whereas La Presse discussed this topic over seven times more frequently.

Figure 4 - References per Newspaper, by Theme

100

90 80 70 60 50
· Reli gion and Seculari sm

Politics, Rights and Leg islation

40
30 20

· Socio-Economic and Cultural IntegrLltion · Tolerance, Diversity, and Oth er

10

o
Th e Gazett e La Presse Le Solei I

26

There is one particularity in tenns of the frequency of codes which cannot be explained without any further investigation. Le Solei! has significantly less coverage of all themes overall than either of the other newspapers, even though a similar number of articles were found to discuss the Bouchard-Taylor Commission debates. In order to avoid themes which would

remain non-coded, I created an 'other' theme for those themes which would appear sporadically with little
frequen~y

and did not fit into any of the other themes or sub-themes. Even within this

'other' category, Le Solei! showed significantly fewer occurrences. The two general themes that were discussed with the most frequency in all newspapers were issues of religion and secularism, and socio-economic and cultural integration (see Figure 4). Within these themes, certain subcategories were discussed with more vigour than others. In the religion and secularism theme, Islam and secularism were discussed with the greatest frequency. While in the socio-economic and cultural integration theme, social integration was discussed most often. Tolerance and diversity was the subcategory with the most references; however, even though the general theme was not the most discussed. This can be explained by the lack of subcategories within this general theme.

. .
~

2 , .

.

27

Figure 4 - References per Theme, by Newspaper

100 90
80

,---------~------------------------------------_,
~----.-----------+-.--~-~----------

70 +---------------60

50
40 30

i--·--··-~---~--······----··-··-···--

· The Gazette
iii

La Presse

· LeSoleil

20

10

o
Tolerance, Diversity, and Other Socio-Economic and Cultural Integration Politics, Rights and Legislation Religion and Secularism

As discussed in the methods section, it would be insufficient to employ only a quantitative analysis of the data obtained from the newspaper coding. It has allowed me to understand what topics may be of greater interest to the Francophone or Anglophone
"

communities, and of interest to the Montreal urban area or in the regions. This does not explain the way in which these topics have been discussed; the quantitative method has only sho,",TI what themes have been included and by comparing between the newspapers, which themes have been

,,

~,

.

neglected by each daily.

In the following section I shall discuss how these themes were

discussed which shall demonstrate further differences between the three newspapers.

5.2 Qualitative Analysis

Quantitative analysis allows for understanding not only of the frequency of an event or occurrence, but also the content of that event or occurrence. In this way we can obtain greater

28

Figure 4 - References per Theme, by Newspaper

100 90 80

70
60

50
40

· The Gazette La Presse · Le Sol ei!

30
20

10

o
Tol erance, Div ersi ty, an d Other Socio-Econom ic and Cult ural Int egration Politi cs , Right s and Leg isl ation Religion and Secularism

As discussed in thernethods section, it would be insufficient to employ only a quantitative analysis of the data obtained from the newspaper coding. It has allowed me to understand what topics may be of greater interest to the Francophone or Anglophone
to

communities, and of interest to the Montreal urban area or in the regions . This does not explain the way in which these topics have been discussed; the quantitative method has only shown what themes have been included and by c')mparing between the newspapers, which themes have bee'1 neglected by each daily . In the following section I shall discuss how these themes were

discussed which shall demonstrate further differences between the three newspapers.

5.2 Qualitative Analysis
Quantitative analysis allows for understanding not only of the frequency of an event or occurrence, but also the content of that event or occurrence. In this way we can obtain greater

28

information about the phenomena being studied and a more accurate explanation can be provided of what it is that is being studied. Here I shall elaborate on the results highlighted in the quantitative section of this paper, and provide some insight in regard to how immigrants were being discussed in the context of these newspaper articles (Mayring, 2000; Cresswell, 2009).

5.2.1 Religion and, Secularism Religion and secularism was one of the themes discussed the most often and with some of the most extreme opinions. More specifically, Islam was the religion most often attacked, although persons practicing the Jewish or Sikh faiths were not excluded from the debate. Overtly, participants at the Bouchard-Taylor Commission expressed fear of an increase of religious accommodations requests upon the state and the influence of Islam on Quebec society as a whole. At the Commission hearing held in Laval in November 2007, one mother expressed her fear in regards to educators being permitted to wear religious dress; Children are sponges, and ifmy children are taught by someone (who is Muslim), they'll start asking themselves who they are [... ] And since I'm trying to be open with them, they risk being influenced by someone with a stronger religious identity who's with them all day." 4
.; .

Of all references made to Islam in The Gazette, approximately one-third of all quotes were overtly intolerant, or based in ignorance or prejudice. The article from which the quote above was taken dedicated fifteen per cent of the word count to the fears of this one mother. In addition, the same article included the comments of a participant who listed Muslims at the bottom of the list of 'preferred' immigrants, behind "Latinos and Haitians and Asians [who] know how to be part of the Quebec melting pot"s. Even further, in a separate article, a Jonquiere

.

Heinrich, 1. (2007, Nov. 15). Mother considers teachers in hijabs a threat; Concerned over 'bath of cultures', Accommodation hearings continue in Laval. The Gazette, p, A 7 5 Ibid.
4

29

man was quoted, "Are we going to tolerate foreigners who come here and impose the burqa? ... If you don't like it, you can go home.,,6 Very few (just over 1 in 10) references portrayed Muslims in a positive light, and just as few criticized media, politicians and other actors who have contributed to the portrayal of Muslims in a negative way.
Le Solei! and La Presse included coverage of opinions that were far more critical of those '

who spoke against minority religious groups. This does not mean that these papers were not guilty of including commentaries or quotes that were overtly racist or ignorant along the same vein found in The Gazette; only that these newspapers provided more balanced coverage of the diverging opinions expressed at the Commission. Some coverage overlaps between two or even all three of these newspapers, particularly some of the most shockingly discriminatory ones or stories of lived discrimination. Nearly half of the references to Islam in both French newspapers either criticized the media for their portrayals of Muslims in a negative light or criticized those who argued in favour of a ban on the hijab in the name of gender equality. Following the November 26th. public consultation in Montreal, Le Solei! dedicated an entire article to a retired political science professor's comments blaming the media for spreading false representations, Ceux qui s'affolent son ceux qui ont acces a ces phenomenes par Ie biais des medias, et non ceux qui les vivent. L'expression du soi-disant malaise vient d'endroits OU it n'y en a pas de probleme. Herouxville, ou Ie debat a commence l'hiver dernier, en est un exemple. Alors, si on se demande pourquoi les gens d'Herouxville sont mal a l'aise, on est oblige de repondre: 'Parce qu'ils regardent la television.' C'est aussi simple que 'Ya [... J. On voit rarement des femmes portent la burqa a Montreal, mais on en voit beaucoup a la television, et de loin,7il est facile de s'imaginer que Montreal peut finir par ressembler aKaboul.
6

Heinrich, J. (2008, Sept. 20). Flood of immigrants feared; Hearings in Saguenay. Secular society, Roman Catholic heritage in peril, Taylor-Bouchard commission told. The Gazette, p. A8.

7 Cliche, J.-F. (2007, Nov. 27). "Quel malaise?" demande Louis Balthazar. Le Soleil, p. 8. Translation: Those who are in a panic are those who obtain information about such phenomena through the media and are not those who live them. The expression of the so-called unease live in areas who do not have any ofthese problems. Herouxville, where the debate commenced last winter is an example. So if we ask why people in Herouxville are uneasy, we must answer 'that it is because they watch television'. It is as simple as that ... We

30

This quote demonstrates some of the frustration felt towards the media that would have the population believe that immigration, particularly of certain groups such as Muslims, is problematic. The professor who made this statement shows his opposition to fear mongering that portrays both Muslims in a negative light elsewhere, and then paints Muslim newcomers with the same brush, hence contributing to a moral panic 8 where immigrants are a group to be feared. Most of the literature reviewed earlier discussed the concept of moral panics to some· extent, without necessarily using that term, and how the media through biased and discriminatory portrayals of certain groups can lead to the sense that the status quo is being threatened (Todd, 1998; Esses et aI, 2001; Li, 2001; Mahtani, 2001; Helly, 2004; Greer and Jewkes, 2005; Jiwani, 2005; Cisneros, 2008; Nieguth and Lacassagne, 2009; Wortley, 2009). Of the eleven articles where Islam was discussed within the coverage of the Bouchard-Taylor Commission in Le Solei/, only two entire articles were dedicated to the voices of those who spoke out to defend Muslims and challenge the stereotypes that had been made public to that point. As with most topics or themes, there is not a dichotomy of opinions but rather a range from one extreme to the other. La Presse provided such coverage more so than the other newspapers, including articles not only either for or against religious accommodation, nor articles that either challenge or explain the discourse. There were several articles which both challenged the understanding of religious minorities and accommodations through the propagation of the stereotype proposed in the media and elsewhere, "Des;us par Ie Quebec, des immign!s musulmans se radicalisent dans les mosquees. Et ce n'est pas seulement de leur faute. 'C'est la faute de nos structures d'accueil incapabJes de repondre aux besoins de ces gens.' Et
rarely see women wearing burqas in Montreal, but we see many of them on television, and it is not so hard to imagine that Montreal may one day look like Kaboul. 8 Term coined by Cohen (1972), which means "a condition, episode, person or group of persons [who] become defined as a threat to societal values and interests" (p. 9).

.

". .

31

s'il y a des mariages forces dans certaines communautes installees au Quebec, c'est aussi parce que Ie Quebec integre mal ses immigres.,,9 This quote, elaborated on following the public consultation held in St-Jerome, north of Montreal, was made by a social worker in the region who assists newcomers to integrate. The majority of the article was dedicated to her understanding of the integration problems that immigrants face, and how in tum this leads to other problems such as a sense of exclusion on behalf of the immigrant as well as misunderstandings between immigrant and host communities, therefore greater acceptance and understanding of diversity is required. At the same time, this quote is problematic as it assumes that practices not traditionally part of Quebec's culture are inferior or backwards. La Presse dedicated the majority of an article to this discussion, elaborating on the challenges of newcomer integration in the region, while neither of the other newspapers mentioned the attendance of this social worker who had much knowledge to contribute. The most common debate regarding religion mentioned during the Bouchard~ Taylor Commission had little to do with how to accommodate the religious accommodations requested, but rather whether such accommodations should take place at all in public institutions such as schools and the civil service given the secular nature of the state. A variety of suggestions were proposed in terms of how to proceed in this regard, all of which would have effects on
,,;,

newcomers who belong to minority religious groups.

Touzin, C. (2007, Sept. 26). Le Quebec "integre mal" ses immigres. La Presse, p. AlO. Translation: "Disappointed by Quebec, Muslim immigrants are becoming more radical through their mosques. And it is not only their fault. 'It is the fault of our reception structures which are incapable of assisting them in their needs.' And if there are arranged marriages in certain communities in Quebec, it is also because Quebec integrates poorly its immigrants."
9

32

5.2.2 Socio-Economic and Cultural Integration Under the umbrella theme of socio-economic and cultural integration, there were several themes discussed which were expected given the day-to-day debates that have existed in Quebec for decades: language and social integration. Perhaps it is because Montreal is the most diverse city in the province and the main reception centre for immigrants to the province that both of these themes were. more widely written about in The Gazette and La Presse in comparison to Le
Soleil.

The latter category overlapped with several other categories, and therefore I shall

elaborate only on the language category. In the latter newspaper, language was only mentioned eleven times in the entire period of the coverage of the Bouchard-Taylor Commission. In over half of those references, language was mentioned as part of a list of Quebec values or cultural characteristics that are essential to protect. In these articles there was no direct mention as to whether there was a greater need to select immigrants on the basis of French-language skills, or to provide improved language training to newcomers. The remainder of the articles included proposals on how to improve linguistic integration, without overtones of fear of immigrants as a threat to the survival ofthe French language in the province. Only one article quoted a Jonquiere man who spoke directly to this fear, "La crise des accommodements resulte de l'insecurite ressentie par les Quebecois it l'egard du franyais"JO. In essence this quote states that the entire reasonable accommodation debate is the result of linguistic insecurity felt as a result of increased immigration, and that immigrants must be encouraged to acquire higher levels of French language competencies.
The Gazette's references to language had less to do with covering what was said in the

presentations before the Commission and more to do with which language the presenters spoke.
10 Giroux, R. (2007, Sept. 12). Le debat religieux al'avant-scene. Le Soleil, p. 7. Translation: "The accommodation crisis is the result of the insecurities of the Quebecois in regards to the French language."

33

Le Solei! did not mention what language a presenter spoke, including when the participant spoke

a language other than French. On the other hand, The Gazette highlighted much more frequently the language spoken by a participant in the Commission when it was a language other than French, and kept count of how many such presentations took place. This newspaper included

some harsh comments made by participants at the Commission against those who do not speak. French, proposals for discriminatory legislation, and some of the consequences faced by newcomers who do not speak the official language of the province sufficiently. There was only one article that offered a historical explanation as to why the Quebecois fear certain 'types' of immigrants; as mentioned in the demographics section of this paper, prior to Quebec obtaining control over immigration destined for its territory, most newcomers integrated into the Anglophone community, and this situation has only recently changed. \Vhile this may appear to be an unfounded or irrational fear, as well as one based potentially in discrimination, it is viewed as a very real threat in the province. Not only did La Presse provide greater coverage than Le Solei! in terms of the number of articles where the language theme was found, but it also offered a greater variety of coverage in terms of opinions than The Gazette. Like the other two newspapers, there was some reporting on those who view many immigrants as a threat to the French language in the province and the
,,':..
"

.

Quebec nation, as well as discriminatory comments towards those who do not speak the language; this represented a minority, only five of over thirty references. Unlike the other newspapers, La Presse included discussions regarding the right to interpreters, as well as the challenges and problems faced in the healthcare system and other public institutions used by those immigrants who do not speak French and perhaps have limited English skills as well. Also included were some articles which made reference to linguistic integration success stories, the

34

need to reinforce or modify existing language laws, and some suggestions regarding ways to improve language courses and the overall French-language ability of newcomers.

5.2.3 Tolerance, Diversity, and Other Under the theme of "tolerance, diversity and other" the media category received little discussion, but it is directly relevant to the topic of this research study and hence its inclusion in the analysis here. Most articles included discussions of media portrayals of immigrants and had in common that these portrayals playa negative role in contributing to the discourse. Media portrays immigrants, religious and visible minorities in a stereotypical way and upholds the status quo, rather than challenging existing stereotypes. The aim of the private, mainstream media is to maximize profits like other private corporations, and therefore must sensationalize the subject of immigration to ensure increased readership and profits. The coverage of the Bouchard-Taylor Commission within the media was criticized primarily for its one-sided portrayal of Muslims, 'and this was the case in all newspapers, as can be seen in quotes such as the following, Faut-il vraiment, au nom de la democratie, ecouter des aneries que I'on condamnerait autrement, du genre: tlJe suis oblige d'endurer les musulmans." Le genre de propos que tout journal responsable refuse de publier dans ses pages du courrier des lecteurs. 11 Both The Gazette and Le Solei! discussed the media's role prior to the commencement of the Commission with little coverage of the comments made by participants regarding the media coverage of the Commission itself. In this regard, La Presse differed significantly. Not only did this newspaper quote participants more often in regard to the criticism of media portrayals of
Marissal, Vincent (2007, Sept. 13), Le "freak show". La Presse, p. A7. Translation: "Must we really, in the name of democracy, listen to this garbage that we would normally condemn, in the vein of' I have to endure Muslims'. This is the type of sentiment that all responsible newspapers refuse to publish in their letters to the editor section.
11

35

minorities within the framework of the Bouchard-Taylor Commission, but it also dedicated entire articles and editorials criticizing these portrayals. Because these latter articles did not directly report on the occurrences of the Commission they were not included in my analysis for this paper, yet I thought it interesting to mention here that this newspaper dedicated a fairlyregular column to criticize media coverage, including its own. As Li (2001) states overt racism, in discourse is inconceivable in a democracy, and hence a possible explanation for the lack of references which could be coded in this theme. The last theme I shall discuss here is the one that all three newspapers mentioned the most often. It is also the theme that had some of the most varied type of comments with some of the most positive coverage and quotes, as well as some of the most negative and prejudicial: the tolerance and diversity theme. This theme also has the most articles which include quotes or

coverage of the opinions of newcomers and minorities themselves. As some have alleged, the media has provided coverage of some overtly racist or discriminatory language, which was discussed briefly in our analysis of the media theme. When 1 use the term overt, I mean that the newspapers have provided a direct quote or comment where a participant stated a discriminatory opinion where an entire group of people was portrayed in a stereotypical manner. The Gazette included these direct quotes most often, more than twice as often as the two French newspapers, for a total of seven references in this newspaper alone. What is rather interesting is that in all newspapers there are more references to comments made accusing the Bouchard-Taylor Commission of giving a medium for racists to air their grievances than there are quotes that are overtly racist. Often included
In

this theme were personal anecdotes gIven by newcomers and

individuals belonging to other minority groups who spoke to the discrimination they have faced

36

in their day-to-day lives both prior to and since the debate on reasonable accommodations in the province began. The group who spoke the most to this effect, according to all three newspapers were Muslims, both native and foreign-born. These testimonies come into direct contradiction with those comments made in favour of diversity and acceptance, particularly those participants who spoke as though no tensions between the majority and various minority groups existed. Unfortunately, th~ number of commentaries and quotes made in support of existing or greater diversity were represented in only fifteen per cent of all coverage of the reasonable accommodations debate, with only nineteen references in all three newspapers pushing in favour of greater acceptance for either immigration or reasonable accommodations. Here were some surprising results given the findings in the other themes. In the case of how much coverage was provided regarding calls for greater diversity, The Gazette had the highest number of references, with seven articles dedicating a portion of each article to this theme. Le Solei! and La Presse had an equal number of six references in favour of greater diversity and acceptance, which translates
j

overall to La Presse having the lowest proportion (15 per cent) of articles where this theme was included, and Le Solei! having the highest proportion (19 per cent). As can be seen from these numbers there was only a slight variation between all three newspapers. Most comments made by participants with a discriminatory tone were less overt. Instead, participants taking the microphone at the Commission used language of fear and stereotypes. Terms such as malaise, which translates to 'unease' in English was used relatively often, and can be seen as a word which is not as harsh a term perhaps as fear, . discomfort, or unwillingness. An example of how this term was used to describe one's feelings of fear towards certain minority groups, while avoiding overtly discriminatory terms was given by Bloc
Quebecois leader, Gilles Duceppe, who said he felt, "mal it Paise avec les habits qui empeche

I

·
:! , ~:
L'

~'f

i

~

· · · " ".
~ :1

~i

.'

37

l'identification, comme la burqa et Ie niqab".12 This same observation about the use of more politically-correct language was highlighted by an activist belonging to the group No One Is Illegal (a group advocating for status for all persons) during one of the public consultation sessions held in Montreal, The very assumption that immigrants need to be informed of values such as equality of the sexes assumes and implies that immigrants have a lesser ability to understand basic principles of'vivre ensemble'. And in that sense it's racist because it assumes [immigrants] are uncivilized, backwards. 13 By masking racist language in the guise of 'malaise' such opinions as the one expressed by Mr. Duceppe are rendered acceptable and even valid as it can be argued as a legitimate concern rather than stereotyping or discrimination. Many of those comments which propagated

stereotypes or used covert discriminatory language would have been excluded from this theme, as here my goal was to analyse that language which was overtly racist and did not require subjective interpretation in order to determine whether language was discriminatory. However, to assume that the effects of such discourse are less damaging would be inaccurate.

6. Discussion As proposed by Fairclough (1995), when analysing media discourse it is important to take into account several factors such as language, social context, as well as to acknowledge what information has been excluded; it is imperative to look at the whole picture instead of doing only a linguistic analysis, for example. A linguistic analysis in this case in particular would

provide an unclear understanding of how immigration and immigrants were portrayed in the media discourse since we are analysing newspapers of different languages, and that certain
12 Cliche, Jean-Fran~ois (2007, Dec. 12). Accommodements raisonnabJes: Duceppe ouvert aux signes religieux dans la function pUblique. Ie Solei!, pp. 11 13 Mennie, James (2007, Dec. 11). Moral commitment document doesn't mention our problems; "Information on poverty and lack of access to health care might be useful." The Gazette, pp. A4

38

words do not translate in exact terms, or may not hold the same social or cultural meaning. Without analysing the social context from which the language stems from only a partial understanding of the overall meaning is clear. In the background sections, I highlighted some details of the immigration demographics in Quebec in addition to some of the history and structure of the reasonable accommodations debate and the res}llting Bouchard-Taylor Commission. Throughout this section I will draw on some of this information as well as insert additional explanations to help understand some of the comments made at the Commission as well as why one newspaper may have selected to include certain information and not other details. Before continuing any further, much of the coverage and quotes do not point the finger directly at immigration or immigrants. In Quebec though, much like elsewhere in the world, visible and other minorities are viewed as 'other" as immigrants would be considered, whether that be the case or not (Greer and Jewkes, 2005; Fall and Vignaux, 2008). Therefore, the discussion of such minorities in these newspapers is
I I

pertinent to this discussion as I am trying to understand how the Quebecois view wHo they define as immigrant or 'other', and how the newspapers covered this debate. Vvl1en discussing the results listed above in terms of relationships or correlations, it would seem that certain topics are perhaps of more interest to Francophones and others may be of greater interest to those living in the Montreal urban area. For instance, Le Solei! provided less overall coverage of the Commission itself, and less coverage of all themes except for one: secularism. Perhaps in the regions where reasonable accommodations for religious minorities are not an everyday occurrence, the debate over how secular the state and its institutions should be is of greater significance. The quantitative analysis alone would lead to some

t.:

misinterpretation however in certain circumstances. While the two Montreal newspapers showed

39

similar interest in the language theme in terms of the number of articles discussing this subject, the two Francophone newspapers show more resemblance in terms of content, which shall be elaborated on later in this section. There are other topics where no clear relationship appears to exist as the number of articles discussing a specific theme or subcategory is higher for only one newspaper, or where all newspapers provided similar coverage. An example would be healthcare, a category which fell under the socio-economic and cultural integration theme. Here La Presse demonstrated a far greater interest in this topic than did either of the other newspapers. Does this mean that this newspaper covered the debates in greater depth, or that the journalists from the other newspapers did not report on a greater range of issues that were raised at or presented to the Commission? Let me elaborate on why certain themes may be of greater interest to be discussed in the media discourse as a whole, or why a given newspaper is attracted to one theme within the greater debate, based on its target audience or the group with which it identifies.

6.1 La nation qUlzbecoise (The Quebec Nation)

The goal of finding a means to allow for greater integration of newcomers and minority groups, as was the purpose of the Bouchard-Taylor Commission was and is to allow for a more harmonious Quebec nation. Commissioner Bouchard (1999) himself has written on this subject rather extensively in his career. He views the concept of la nation quebecoise as not a fixed identity, but rather one that is in flux as well as is in need of more change. Traditionally, the idea of a Quebec nation was one based on ethnicity, religion, and history; the Quebecois were viewed as Francophone, Catholic, and have in common that they had colonized the territory of New France. Bouchard argues that this traditional view is both false and in need of further change to

40

reflect the diverse history and increasing diversity of the province.

The change towards a

pluralistic view began at the beginning of what is known as La revolution tranquille. 14 However, a civic concept of the nation would not be any more viable in the Quebec context, as it is too individualistic and does not allow for a collective Qw?becois identity. Therefore, la nation
quebecoise is and should continue to progress towards a more inclusive definition of 'us': a

French-speaking s!)ciety (in the public sphere) comprised of a plurality of ethnicities and histories including First Nations, Anglophones, and newcomers. There are still advocates of each definition of this collective identity or nationhood, and hence some of the difference in how immigrants are viewed, either as a threat or as 'one of us'.

6.2 Religion

When attempting to understand why people would view the place of religion in our society in a specific way or how they view religious minorities, the majority of which are viewed as being immigrants, we must investigate certain elements of Quebec culture and history. Until the 1960s the province was predominantly Catholic. The Church was responsible for providing public services that were regulated in other provinces by their respective governments such as education and welfare services. The economy was controlled mostly by English-speaking entrepreneurs who employed French-speaking Quebecois in low-skilled and low-paying jobs. Eventually tired of working for the English 'other', the population decided it was time to take control over their collective well-being, which included rejecting the Church as it was viewed as one of the institutions that had helped keep the Quebecois in a position of subservience. The Church had for generations encouraged large families and that people be content with their lot, however

14 The Quiet Revolution, which took place during the 1950s and 1960s, was a period ofmodemization and secularization in the province of Quebec, in both the public and private spheres.

41

simple their lives may be.

While the promotion of large families had allowed for French

Canada's population to grow at exponential rates, it prevented economic growth in the hands of this population who often lived in more rural areas on family farms or working factory jobs in the city and living in cramped dwellings (Kelley and Trebilcock, 2000). Yet, while most

Quebecois no longer consider themselves to be 'practicing' Catholics, the religion is an

important part of the history and cultural practices of province, and hence key to the traditional definition of fa nation. Any discussion about the place of religion in public life would be a 'hotbutton' topic, but when discussing the place of other religions an added dimension comes into play. Given the number of references against religious accommodation, as well as the number of people who made legislative and other suggestions either in favour of secularism or in protection of Quebec's Catholic heritage, it would be appropriate to discuss the ramifications of
l~~;
~,~,

some of these proposals made before the Commission. Currently, the freedom of religion is

"~~r 4 1

II~i~'

.

enshrined in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms as well as the Quebec Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms (Bouchard and Taylor, 2008). If a religious accommodation were refused or if the province were to pass legislation placing limits on religious practice, there would be recourse for those seeking to protect their religious rights, and hence it would be difficult to elaborate on how immigrants would be affected based on such suggestions. This was the case when Supreme Court of Canada ruled in favour of allowing a Sikh student to be permitted to wear a kirpan to school, as was mentioned in an earlier section of this paper. Immigrants would not be the only group affected by any such legislative or other

changes, as not all religious minorities are newcomers. However, as immigration increases the diversity of the province, and demands for reasonable accommodations based on faiths other

42

than Catholicism, any such legislative or other challenges

ill

favour of reasonable

accommodations may be viewed by the Quebecois to be a negative and unnecessary consequence of the presence of immigrant' others' .

6.3 Language

There wer~ significant differences in the way that newspapers discussed linguistic integration of newcomers and language overall, with Le Solei! provided little coverage, The
Gazette portrayed QuebeCOiS as discriminatory on the basis of language. As well, La Presse

covered varying aspects of language not covered by the other newspapers such as access to healthcare and interpreters, as discussed in the findings sections. Important to this research is the question: Why do such differences in coverage regarding the linguistic integration of immigrants occur? Historically, newcomers have integrated into the English-speaking community in and around Montreal rather than into the French-speaking community in the city or elsewhere in the province. This is partly because prior to the 1970s language laws such as La loi sur la langue
officielle (Bill 22) and La charte de la langue fram;aise (Bill 101) did not exist and Quebec did
;,!
'I

~:

not have control over the selection of immigrants destined for its territory. English was and is often referred to as the 'language of business', and this was the case in Quebec prior to the passing of official language laws. Therefore it was more beneficial for newcomers to learn English rather than French in order to secure employment while still receiving government and other public services in English. These factors in conjunction with decreasing birthrates in the province led to French decreasing in importance, and left the Francophone majority fearing for their survival (Kelley and Trebilcock, 2000).

: .'
f,

:'

"

43

Since the adoption of French as the official language of the province in 1977 the children of newcomers have been obliged to attend French primary and secondary schools with few exceptions, such as those who opt to send their children to private institutions where the language of instruction is then chosen by the parents. As a result of such language laws, there has been an increase in the integration of newcomers into the French-speaking community. In 1990, the Canada-Quebec Accord granted the province control over the selection and integration of all newcomers. As a result priority has been given to those newcomers who already have knowledge of French (Quebec, 1990). Furthermore, because immigration applicants are required to submit a separate application to the provincial and federal governments, it is assumed that newcomers have a greater understanding of the society into which they are integrating and not that they are simply moving to one of the Canadian provinces. As discussed in the literature review earlier in this paper, Todd (1998) argues that because of the different cultural psyche of the English and French communities, the news media of each will reflect the fears and worries of their respective communities. Over the last several decades, it is the Anglophone community which has been feeling threatened as a result of its dwindling numbers in the province. Many Anglophones have out-migrated to other provinces, the birthrate has fallen to below replacement level, and newcomers are no longer permitted to
.,!" ·

enter the English public school system.

According to Todd's logic, it is possible that the

continual references to the language spoken at the Bouchard-Taylor Commission found in The Gazette may be due to the threat of disappearance the Anglophone community feels. Many of the articles also quoted some of the more shocking and prejudicial comments made by some of the French-speaking participants while not giving any possible explanations and without including any such quotes made by non-French speakers. Todd's argument is that The Gazette

44

"S2

r

often portrays the Francophone community community by which they feel threatened.

In

such a way as a means of attacking that

Helly (2004) argues, after conducting her own content analysis of Canadian newspapers covering stories following the September 11 th attacks regarding immigration, that French newspapers more often than English newspapers attempt to provide more background on a given ,story. This may c:xplain why La Presse has been more balanced in its coverage of this issue, writing articles discussing issues which went unnoticed by The Gazette. While there is no

explanation found in the literature as to why Le Solei! was less interested in this theme than the other two papers, I suspect like many of the other themes, it is one which affects the community outside of Montreal less. It is also perhaps because those immigrants who do settle in the regions do and have traditionally integrated linguistically into the Francophone community because of the lack of any other linguistic communities in those areas of the province. Therefore,

immigrants are not viewed as a challenge in terms of integration or threat to the linguistic makeup of the province. .
:' .'
I

':
~

7. Conclusion Let me reiterate my initial research questions here in order to determine what has been learned as well as where future research is needed. What is the extent of the difference in the media discourse between different media outlets? There are some slight differences in certain areas, such as the politics and legislation theme; there are more pronounced differences in others themes such as language. Helly's (2004) findings that French-language news-media tends to be more critical in its coverage of an event as well as provides greater analysis would appear true in the case of La Presse, but this not true when comparing the other two newspapers to one another.

", .
j

.' i

, ..
, ,

45

The former paper provided discussion on a greater variety of issues raised at the BouchardTaylor Commission, but the differences between the other two newspapers are less significant and do not support Helly's arguments. Overall however, all three Quebec newspapers included far more negative stereotypes about immigrants and fears of what immigration might do to the existing culture and other characteristics of the province and its people. I have argued that all three newspapers portray immigrants and other minorities requiring some level of reasonable accommodation in a negative way, and that very little attention has been paid to dissenting voices arguing in favour of equality and greater openness to diversity, regardless of which newspaper one looks at. How do competing media discourses affect the overall public discourse? Further

research needs to be done in this area to know what the specific effects are of media on the public discourse regarding the reasonable accommodation of minorities. As highlighted in the literature, media is a strong influencing force on public discourse in generaL The effect on public discourses exists even when media either misreI5resents or under-represents minority groups (Mahtani, 2001), or when covertly discriminatory language is used (Li, 2001). Even in a province like Quebec with a relatively small population in comparison to other 'nations', as the
Quebecois often view themselves, there are competing media sources. The three newspapers

selected for study here cater to three relatively different populations: Anglophones and Francophones from Montreal and the other fifteen regions of the province, each having distinct cultures and varying opinions on the issues raised at the Bouchard-Taylor Commission. Each of these populations surely has their own different public discourses as can be seen through the variations between their representative news sources with their competing discourses. Todd (1998) in her discussion of media coverage in Quebec regarding the right of Muslim girls to wear

46
/

the hijab in school and other public institutions, shows that indeed there

IS

no one public

discourse in the province, and hence there are varying media discourses representing each of these public discourses. Thus, each public discourse is affected by various competing media discourses, but is likely most influenced by that media discourse with which one most identifies. Further research is necessary in order to analyse more fully how each media discourse reflects the public discour~e of the population which it targets for its readership, and how it represents this readership in its reporting versus how it represents those it views as 'other'. How may public discourse shape the media discourse in turn? Public discourse is not simply the discourse held by the majority of the population; it is those discourse held by any individual or group of individuals in society. Therefore public discourse in relation to reasonable accommodations can be that discourse used by politicians when giving a press conference to the statement provided to the Bouchard-Taylor Commission by an association representing a special interest, or minority, group. Thus when such groups or individuals contribute to the discussion they often affect media discourses as they are viewed as experts or those with enough power to contribute to the mainstream media discourse. Not all contributors to public discourse are equal, where politicians and other public figures often hold greater power than individuals, for example. The media often reports on public discourse such as public consultations and public opinion polls for example. When the media reports on public discourse it is being shaped by this discourse on which it is reporting. In turn, the media chooses what it wants to report, and what it chooses to ignore. Even within the same medium in the same province it can be seen that different media outlets provide different coverage. Certain newspapers covered different aspects of the Commission in greater depth than others, and used different language in order to describe or criticize the same occurrences. However, all of the newspapers were reporting on a public
j
t,

47

discourse which existed prior in the province, even if much of this discourse had already been influenced by earlier media reports. Had the BouchardwTaylor Commission not taken place, or had been held in a different format that did not involve public consultations, the media would not have had anything to provide coverage of. discourses therefore appear circular in nature. Is there a disconnect between media and public discourse? There must be a disconnect between the media and public discourses, for if the media truly reflected the existing public discourse, or vice versa, we would see virtually identical reporting of such a specific event between all three newspapers analysed, even if the debate itself if not unified. In this case there are two possible explanations: either each media discourse is accurately reflecting the public discourse with which it identifies (i.e. each newspaper is reporting on the discourse of its target audience) or at least two of the three newspapers studied do not accurately reflect the public discourses within the Bouchard-Taylor Commission debate, as if any of them accurately represent all the discourses found at the Commission then at least two are not accurate otherwise all three newspapers would show similar findings. It would be difficult through the method of content analysis to study what differences exist between these two discourses, although further study would provide useful to answering this question. It is impossible to say which newspaper was truly most accurate, although La Presse provided the most coverage as well as some of the most varying coverage and criticism, this does not equate to accuracy. ,Given the nature of mainstream news-media, as highlighted by most of the literature reviewed earlier in this work, I would argue that there is a disconnect between the public and media discourses, as media uses certain kinds of language (i.e. 'new racism') or misrepresents and underwrepresents certain populations (Li, 2001; Mahtani, 2001). While it is not necessarily impossible for a mainstream The relationship between media and public

48

newspaper t? report accurately on public discourses surrounding the issue of reasonable accommodations, they will generally portray a one~sided image that is representative of Westem,
male~dominated,

'white', Christian, heterosexual ideals (Jiwani, 2005).

The Bouchard-Taylor Commission was a very recent occurrence, and hence the surrounding media discourse is also recent and as a result there is currently a lack of literature on the subject of how.the reasonable accommodations debate played out as well as how newcomers have been affected. This has left me forced to make theoretical linkages based on an incomplete literature review. There is no question that additional investigation into this subject is required, as it could help generate greater understanding between the dominant and immigrant groups in the province. Content analyses of different forms of media coverage as they pertain to the debate regarding reasonable accommodations, and the integrations of immigrants more generally, could help show how particular stereotypes are being propagated in part by the media, which for many

Qw}becois living outside of the

major~immigrant

receiving centres, is one of the key formats
In addition, both quantitative and

through which they gain understanding of this issue.

qualitative research must be done to comprehend how such stereotyping affects the lives of newcomers in terms of their ability to integrate socially, culturally, and economically. What I
"

have learned here is that stereotyping of certain ethnic groups is taking place in the province, both in the public and media discourses. One negative stereotype which has been found in this study is that at least a portion of the population and news
print~media

find that immigrants are

not successfully integrating, either willingly or not. In order to eliminate this problem it is necessary to understand how much stereotyping plays a role in one's ability to integrate or want

49

t1l0PERTY Of JiYERSON UN1VEHSlTY UBPJJIr

to integrate if we are to create better relations between the native-born population and newcomers. Based on Fairclough's (1995) approach and U's (2001) theory, research should be conducted in the province to see where the population is obtaining its information in regard to newcomers as well as how accurate they view such information to be. It would prove useful to know how critical the public is of the information it obtains through the media, and to see if the public accurately analyses the social and historical context through which this information is generated. It has been shown in various studies, some included in the literature review section of this paper, that the media does indeed have the power to influence public discourse through the promotion of stereotypes, misinformation and underrepresentation of minority groups. What would be useful would be to know to what extent media can do this, and which populations interpret media in what kind of ways. The reasonable accommodations debate in the format undertaken in the Bouchard-Taylor Commission could serve as a potential model for future public forums regarding matters of reasonable accommodation, and it should be understood where improvements can be made to avoid overt hate speech, "new racism" (Li, 2001) and further 'othering' of immigrants. Media discourses which reinforce dominant conceptions of the nation, and who belongs, must be understood if we are to change them for the better of all. The Bouchard-Taylor Commission was supposed to take on the role of a democratic forum where dissident voices could challenge the dominant discourse and help form a new and more inclusive society (Quebec, 2008). I think however, that the media discourse only helped reinforce more exclusionary concepts of the Quebec nation, where 'others' are still prohibited from reshaping the dominant discourse.

50

Appendix List of Newspaper Articles Reviewed

The Gazette
Heinrich, J. (2007, Sept. 12). Feet washing and video games; Wide-ranging topics at the accommodation hearing Series: Identities. The Gazette, p. A3 Heinrich, J. (2007:Sept. 13). Rouyn-Noranda's diversity surprises; Original algonquins now minority. From Moroccan Muslims to Afro-Latino from Colombia, locals flock to have their say. The (jazette, p. A10 Heinrich, J. (2007, Sept. 14). Man in a chair decries isolation; All religion based on superstition, he says. Newcomers should become 'Quebecois like me'. The Gazette, p: A14 Heinrich, J. (2007, Sept. 19). Old stock has its say; Accommodation hearings visit the North Shore. The Gazette, p. A3 Heinrich,1. (2007, Sept. 20). Flood of immigrants feared; Hearings in Saguenay. Secular society, Roman Catholic heritage in peril, Taylor-Bouchard commission told. The Gazette, p. A8 Heinrich, J. (2007, Sept. 21). Fear of other values 'visceral,' hearings told: Reasonable accommodation. 'The founding people have become third-class citizens: Saguenay man laments. The Gazette, p. A8 Heinrich, J. (2007, Sept. 25). Laurentian residents vent anger with Hasidim; St. Jerome session becomes platform for bashing distinctive Orthodox sect. The Gazette, p. A12 Heinrich, J. (2007, Sept. 26). Commission hears of diso\\'l1ed daughter; Hindu family cited in scathing attack on how immigrants are treated. The Gazette, p. A3
"

,
~!

Heinrich, J. (2007, Sept. 27). Lone voice of Jewry speaks up for attacked Hasidim; 'They're quiet ... so what do people have against them?' The Gazette, p. A8 Laws won't solve our identity crisis (2007, Sept. 29). The Gazette, p. Al Heinrich, J. (2007, Oct. 2). A chorus of resentment in Rimouski; Reasonable accommodation hearing. But other participants urge tolerance, saying we're richer for new arrivals. The Gazette, p.A9 Heinrich, J. (2007, Oct. 3). Gays in small towns still struggle for rights; Religious extremism a new threat, hearing told. The Gazelle, p. A8

51

Heinrich, J. (2007, Oct. 4). Global villagers show up for accommodation roadshow; Immigrants, relatives speak. 'It's not like it was; it's something joyful'. The Gazette, p. A9 Heinrich, J. (2007, Oct. 5). 'Best of both worlds,' English Gasp teen tells commission; Language, religion accommodated. Jewish father-daughter team talk of harmony, call for end to linguistic school boards. The Gazette, p. A7 Heinrich, J. (2007, Oct. 24). Herouxville councillor among friends at hearing; 'Reasonable accommodation' commission. Man who drafted town's controversial 'code oflife' basks in allies' praise but gets harsh words, too. The Gazette, p. AS Headlines; You might have missed this week (2007, Oct. 27). The Gazette, p. B5 Heinrich, J. (2007, Oct. 29). Islamic communities' diversity on display. The Gazette, p. AS Heinrich, J. (2007, Oct. 30). Anti-Semitic rant gets short shrift; Reasonable accommodation hearing. Media frenzy has distorted reality, Quebec City Muslims contend. The Gazette, p. A8 Dougherty, K. and Authier, P. (2007, Oct. 31). Bertrand drops the gloves; Rips Koivu's lack of French fluency. Fears Montreal will become mostly English. The Gazette, p. A3 Dougherty, K. (2007, Nov. 1). Catholic roots worth keeping, ex-priest says; Louis O'Neill speaks at accommodation commission. The Gazette, p. Al 0 Dougherty, K. (2007, Nov. 2). 'Here, it works like this'; Accommodation hearings in Beauce. Newcomers must conform, mayor insists. The Gazette, p. AS Heinrich, J. (2007, Nov. 6). Don't look to Drummondville for final word on reasonable accommodation; Bouchard-Taylor open-mike session brings out wide diversity of opinion on immigrants and identity. The Gazette, p. A9
,,~-:

~:::
I~:

,',.
'.'.,
-I.

Heinrich, J. (2007, Nov. 15). Mother considers teachers in hijabs a threat; Concerned over 'bath of cultures'. Accommodation hearings continue in Laval. The Gazette, p. A7 Heinrich, J. (2007, Nov. 23). Muslims worry about 'tarnished' image; Rein in 'preachers of hate,' \ commission told. The Gazette, p. AS
\

Hustak, A. (2007, Nov. 26). Quebecers don't have to bicker, a child tells adults; Reasonable accommodation forum. But workshops hear that immigrants face bigger obstacles than language. The Gazette, p. A8 . Heinrich, J. (2007, Nov. 29). Sikhs want rules bent, hearing told; Exemptions described as 'only way'. Commission also hears jab at Orthodox Jews. The Gazette, p. AS Mennie, J. (2007, Dec. 11). Moral commitment document doesn't mention our problems; "Information on poverty and lack of access to health care might be useful." The Gazette, p. A4

52

I
Heinrich, 1. (2007, Dec. 12). Duceppe warns of'too permissive' changes. The Gazette, p. A3 Heinrich, J. (2007, Dec. 13). Freedoms essential, Jews say; Bouchard-Taylor. B'nai Brith service organization calls for more accommodation. The Gazette, p. Al Heinrich, 1. (2007, Dec. 13). Church gave Quebec a lot, cardinal says; Turcotte distances himself from primate who apologized for 'errors'. The Gazette, p. A4 Heinrich, J. (2007, Dec. 14). Don't deprive children of religious education. The Gazette, p. AS

Le Solei!
Giroux, R. (2007, Sept. 12). Commission sur les accommodements raisonnables: Le debat religieux a l'avant-scene.. Le Solei!, p. 7 Paradis, S. (2007, Sept. 19). Commission sur les accommodements raisonnables: Un temoin expulse apres avoir traite de "retrograde" la religion musulmane. Le Solei!, p. 28 Cliche, J.-F. (2007, Sept. 20). Commission Bouchard-Taylor: Vers une participation monstre a Quebec. Le Solei!, p. 9 Cliche, I.-F. (2007, Sept. 20). Commission Bouchard-Taylor: L'integration, "oui, mais ... /I Le Solei!, p. 9 Cliche, 1.-F. (2007, Sept. 21). Commission Bouchard-Taylor: Le maire de Saguenay prone la pre seance du catholicisme; La consultation populaire a ses defauts. Le Solei!, p. 5 Cliche, I.-F. (2007, Sept. 21). Commission Bouchard-Taylor: Le maire de Saguenay prone la preseance du catholicisme; Jean Tremblay se porte ala defense de l'Eglise dans les institutions quebecoises. Le Solei!, p. 4 Theriault, C. (2007, Oct. 3). Accommodements raisonnables: Le commissaire Bouchard parle de "l'ecoie de Rimouski". Le Solei!, p. 20 Gagne, G. (2007, Oct. 4). La Commission Bouchard-Taylor a Bonaventure: Des Gaspesiens de toutes origines, un meme message. Le Solei!, p. 30 Cliche, I.-F. (2007, Oct. 17). Commission Bouchard-Taylor: Propos surprenants tenus a Longueuil. Le Solei!, p. 9 Cliche, J.-F. (2007, Oct. 18). Offensive laYque: Le maire de Huntingdon s'oppose aux signes religieux dans les edifices publics. Le Solei!, p. 6

"

53

Cliche, J.-F. (2007, Oct. 25). Accommodements raisonnables: Le conseiller de Herouxville pris apartie. Le Solei!, p. 8 Cliche, J.-F. (2007, Oct. 25). Accommodements raisonnables: En bref; Commission scolaire pour la laYcite. Le Solei!, p. 8 Cliche, l-F. (2007, Oct. 25). Accommodements raisonnables: "La religion ne peut pas etre que privee" - L'eveque de Trois-Rivieres. Le Solei!, p. 9 Cliche, J.-F. (2007, Oct. 25). Accommodements Raisonnables: En bref; Participation monstre. Le Solei!, p. 8 Cliche, J.-F. (2007, Oct. 26). Accommodements raisonnables: La "clause nonobstant" appeIee en renfort. Le Solei!, p. 16 Cliche, J.-F. (2007, Oct. 30). Accommodements raisonnables: Le fantome de Levesque. Le Solei!, p. 3 Cliche, J.-F. (2007, Oct. 30). Accommodements raisonnables: Ras-Ie-bol musulman; Appel ala tolerance de membres du Centre culturel islamique de Quebec devant la commission BouchardTaylor. Le Solei!, p. 2 Cliche, l-F. (2007, Oct. 31). La solution dans la religion; Le cardinal Marc Ouellet prone un retour aux valeurs catholiques. Le Solei!, p. 6 Cliche, J.-F. (2007, Oct. 31). Love-in interculturel. Le Solei!, p. 7 Cliche, J.-F. (2007, Nov. 1). Accommodements raisonnables: Plaidoyer pour l'immigration; Selon Ie maire suppleant, Jacques JoIi-Coeur, l'avenir economique de Quebec depend des nouveaux arrivants. Le Solei!, p. 7 Dion-Viens, D. (2007, Nov. 5). Commission Bouchard-Taylor: Un ado de 14 ans transmet Ie message des jeunes. Le Solei!, p. 11 Cliche, J.-F. (2007, Nov. 27). Accommodements raisonnabIes: Distinguer doctrine et interpretation; La Cour supreme a ouvert une bOlte de Pandore avec l'affaire du kirpan, affirment des enseignants. Le Solei!, p. 8 Cliche, J.-F. (2007, Nov. 27). Accommodements raisonnables: "Quel malaise?" demande Louis Balthazar. Le Solei!, p. 8 Cliche, J.-F. (2007, Nov. 28). Des immigrants expriment leur colcre. Le Solei!, p. 18 Cliche, J.-F. (2007, Nov. 29). Commission Bouchard-Taylor: Les sikhs victimes de "malentendus". Le Solei!, p. 12

54

Cliche, J.-F. (2007, Nov. 29). Accommodements raisonnables: La facilite croit avec l'usage. Le Solei!, p. 13 Cliche, J.-F. (2007, Nov. 30). Commission Bouchard-Taylor: Les critiques les plus severes; Les citoyens anglophones n'ont pas mache leurs mots envers les commissaires. Le Solei!, p. 13 Cliche, J.-F. (2007, Nov. 30). Commission Bouchard-Taylor: Vne definition differente de l'emaneipation; Des musulmanes denoncent Ie feminisme obtus de certains Quebecois. Le Solei!, p. 12 Cliche, l-F. (200~, Dec. 11). Les syndicats rec1ament une stricte lai"cite; Le SFPQ craint que Ie port de signes sacres ne compromette la neutralite des institutions publiques. Le Solei!, p. 11 Cliche, J.-F. (2007, Dec. 11). La primaute du droit sert tout Ie monde. Le Solei!, p. 11 Cliche, J.-F. (2007, Dec. 12). Accommodements raisonnables: Reconnaissance des diplomes; Les ordres professionnels plaident l'innocence. Le Soleil, p. 11 Cliche, J.-F. (2007, Dec. 12). Accommodements raisonnables: Duceppe ouvert aux signes religieux dans la fonction publique. Le Solei!, p. 11 Cliche, J.-F. (2007, Dec. 12). Accommodements raisonnables: Lisee veut lier Ie droit de vote a la connaissance du franlYais. Le Solei!, p. 11 Gagne, J.-S. (2007, Dec. 13). Commission Bouchard-Taylor: Les Roumains de Quebec ne jugent pas utile d'intervenir. Le Solei!, p. 8 Vne loi 101 plus muscle; Pauline Marois a reaffirme cette volonte devant la Commission Bouchard-Taylor (2007, Dec. 15). Le Solei!, p. 8
.i

La Presse
. C (2007 , Sept . 11). Comml'ssl'on sur les accommodements raisonnable: Bouchard fait T ouzm,. son mea-culpa. La Presse, p. AlO Ouimet, M. (2007, Sept. 12). Chronique: lei Radio Bouchard. La Presse, p. A9 Touzin, C. (2007, Sept. 12). La Commission re90it ses premiers memoires. La Presse, p. A8 Marissal, V. (2007, Sept. 13). Chronique: Le "freak show". La Presse, p. A7 Touzin, C. (2007, Sept. 13). Commission sur les accommodements raisonnables: Des talibans aux autochtones en Abitibi. La Presse, p. A7 Boisvert, Y. (2007, Sept. 14). Avant d'enterre~ la Commission. La Presse, p. A8
t,

55

Petrowski, N. (2007, Sept. 15). Chronique: Portrait de farnille. La Presse, p. Arts et Spectacles
2

Touzin, C. (2007, Sept. 19). Commission sur les accomodements raisonnables a Sept-lIes: Gerard Bouchard rt!primande un citoyen. La Presse, p. A 15 Touzin, C. (2007, Sept. 20). Commission sur les accommodements raisonnables: Humour et atmosphere detendue a Saguenay. La Presse, p. A15 Touzin;C. (2007, Sept. 21). Commission Bouchard-Taylor aSaguenay: Le maire affirme ses valeurs religieuses. La Presse, p. A9 Touzin, C. (2007, Sept. 25). Accommodements raisonnables: Lesjuifs hassidiques derangent a Saint-Jerome. La Presse, p. AI0 Touzin, C. (2007, Sept. 26). Le Quebec "integre mal" ses immigres: Les structures d'accueil quebecoises montrees du doigt a la commission Bouchard-Taylor. La Presse, p. AIO Touzin, C. (2007, Sept. 27). Commission sur les accommodements raisonnables: "ll ne faut pas attribuer toutes les choses que l'on considere horribles al'islarn ". La Presse, p. A5 Boisvert, Yves (2007, Oct. 14). Accommodements raisonnables Chronique: De la difficulte de feIiciter Jean Charest. La Presse, p. A6 Touzin, C. (2007, Oct. 16). Accommodements raisonnables: La Commission croule sous les memoires a LongueuiL La Presse, p. AIO Touzin, C. (2007, Oct. 16). Port du voile; "<;a vient nous chercher un peu", concede Gerard Bouchard. La Presse, p. All Touzin, C. (2007, Oct. 17). Accommodements raisonnables: Et la numerologie? La Presse, p. AIO Touzin, C. (2007, Oct. 18). Sortie remarquee du maire Stephane Gendron. La Presse, p. A8 Beauchemin, M. (2007, Oct. 31). Le cardinal Ouellet a la commission Bouchard-Taylor: Le Quebec "mur" pour l'evangelisation. La Presse, p. AI2 Perreault, L.-J. (2007, Nov. 16). Commission Bouchard-Taylor: Des employeurs refusent d'embaucher des musulmans. La Presse, p. A8 Perreault, L.-J. (2007, Nov. 21). La Commission Bouchard-Taylor a Montreal: Des immigres se vident Ie coeur. La Presse, p. A8

56

Touzin, C. and Perreault, L.-J. (2007, Nov. 26). La Commission a Montreal: Bouchard-Taylor: Mythes et Realites. La Presse, p. A2 Perreault, L.-J. (2007, Nov. 27). Bouchard-Taylor aMontreal: La decision sur Ie port du kirpan cause encore des ramous; "Sans n!gles claires, c'est l'anarchie". La Presse, p. A6 Croteau, M. (2007, Nov. 28). Bouchard-Taylor a Montreal: Des participants craignent la politisation du debat. La Presse, p. A2 Perreault, L.-J. (2007, Nov. 28). Bouchard-Taylor a Montreal: Dispense d'Halloween et plats vegetariens; Les d~mandes d'accommodement ne sont pas une source de conflit dans les ecoles multiethniques montrealaises, assurent les commissions scolaires. La Presse, p. A2 Perreault, L.-J. (2007, Nov. 29). Bouchard-Taylor Montreal: Pas de kirpan, pas de crucifix; Des sikhs demandent que ron affiche dans les lieux publics tous les symboles religieux ou aucun. La Presse, p. A22 Croteau, M. (2007, Nov. 30). Bouchard-Taylor a Montreal: Les anglophones appellent a la tolerance. La Presse, p. A12 Ouimet, M. (2007, Dec. 11 ). Bouchard-Taylor la demiere ligne droite Chronique: C'est la faute au voile. La Presse, p. A7 Perreault, L.-J. (2007, Dec. 11). Bouchard-Taylor la demiere ligne droite: Un devoir de reserve elargi; Le Syndicat de la fonction publique suggere d'interdire aux employes de I'Etat d'afficher leur appartenance religieuse. La Presse, p. A6 Croteau, M. (2007, Dec. 12). Bouchard-Taylor la demiere ligne droite: Les participants se font plus rares. La Presse, p. A8 Perreault, L.-J. (2007, Dec. 13). Bouchard-Taylor la demiere ligne droite: On n'en fait pas assez, plaident des representants juifs. La Presse, p. AS Perreault, L.-J. (2007, Dec. 14). Commission Bouchard-Taylor: Les ordres professionnels ont besoin d'un remede muscle. La Presse, p. A13 Perreault, LA. (2007, Dec. IS). Marois veut modifier la loi 101 et la Charte des droits. La Presse, p. A12

a

57

9. Bibliography Bauder. Harald (2008). Immigration Debate in Canada: How Newspapers Reported, 2004. Journal of Internationallvfigration and Integration, 9(3), pp. 289-310.
1996~

Bouchard, Gerard (1999). La nation quebecoise au future et au passe. VLB, Montreal. Bouchard, Gerard and Charles Taylor (2008). Building the Future: A Time for Reconciliation. Gouvernement du Quebec. Bosset, Pierre (2005). Reflections on the Scope and Limits of the Duty of Reasonable Accommodation in the Field of Religion. Comite pour la protection de lajeunesse, Saint-Lazarre, Quebec. Cisneros, J. David (2008). Contaminated Communities: The Metaphor of 'Immigrant as Pollutant' in Media Representation of Immigration. Rhetoric & Public Affairs, 11(4), pp. 569-602. Citizenship and Immigration Canada (2005a). Recent Immigrants in Metropolitan Areas: Canada April 2005. Retrieved from http://www.cic.l!c.calEnglish/pdf/research· stats/2001-canada.pdf Citizenship and Immigration Canada (2005b). Recent Immigrants in Aletropolitan Areas: Alontreal April 2005. Retrieved from http://\v~w.cic.gc.calEnl!lish/pdti'research stats/200 I-montrea1.pdf Cohen, Stanley (1972). Folk Devils and Moral Panics: The Creation o/Mods and Rockers. MacGibbon and Kee, London. Commission de consultation sur les pratiques d'accommodement reliees aux differences Culturelles (2010). Retrieved from http://\\:"\\:w.accommodements.qc.ca/index-en.html Cresswell, John W. (2009). Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Alixed Alethods Approaches. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
j

,

,~.

Dunn, Brian (1998). Two ways to measure Quebec: buyers would prefer a single readership Study, but having two isn't all bad. Marketing Magazine, 103(15), pp. 18. Esses, Victoria M., John F. Dovidio, Lynne M. Jackson, and Tamara L. Armstrong (2001). The Immigration Dilemma: The Role of Perceived Group Competition, Ethnic Prejudice, and National Identity. Journal ofSocial Issues, 57(3), pp.389-412. Fall, Khadiyatoulah and Georges Vignaux (2008). Images de I 'autre et de sol: Les accommodements raisonnables entre prejuges et reallte. Les Presses de l'Universite de Laval, Quebec.

58

Fairclough, Nonnan (1995). Media Discourse. New York: E. Arnold. Foucault, Michel (1978). The History ofSexuality, Volume 1. Pantheon Books, New York. Greer, Chris and Yvonne Jewkes (2005). Extremes of Otherness: Media Images of Social Exclusion. Social Justice, 32(1), pp. 20-31. Grondin, Chantal (2007). Knowledge of Official Languages Among New Immigrants: How Important Is It in the Labour .Varket? 2005. Statistics Canada, Ottawa. Hamilton, Graeme. (2002, April 17). Boy with Sikh ceremonial dagger may return to school: Judge sees no danger. National Post, pp. A4. Helly, Denise (2004). Are Muslims Discriminated Against in Canada Since September 2001? Journal of Canadian Ethnic Studies, 36(1), pp. 24-47. Kelley, Ninette and Michael Trebilcock (2000). The Making of the kfosaic: A History of Canadian Immigration Policy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. Jiwani, Yasmin (2005). The Great White North Encounters September 11: Race, Gender, and Nation in Canada's National Daily, The Globe and Mail. Social Justice, 32(4), pp. 50-68. Li, Peter (2001). The Racial Subtext in Canada's Immigration Discourse. Journal of International Migration and Integration, 2(1), pp. 77-97. Liaw, Kao-Lee (2007).' "Problematic post-landing interprovincial migration of the immigrants in Canada." SEDAP Research Program. McMaster University. Mahtani, Minelle (2001). Representing Minorities: Canadian Media and Minority Identities. Canadian Ethnic Studies, 33(3), pp. 99-133. Mayring, Philipp (2000). Qualitative Content Analysis. In Flick, Uwe; Von Kardorff, Ernst; and Steinke, Ines (Eds.) A Companion to Qualitative Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. McAndrew, Marie (2010). The Muslim Community and Education in Quebec: Controversies And Mutual Adaptation. Journal ofInternational kfigration and Integration, Published online: January 23,2010. Retrieved from http://www.metapress.com.ezl2roxv.lib.ryerson.ca/contcnt/::!r501586775v3315/fulltext.ht

.,I
I I
I

ml
Nieguth, Tim, and Aurelie Lacassagne (2009). Contesting the Nation: Reasonable Accommodation in Rural Quebec. Canadian Political Science Review, 3(1), pp. 1-16. Ouimet, Michele (2006, November 9). Short, libido et accommodement. La Presse, pp. A 14.

59

Quebec, Gouvernement du (1990). Vision: A policy statement on immigration and integration. Ministere des Communautes culturelles et de 1'Immigration du Quebec. Quebec, Gouvernement du (2008). Commission de consultation sur les pratiques d'accommodement reliees aux differences culturelles. Retrieved from: http://vvw\v.accommodements.qc.calindex -en .html Quebec, Gouvernement du (2009). Fiche synthese sur I 'immigration au Quebec Ministere de l'Immigration et des Communautes culturelles du Quebec.

Annee 2008.

Quebec, Gouvernement du (March 2009). Tableaux sur I 'immigration permanent au Quebec 2004-2008. Ministere de l'Immigration et des Communautes culturelles du Quebec. Sutherland, Anne (2006, November 16). Let male police officers deal with Hasidic men, cops told. The Gazette, pp. AI. Thomas, Eric (1992). Canadian Broadcasting and Multiculturalism: Attempts to Accommodate Ethnic Minorities. Canadian Journal o/Communication, 17(3), pp. 281-300. Thompson, Elizabeth (2006, March 3). OK in schools: Religious freedom cited as Montreal Board's ban in quashed. The Gazette, pp. AI. Todd, Sharon (1998). Veiling the 'Other', Unveiling Our 'Selves': Reading Media Images of The Hijab Psychoanalytically to Move Beyond Tolerance. Canadian Journal 0/ Education, 23(4), pp. 438. Wortley, Scot (2009). Introduction. The Immigrant-Crime Connection: Competing Theoretical Perspectives. Journal 0/ International ~Migration and Integration, 10(4), pp. 349-358.

60

