BROWNFiElD REDEVELOPMENT: A CASE STUDY OF THE LAKEVIEW WATERFRONT REVITALIZATION IN MISSISSAUGA

by

Beata Palka, BA, University of Toronto, 2009

A Major Research Paper presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Planning in Urban Development

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2011

© Beata Palka 2011

ii

AUTHOR'S DECLERATION

I hereby declare that I am the sole author ofthis major research paper. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this paper to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

<

=

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this paper, in whole or in part, by photocopying or by other means, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

l--------___

J-------

iii

-J

iv

BROWNFIELD REDEVELOPMENT:
A CASE STUDY OF THE LAKEVIEW WATERFRONT REVITALIZATION IN MISSISSAUGA

© Beata Palka, 2009
Master of Planning in Urban Development Ryerson University

ABSTRACT

This research paper is a case study examining the development of the Vision for the Ontario Power Generation lands in lakeview. The interests of stakeholders such as the City of Mississauga, the lakeview residents, the Region of Peel, the Province of Ontario, Credit Valley Conservation, as well as the Toronto and Region Conservation will be discussed. The importance of the history of lakeview, the public consultation process, the project structure, as well as the next steps will be critically talked about in detail. This purpose of this paper is to provide other municipalities with recommendations on brownfield redevelopment and thus give them a better understanding of things to consider and potential roadblocks and challenges that could arise.

Key words: Brownfield; Waterfront; Redevelopment; Government Relations; Public Engagement.

v

vi

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to acknowledge the hard work of the City of Mississauga Inspiration Lakeview Core Team. Without their cooperation and hard work this paper would not have been possible. The members of this group are:

Bruce Carr, Director, Strategic Community Initiatives Lori Kelly, Manager, Strategic Community Initiatives Lorenzo Ruffini, Strategic Leader, Strategic Community Initiatives Department Jim Doran, Strategic Leader, Strategic Community Initiatives Department Sharon Mittmann, Urban Designer, Planning and Building Department Paul Stewart, Policy Planner, Planning and Building Department Matthew Williams, Transportation Planner, Transportation and Works Beata Palka, Executive Assistant, Strategic Community Initiatives

I would also like to acknowledge the help and guidance of Professor David Amborski in shaping this major research paper.

vii

viii

DEDICATION

This major research paper is dedicated to Simon Rusinek who has been an endless source of motivation, encouragement, and inspiration. Words fail me in expressing my heartfelt gratitude and appreciation.

ix

x

TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 1.0 2.0 3.0 INTRODUCTION PROJECT PURPOSE AND APPROCH CITY OF MISSISSAUGA OVERVIEW

3.1

Profile of Lakeview and Surrounding Area 3.1.1 3.1.2 3.1.3 Demographics Education, Labour, and Income Housing

4.0

HISTORY OF LAKEVIEW

4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5
5.0

Early History Canada's First Aerodrome and Flying School Long Branch Rifle Ranges Small Arms Ltd. lakeview Generating Station

INSPIRATION LAKEVIEW

5.1 5.2 5.3

Strategic Community Initiatives Division Project Beginning Project Structure 5.3.1 5.3.2 5.3.3 Phase 1 Phase 2 - Public Engagement Vision Public Presentation

6.0

NEXT STEPS

6.1 6.2 6.3 6.4
7.0

Master Plan Environmental Review Lakefill Feasibility Memorandum of Understanding

OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

REFERENCES

xi

xii

LIST OF FIGURES:

Figure 1: Mississauga's location within the Greater Toronto Area Figure 2: Photographs of the OPG Pier and the shoreline in lakeview Figure 3: Map of Main Study Area Figure 5: City of Mississauga Organizational Chart Figure 5: Map of the City of Mississauga's Ward 1 Figure 6: lakeview in 1954, first aerial photography of the area. Figure 7: Women working at Small Arms Ltd. Figure 8: Demolition of the Lakeview Power Generation Plant Figure 9: Public Engagement Sessions (City of Mississauga, 2010) Figure 10: The Hon. David Crombie's Common Principles and Strategies for Waterfront Success Figure 11: Overview of Core Principles, Themes, and Moves for Inspiration Lakeview

xiii

xiv

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This research paper is a case study examining the development of the Vision for the Ontario Power Generation lands in lakeview. During the 1960s, the lakeview Generating Station on the Ontario Power Generation (OPG) lands, located in the lakeview community of Mississauga, was the largest thermal electric plant in the world. Following Provincial Government policy to phase out coal fired generating stations by the end of 2007, the station closed down on April 30, 2005, after 43 years of service. The OPG site is 80 hectares (196 acres); it incorporates approximately 4500 meters of shoreline, including breakwaters and is currently owned by OPG. In June of 2010, the City of Mississauga retained a multi-disciplinary consulting team lead by Urban Strategies Inc. to create a compelling vision for the site. The importance of the history of lakeview, the public consultation process, the project structure, as well as the next steps are critically talked about in detail. The City has completed the Vision at the end of February 2011 with a presentation to Council on April 18, 2011. Next steps for the project include working towards the development of a Master Plan, conducting an environmental review, a lakefill feasibility study, and executing the memorandum of understanding. These lands have the potential to become a regional, national and international model of sustainability and brownfield redevelopment. This purpose of this paper is to provide other municipalities w~th recommendations on brownfield redevelopment and thus give them a better understanding of things to consider and potential roadblocks and challenges that could arise.

1 PROPERTY OF

RYERSON UNIVERSITY' '!'.lDA".

2

1.0

INTRODUCTION
During the 1960s. the Lakeview Generating Station on the Ontario Power Generation

(OPG) lands, located in the Lakeview community of Mississauga, was the largest thermal electric plant in the world. Following Provincial Government policy to phase out coal fired generating stations by the end of 2007, the station closed down on April 30. 2005, after 43 years of service. On June 12, 2006. the 'four sisters' (smoke stacks) of the plant were demolished. The OPG site is 80 hectares (196 acres); it incorporates approximately 4500 meters of shoreline, including breakwaters and is currently owned by OPG. The site is considered a brownfield, and the extent of remediation that has been completed by the OPG to date is unknown at this point. The lands are still owned by OPG and there are no immediate plans to sell or transfer the lands. In other words, OPG's future plans and intentions pertaining to the lands are not yet known. Adjacent land uses include parks, open space, nearby residential, business employment uses, and a wastewater treatment plant (operated by the Region of Peel). On April 14, 2010, Mississauga's City Council had passed Resolution 0087-2010 about the various options available to protect the Lakeview lands and reconfirmed that it is strongly opposed to using the Lakeview lands for power generation in the future and that Council desires and intends to develop the Lakeview lands into a diverse, multi-faceted lakefront community. Council also directed that a Request for Proposals be prepared immediately to retain a consultant to facilitate the development of a vision for the OPG lands. In June of 2010, a multi-disciplinary consulting team lead by Urban Strategies Inc. was awarded the contract to

3

create a co m pelling vision for t he site. The consu lting team includes GD H Inc.; N. Barry Lyo n Consu ltants Ltd.; Michael Van ValkenbJrgh Associates, Inc. and Lor d Cultura l Resou rce s.

M ississauga's location withi n t he Greater Toronto Area

So~Cif

o 5 10 20 JO _ -===-_-== = 30 __ Ki1omolre,
Figure 1: Mississauga ' s Location within the Greater Toronto Area

SUil-st c: ~ c.,ada .2(X)6 HAD 1933 U"'-M ZOrtf 17ftf
Be!!l aPe~

~

....

"",' 3 2011

The name of this project became Inspiration Lakeview These lands have the potential to become a regional, national and international model of sustainability and brownfield redevelopment The Inspiration Lakeview project will take place in three phases, the first and second phase have been awarded to Urban Strategies and third phase is dependent on Council approval and funding. The City has completed the Vision at the end of February 2011 with a presentation to Council on April 18, 2011. Next steps for the project include working towards the development of a Master Plan for the site and conducting additional studies that will enable

4

the develo pm ent of th e co mmu nity vision.

Figure 2: Photographs of the OPG Pier and the shoreline in Lakeview (Mississauga , 2010)

This major research paper will be a case study on the development of the Vision for the OPG lands in Lakeview . I will examine the interests of stakeholders such as the City of Mississauga, the Lakeview residents, the Region of Peel, the Province of Ontario, Credit Valley Conservation (CVC), as well as the Toronto and Region Conservation (TRC) and add ress the many political issues involved in this project. The importance of the history of Lakeview, the public consultation process, the pruject structure, as well as the next steps will be critically talked about in detail. This purpose of this paper is to provide other municipalities with recommendations on brownfield redevelopment 2nd thus give them a better understanding of things to consider and potential roadblocks and challenges that could arise .

5

6

2.0

PROJECT PURPOSE AND APPROACH
The purpose of this project is to examine how a municipality goes through the process

of developing a vision for brownfield waterfront lands, while managing the interests and of all levels of government, the general public, adjacent landowners and residents. This topic is relevant to planning because it deals with brownfield redevelopment, public consultation, the extent and cost of remediation required, and government relations. Ontario Power Generation owns the lands the City of Mississauga is developing the vision for. Ontario Power Generation, incorporated on December 1, 1998, is the Crown Corporation for power generation in the Province of Ontario. OPG's focus is on the "efficient production and sale of electricity from our generation assets, while operating in a safe, open and environmentally responsible manner" (OPG, 2011). OPG is also one of the largest power generators in North America with 3 nuclear generating stations, 5 thermal generating stations, and 65 hydroelectric generating stations as well as 2 other nuclear generating stations that are leased to Bruce Power L.P. Also, OPG employs approximately 12,000 people across Ontario (OPG, 2011). However, the City sees this as an opportunity to put forth a vision that reflects how the residents and the City see that waterfront developing, which in essence makes the City leaders on the project. Others organizations or levels of government have not put forth any plans for the OPG lands but the City has been in constant communication with all parties to ensure that their initiatives align with the vision of the Inspiration Lakeview project. On December 1, 2010, Mississauga South IVIPP Charles Sousa announced that the Ministry of Energy, the City of Mississauga, and OPG are working together to develop a

7

co llective long-term vi::;ion for the inspiration Lakeview la:lcs, as sho wn in Fig ure 3. The pa rti es are cu rrently working on developing a memorandum of understanding, which will result in developing t1eir collective vis ion. In other words, the future re-development of these lands is very ~ mpo(tant and this agreement "viii formalize the coordination of efforts by al l t hree parti es involved

Inspirati on lakeview Main Study Area

~(t C vofMz~11

NAO IgS3 U1M Zan. 11N

0.15 03 0.9 0.6 12 _-====-__ -======-___ Kdometrl'\

Se !J.~PI"

"OIH 1011

Figure 3: Map of the Main Study Area

8

3.0

CITY OF MISSISSAUGA OVERVIEW
Missis sauga \;vas(ormcd in 1974 and is now cOllsidered to be Canada's 6th largest and

fastest growing city. Mississauga is cuiturally diverse: with 729, 000 re sid ents in eleven different ward s. Miss issa uga has eleven community centres and approximately 55 ,000 registered bu sinesses that employ more than 425,000 people . Mississauga 's organizational chart can be seen in Figure 4 Understanding the internal structure of municipalities is essential when trying to coordinate projects and efforts between departme nts or when attempting to garner support from other departments for a project.

CllY COUNOL AND MAYOR

· · · · ·

Co r porate Strategy & In nova tion Econom ic Developmen t IntPrna l Audit Legal Services Strategic Community Initiatives

· Fire and Emergency Services · · · · Library Business Services Recreation and Parks Culture Division

· Communications · Human Resources · Custolner and Business Services · Info rmation Technology · Facilities and Property Management · Legis lative Services & City Clerk · Finance · Revenue

· Busine ss Services · Development & Design · Building & Chief Bu il ding Officer 'Poli cy Planning

· Business Services · Trans it · Engineeri ng & Works · Enforcement 'Transportation & Infrastructure Planning · Transportation Project Offic e

Figure 4: City of Mississauga Organizational Chart

Mississauga has more than 480 parks and 23 major trail systems including part of a 780 kilometre waterfront trail that spans from Niagara-on-the-Lake to the Quebec border. More specifically, the City's existing waterfront parks and greenbelts comprise approximately 460 acres or 7% of all parks and greenbelts (6877 acres) in the City; and 10.1 km or 46% of the City's

9

22 km lake Ontario shoreline (Community Services, 2010). 3.1 3.1.1 Profile of Lakeview and Surrounding Area Demographics The lakeview community is located in Ward 1. The Ward has a total population of 41,764 and is located in south-east Mississauga and also includes the communities of Port Credit, Mineola, and part of Dixie. As shown in Figure 5, Ward 1 has the greatest percentage of residents over the age of 65. As of the 2006 Census, the ward also has the smallest average household size of all eleven wards and has the highest percentage of families with no children living at home, with over 60% of the population living in one or two person households (Planning and Building, 2009). As a result of these demographics, schools in the area are dosing down and that land is being considered for sale. The fertility rate in lakeview is lower than in the rest of Mississauga.

Map of Ward 1 in Mississauga
INSET MAP

Figure 5: Map of the City of Mississauga's Ward 1

Ward 1 has the higher percentage of Canadian citizens than the rest of the City however 10

one-third are immigrants, with the majority being from Eastern and Southern Europe. The most common ethnic origins of Ward 1 residents are English, Canadian, Scottish, Irish, and Polish. In 2001, 11.6% of the ward's population was classified as a visible minority but that number increased to 14.8% in 2006. Despite this increase, Ward 1 still has the smallest percentage of residents that belong to the visible minority population (Planning and Building, 2009). The Lakeview community has a total population of 22,045, which is approximately 3.6% of Mississauga's total population. 14.8% of residents are 65 years of age or older whereas 17.1% are 14 years of age or younger. The five most common ethnic origins of people in Ward 1 are Canadian, Polish, English, Portuguese, and Italian. 36.1% of lakeview's population 15 years of age and over is 3 generation and over and in the rest of Mississauga that number is 22.7%. In 2006, 13.1% of people were classified as part of a visible minority population (Planning and Building, 2009).
rd

3.1.2

Education, Labour, and Income
One out of five residents in Ward 1, between the ages of 25 and 64, hold a college,

CEGEP, or other non-university certificate or diploma. Of that same population, 16.4% of people hold a Bachelor's degree, which is lower than Mississauga's average of 21.1%. For Ward 1, the service and sales occupations (22.2%), and the business, finance and administration occupations (21.3%) are the largest occupation types. On the other hand, health occupations (4.0%) and occupations in art, culture, recreation and sport (3.5%) are the lowest ones. The top three industries that employ residents in Ward 1 are manufacturing, retail trade and professional, as well as scientific and technical services. Ward 1 has the greatest percentage of workers in all of Mississauga that commute to

11

work by bicycle {0.8%} but the majority still commute by car, truck, or van as a driver {72.2%}. The use of public transit for commuting workers increased from 14.8% in 2001 to 16.2% in 2006 {Planning and Building, 2009}. The median household income for Ward 1 in 2005 was $65,091 whereas Mississauga's median household income was $71,393. The proportion of the population with low income has increased from 11.4% in 2001 to 12.9% in 2005. Focusing in on the Lakeview community, 15.4% of the population 20 years of age or older had obtained a college certificate or diploma and 15.7% of the population in that same age group had obtained a bachelor's degree or a higher level of education (Planning and Building, 2009). In 2006, 66.6% Lakeview's population 15 years and over was employed, 3.2% was unemployed, and 30.2% of that population was not in the labour force. 73.3% of workers commuted to work using a car, truck, or van as a driver, 12.2% used public transit, and 4.1% walked to work (Planning and Building, 2009). 3.1.3 Housing Ward 1 has the greatest number of dwellings that were constructed before 1970. Also, 80% of dwellings in Ward 1 were constructed before 1980 in comparison to 43% of dwellings in all of Mississauga. 66.6% or 11,435 of the total private dwellings are owned whereas 33.4% or 5,735 dwellings are rented. Ward 1 has the greater percentage of rental dwellings than the entire City of Mississauga. Almost half or 48.1% of all the dwellings in Ward 1 are single detached homes and 30.4% are apartments, buildings that have five or more storeys. The average dwelling value in Ward 1 is $424,395 whereas that value is $377,120 for all of Mississauga (Planning and Building, 2009). Lakeview's highest percentages of occupied private dwellings are single-detached

12

homes at 58.0% and apartments, buildings that have five or more storeys at 30.8%. 72.2% of dwellings are owned whereas 27.8% are rented. 66.1% of private dwellings need regular maintenance only and 9.0% need major repairs. Of the total private occupied dwellings in Lakeview 62.3% of dwellings were constructed in or prior to 1970 and only 6.7% were constructed between 1996 and 2001 (Planning and Building, 2009).

13

14

4.0

LAKEVIEW HISTORY
Heritage Mississauga, a not-for-profit charity was established in 1960 by a group of

volunteers. Today, Heritage Mississauga deals with the City's heritage matters through researching, interpreting, and encouraging awareness. Matthew Wilkinson, a historian for Heritage Mississauga, was asked by Lorenzo Ruffini to come speak to the consulting team as well as some members of the core Inspiration Lakeview team about the history of Lakeview. There are many publications on other areas of Mississauga such as Port Credit and Streetsville however the same cannot be said for Lakeview, despite its rich history. Matthew Wilkinson was able to provide the core team with newspaper articles, a PowerPoint presentation, references to a couple of books, and photographs of Lakeview. His information described how the current OPG lands have developed throughout the years and the different uses that were present on the lands. 4.1 Early History Colonel Samuel Smith (1756-1826) owned over 5000 acres of land in Toronto Township and Etobicoke. The majority ofthe Colonel Smith Tract was sold by the family between 1865 and 1872. By 1877, the lands in Lakeview were primarily utilized for farming. The Ontario Rifle Association was formed in 1868 and used Garrison Common in Toronto. However, in 1881, the city ordered them to relocate and the association acquired land in Lakeview, from Cawthra road to Etobicoke Creek for the rifle ranges, calling officially naming them the Long Branch Rifle Ranges. At this time farming ceased south of Lakeshore but north of Lakeshore was still largely farm land. The Lakeview name was never incorporated but prior to 1880, there was a Lakeview hotel in the community (Weeks, 1990).

15

4.2

Canada's First Aerodrome and Flying School

In 1915, Curtiss Ae rop lanes an d Mot ors Lt d established Canad a's fi rst aerodrome and f lying schoo l in Lakeview. The fi rst flight occu rred on June 22, 1915. The chief inst ructor w as Theodore Macauley with flyirg ass:stants, Bret Acosta al1d Guy Gilpatric. At m ost th e aerodrome had 10 planes . As part of World War I, it operated for 2 years (19 15- 1917). Aviator s had to pay their own way, br 400 minutes they had to pay $400 . The flying school closed in December of 1916 (Weeks, 1990) . There were 130 graduates from the school. In 1917, the school transformed into the air and ground training schoo! fo ' cad ets . upon graduating, pilots went to England to serve during War World I with the Royal I\lava l Air Services . William Faulkner trained there for the Roya: Canadian Air Force however it is unknowr whether or not he completed his training. He doe s however refer to Long Branch in a few of his writings . At the end of WWI, the field was determined to be too small so training ceased (Weeks, 1990).

Figure 6: Lakeview in 1954, first aerial photography of the area .

16

4.3

Long Branch Rifle Ranges
The Long Branch Rifle Ranges were active as a site for militia training and a Cadet

program. The Rifle Ranges were used for training by the Royal Air Force for administration offices during World War I and for training grounds by the Department of National Defence during the World War II. Following the War, the use of the ranges was on the decline. In 1917, the aerodrome had a more formal structure and the barracks were built. Wartime housing in the area had four different models. The barracks were used as relief housing for the poor during the war but when relief housing ended in 1958, the buildings destroyed within a month. There was a fire on the site in 1944, which resulted in all records from the rifle ranges being burned. In 1945, there were a few tragedies on the ranges, including one where a boy lost his life when he wandered onto the lands and found a grenade. The ranges officially closed in 1957 but the short range was still utilized by Small Arms Ltd. for manufacturing guns and ammunition. The fire range was located at the back of the building (Weeks, 1990).

4.4

Small Arms ltd.
In 1935, the Department of National Defence from the Ontario Militia Department

purchased some of the land that was used for the rifle ranges. On August 7, 1940, Small Arms Ltd., a Crown Corporation, was created and the objective was to build an arms manufacturing facility. Establishing and building the facility cost $8 million. The first weapons in the facility were being produced by June of 1941 and by the end of that year. The facility had employed 1200 people and produced 7589 rifles. In 1942, 200 homes and a women's dormitory were built for the workers in the lakeview area. By 1943, the plant has over 5,500 employees working in 3 shifts and was producing over 30,000 rifles a month.

17

Over th E: years, more t har- 14,000 em ployees worked at the plan t, most of them were women, as shown in Figu re 7. However, mos( of the official photographs are of mal es in manageria l positions . The maxi'1lum nu mber of workers at one time was as much as 4,000 to 5,000. Wartime production ceased :n December of 1945 and in 1946 the site beca me home to th e Canadia n Arsenals product ion facilities and began producing engine co mp o nents, vehicle parts, as well as arms for the Canadian Army, The facility functioned until 1974 (Weeks, 1990) .

Figure 7: Women working at Small Arms Ltd. (Heritage Mississauga, 2011)

Eventually all the buildings that housed the facilities were destroyed with the exception of Building 12, being the only building that survived to date. The building was the Rifle Inspection Facility and is listed on the heritage registry; it is used by the OPP as an indoor shooting range. The building is not publicly accessible; it located on the sewage treatment plant property.
4.5 Lakeview Generating Station
IS

owned by the Region of Peel and

On June I, 1958, construction of Canada's first 300,000 kilowatt thermal-electric plant began on 52 acres of waterfront land in Lakeview. Ontario Hydro announced on July 24, 1959 that there would be a third and a fourth 300,000 kilowatt generating unit added to the station

18

by 1964 (OPG, 2005). On June 20,1962, Ontario Premier John Robarts and Ontario Hydro chairman W. Ross Strike started up the first unit of the plant. By 1969 all the units were in service and the total cost for the plant was $274 million, making it the largest thermal electric plant in the world (OPG, 2005). The plant had four 146 metre smoke stacks; they became known as "The Four Sisters" and served a dual purpose of a navigation tool for boats, ships, and aircrafts. Between 1969 and 1980, the plant operated at its highest capacity, meeting approximately 17 percent of Ontario's energy needs (OPG, 2005). In 1980s, as alternatives to fuel became available such as nuclear units, the Lakeview plant transitioned into a four unit peaking plant. In 1986, the station began using lower-sulphur coal in order to reduce sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides. Between 1990 and 1993, $1.1 billion was invested in rehabilitating the plant units for increased efficiency and reliability and the addition of acid control equipment was supposed to be added to all eight units. However, by 1992, only four units were repaired the plant continued to function as a four-unit peak demand generating station but with a much better environmental performance (OPG, 2005). In March of 2001, the provincial government announced that Lakeview would be required to stop burning coal by April, 2005. Then once again, in 2003, the provincial government confirmed that Lakeview would close on April 30, 2005 along with any other remaining Ontario Power Generation fossil-fuelled plants (OPG, 2005). The plant then closed after 43 years of service in Lakeview. The extent of the land contamination of the lands is still unknown as Ontario Power Generation has not released any environmental reports. Today, Lakeview is largely a suburban community with come light industrial uses along the lakefront

19

la nds south of Lakesh ore Road. As shown in Fi gure 8, th e " Four Sisters" we re demolished on June 12, 2006. Th is w as a positive expe rience fo r t he many people because throughout Lakeview's h:story the commu nity was prohibited f rom accessi ng Miss issauga's eastern shoreline and th is so lidified that there would not be another power gene rating station in Lakeview and that maybe o ne da y t he community would have access to the waterfront.

Figure 8: Demolition of the Lakeview Power Generation Plant (Mississauga, 2006)

20

5.0
5.1

INSPIRATION LAKEVIEW
Strategic Community Initiatives Division The Strategic Community Initiatives Division in charge of the Inspiration Lakeview

project was created by its director Bruce Carr. Its main purpose was to connect with the public as part of a community engagement initiative entitled "Our Future Mississauga" and coming out of this exercise was work on the creation of the City's new Strategic Plan. To make this happen, employees looking for career development opportunities could apply for online for positions at this division. This resulted in a multi-disciplinary team of people from across the corporation working on the initiatives described above. The employees would divide their working days between their home departments and the Strategic Community Initiatives Division. The resulting Strategic Plan provides direction that shapes decision-making for the City. This document has great value and power because all City initiatives must align with the Plan. In other words, whenever a department puts forth an idea for a project or an initiative, they must show how that project aligns with the goals and objectives of the Strategic Plan. The Strategic Plan sets out a vision for the City: "Mississauga will inspire the world as a dynamic and beautiful global city for creativity and innovation with vibrant, safe and connected communities; where we celebrate the rich diversity of our cultures, our historic villages, Lake Ontario and the Credit River Valley. A place where people choose to be." The plan also includes five pillars for change: Move - developing a transit-oriented city Belong - ensuing youth, older adults and new immigrants thrive Connect - completing our neighbourhoods

21

Prosper - cultivating creative and innovative businesses Green - living green There are a number of projects that stemmed from the Strategic Plan such as Downtown 21, the revitalization or Mississauga's downtown core, and the Inspiration Lakeview Project (at the time the project started, it did not have an official name). Each pillar in the Strategic Plan is connected to an action item that is outlined in the (lAction Plan", which serves as a supplementary document with key indicators, targets, actions and funding options (Strategic Plan, 2008). The Inspiration Lakeview Project perfectly aligns with the Prosper Pillar: "We will create a model sustainable creative community on Mississauga's waterfront." It includes the following action and description: "Mississauga's waterfront is a hidden jewel, and one of our city's greatest assets. This strategic location has limitless potential for creative development and redevelopment. We can attract industries to mixed use communities, complete with arts and culture districts, a variety of housing options, employment, and retail and recreational uses - all built to world-leading standards of urban and green design. Mississauga's waterfront can become a regional, national and international model, and an inspiration to cultivate innovation elsewhere in Mississauga. Building on this asset will enhance our cultural and economic richness, and create recreational amenities and world class attractions that will increase the quality of life for residents and the experience for visitors." (2008)

5.2

Project Beginning On February 27, 2008 Council unanimously approved the following motion in regards to

22

the OPG lands in lakeview: "Be it resolved that the City Council of Mississauga inform the Ontario Power Authority that we are strongly opposed to the construction of a gas power plant in the lakeview Community; and further, that the Council of the City of Mississauga encourages Staff to commence planning for the redevelopment of lakeview as a diverse, multi-faceted community for the twenty-first century." As a result of this motion, Bruce Carr was looking for someone to join the Strategic Community Initiatives Division and lead the Inspiration lakeview. lorenzo Ruffini had previously spoken to Bruce Carr about possible career development opportunities and mentioned to him that he would be interested if any other positions became available. lorenzo Ruffini also has a deep interest and love for the waterfront, having bought his first home in lakeview. When approached about this opportunity and after having worked out the details with lorenzo's home department, Community Services, lorenzo joined the project team in September of 2009. He originally started out working on this initiative part time but soon he was managing the project full time. His main focus was on establishing a core team for the project and working on government relations. Government relations work involved identifying all the stakeholders and aligning the objectives of the Inspiration lakeview Project with their objectives. Some of identified stakeholders were the Ministry 0 f Energy and Infrastructure, MPP Mississauga South Charles Sousa, the Ward 1 Councillor, Mississauga Summit Task Force, Region of Peel leadership Team, Enersource, and Waterfront Toronto. The City held various meetings with those stakeholders in an effort to align initiatives, generate support and endorsement for the project, as well as provide the stakeholders with an understanding of how this project may benefit them.

23

On July 16, 2008, the Provincial Government announced the former Lakeview Generating Station will not be a potential site for a new natural gas plant and Lakeview/s future in electricity generation is over. This provided even further support for the project. On November 17, 2008 a report to Planning and Development Committee titled "Waterfront as a Premier Destination: Update and Action Plan" was later approved by Council and received $150,000 to conduct a study on the OPG lands. Then, on April 14, 2010, Mississauga's City Council passed Resolution 0087-2010 "That an RFP be prepared immediately, utilizing the budgeted amount approved, to put in place a consulting firm to commence a tertiary study for the OPG lands". Council also reaffirmed its strong opposition to any reconsideration of the Lakeview lands as a site for power generation. These announcements changed the City's direction from working on government relations to writing a request for proposals and retaining a consultant. 5.3 Project Structure The Inspiration Lakeview Project has been divided into three phases. The first and second phases have been awarded to Urban Strategies Inc. following the review of 11 proposals. The consulting team includes GDH Inc.; N. Barry Lyon Consultants Ltd.; Michael Van Valkenburgh Associates, Inc. and Lord Cultural Resources. The third phase, at the time was still subject to Council budget approval, would be defined in more detail depending on the outcomes of the first two phases. There was a possibility of extending the consultant's contract onto the third phase, thus each proposal being submitted for phase one and two also included a breakdown of steps and estimated costs for phase three.

24

5.3.1

Phase 1 In the first phase of the project, the core project team along with the consultants

worked on understanding and consolidating all the information, reports, and documents that are relevant to the OPG lands. The consultants also looked at provincial documents such as the Growth Plan and the Places to Grow Act. Essentially, this phase was heavily research based and included information gathering and analyzing in order to get a detailed understanding of the lands, their history, and the community at large. This phase was completed in September, 2010 with a deliverable of a Phase 1 background report that was posted on the Inspiration lakeview website for public access. This was a milestone in keeping the community involved in the process and being transparent about the work that is being done on this project. 5.3.2 Phase 2 - Public Engagement The community in Lakeview has been recently engaged in the Strategic Plan and in the Lakeview and Port Credit District Policies Review. Thus, one of the concerns of the project team was that the community would feel over-engaged and would lose interest in public information and engagement sessions. The consultants, Urban Strategies, have suggested that instead of doing a few evening sessions, the focus should be on doing an evening project kick-off session sometime in October and following up with 3 full days of community engagement that would involve a mix of charettes, presentation, design workshops, and drop in sessions. The City agreed. Nearly three hundred Mississauga residents and stakeholders came together for a kickoff event on October 6th, 2010 for the launch ofthe Inspiration Lakeview visioning sessions. Two urban experts spoke to the community and provided them with specialist perspective and

25

knowledge . Jo e Berri dge, pa rtne r at Urban Strategies Inc., shared his exp erien ce working on and visitin g waterfronts arou nd the world . He encouraged us to t hink " 3ig, Me diu m, and Small," when thinkin g about the potential for t he waterfront . The n, Barry Lyon , se nior partner an d president of N. Barry Lyon Cons ulting, drew fro m hi s experience w ith large, bro w nf iel d redevelopment sites across southern Ontario and identified H~at the m ar ke t potent ial for the Lakeview area is significant. He contends that success will depelld on attracting a true mi x of uses, including employment, residential and retail/commercial uses and attracting a young demographic to this community.

Figure 9: Public Engagement Sessions (City of Mississauga, 2010)

Throughout the public consultation process that occurred prior to the December Sessions, certain core concepts, themes, and ideas began to emerge . These ideas were refined into eight Core Principles that would reflect the community's vision and values . The vi sion for Lakeview is rooted in eight core principles: Principle 1: Link the City and the Water Principle Z: Open the Site with a Wealth of Accessible Public Spaces Principle 3: Create a Green, Sustainable, Innovative, Model New Community Principle 4: Create a Vibrant Community. Principle 5: Connect in Multiple Ways : Transit, Walking, Cycling and the Car

26

Principle 6: Create a Destination to Draw Local, Regional and International Visitors Principle 7: Commemorate History While Creating a New Legacy Principle 8: Balance Public and Private Investment to be Economically Viable and Sustainable. The project team along with the consultants realized that it would be very challenging for the public to focus on all eight core principles individually during the December Sessions. Thus, the following four themes were developed in order to clearly focus discussion: Blue - Water is the defining feature of Inspiration Lakeview. No other shoreline city will engage with water so significantly, inviting us to be both playful and contemplative; its presence both calming and energizing. Green - Green Inspiration Lakeview will be visually, philosophically and functionally green. It will provide: an extensive public realm; rehabilitated natural areas; and integrated sustainable infrastructure and design; each aspect contributing to a high quality of life for the community and high value setting for private investment. Culture - From generating power to generating ideas, Inspiration Lakeview will give a place and forum for arts and culture inspired locally and extending internationally. Urban - With the redevelopment of Inspiration Lakeview, a new vibrant community will take shape on the shores of Lake Ontario that will be a regional, national and international model of new community design. The three-day sessions were going to take place in November however it is extremely difficult to coordinate schedules. It was a challenge to make sure that the date worked for the local Councillor, the Mayor, the consultants as well as the stakeholders. Finally the public engagement sessions took place over December 2, 3, and 4, 2010 at the lVlississauga Seniors'

27

PROPERTY OF
RVER~ON "Nllfm~lTV

IIQOfo O

Centre. Almost 500 members of the community attended over those 3 days, got involved and shared their ideas for a new waterfront with the consultant team. During those sessions, there was also an opportunity to listen to three urban experts. Erik Freudenthal, Head of Communications at a unique sustainable development in Stockholm, spoke about how Hammerby Sjostad, Sweden, transformed a contaminated industrial area into an exciting waterfront district. Gail Lord, President of Lord Cultural Resources, gave a presentation on how cities around the world are capitalizing on culture for economic change. Finally, Mathew Urbanski, a principal at Michael Van Valkenburgh Associates Landscape Architects Inc. in New York City, presented ways that landscape design can create engaging public spaces. In addition to these sessions, the core project team engaged local schools and youth by conducting presentations and sit down sessions with students. In fact, one class took on a visioning exercise of their own for the lands. Students had built miniature models displaying what they thought the possibilities were for the vacant lands. The students were also given the opportunity to communicate their ideas to the consulting team. 5.3.3 Vision Public Presentation The collaboration of the ideas heard from over 1000 people during the three day December Sessions, workshops, ongoing conversations, as well as key stakeholder meetings that led to the creation of the Inspiration Lakeview vision. This vision was presented to over 300 member of Lakeview community on the evening of February 17, 2011 at the Cawthra Senior's Centre in Mississauga. The Keynote Address was by the Honourable David Crombie, PC, OC, founding chair of the Waterfront Regeneration Trust and commissioner of the Royal

28

Commission on the Toronto Waterfront. As part of his presentation, David Crombie gave a brief history of the evolution of waterfronts with a focus on waterfronts along the Lake Ontario shoreline. David Crombie also spoke about the following ten Common Principles and seven Strategies to achieve successful waterfronts:

:Common Prificiples!
Clean, Green, Connected, Open, Accessible, Useable, Diverse, Affordable, Attractive, Meaning
I:

Strategies:

1. Make the waterfront a Community Priority;
2. Always look beyond your boundaries / borders; 3. Set the stage with really good planning (comes from within the community and talent beyond the community); 4. Use milestone projects to build momentum; 5. Design with both natural and cultural heritage in mind; 6. Add value to your asset with connections; 7. You make it happen only with Partnerships
Figure 10: The Honourable David Crombie's Common Principles and Strategies for Waterfront Success

Urban Strategies Inc. presented the vision to the community and explained how the eight core principles were applied to the four themes that grouped the recommendations for the vision. Once again, it is important to remember that this is a vision not a master plan. The actions, themes, and ideas identified in this vision will be reference points throughout the development of the master plan in order to ensure that the plan remains true to the community's vision. As seen in Table 1, each ofthe themes identified more actions that would collectively form a sustainable community, considering environmental, social, economic, and cultural responsibility. These moves range from big, medium and small as redevelopment

29

should occur at all different scales. It will be this long term transition and varying times of each of these moves that will overtime build the character of these lands. The vision also outlines the next steps and ideas for immediate action. At the master plan leve" the feasibility of these ideas will be examined.

The Street Pattern · · Main Street · · Transit Spine · · · Park Boulevards · · Local Streets · · · Lakeside Drive · · Multiple Modes · · Residential Mixed· · Use · Retail Streets · Coal Hi" · · Urban Institutional · Pier Walks · Campus · Local Open · Employment Area · Spaces · Cultural & Cultural Open Space · Green Space Figure 11: Overview of Core Principles, Themes, and Moves for Inspiration lakeview New Channels Water Features as Focal Points Daylight Serson Creek Link Lakefront Promenade Marina Reconfigure Marina Breakwall Stormwater Canals Variety of Waterfront Experiences Green Recreation Corridor Green Water's Edge Green Infrastructure Green Streets & a Grand Boulevard

·

·

·

Arts & Culture Island Cultural Generator Cultural Spine and Special Attractions Public Art & Architecture Multi-use Facilities Commemorate History

·

30

6.0

NEXT STEPS
It is evident that the OPG lands are a significant site along the city's waterfront providing

a tremendous opportunity to transform the south easterly portion of the city. City Council has sent a clear message that it is committed to facilitating and supporting a change in this area as demonstrated in the motions unanimously adopted on February 27, 2008 and April 12, 2010. The Provincial Government has also supported change in this area through the announcement on July 16, 2008 indicating the OPG lands will not be a site for a future natural gas power plant. The City has completed its Vision for the OPG lands, which will be received by Council on April 17,2011. It is important to keep the momentum going on such a project thus here are the next steps the City will be taking.

6.1

Master Plan
The Inspiration Lakeview Vision is only the beginning of a lengthy transformation

process for the lands. The ideas that are presented in the Vision need to be studied, and refined in order to be feasible. The City will proceed on working on the third phase of the Inspiration Lak"eview project, which involves the development of a Master Plan for the lands. The contract that was awarded to Urban Strategies Inc. for the first two phases have been extended into Phase 3 of the project with an approved budget of $700,000. The steps and studies that will be undertaken have not yet been defined. The City is waiting for the environmental information from Ontario Power Generation as that information is central to determining the next steps and the feasibility of the vision for these lands. Aside from looking at the environmental information, the studies that are part of the Master Plan will examine the public realm, specific land use and densities, urban design guidelines, transportation and services, a sustainability

31

strategy, financial modeling, and implementation strategies. 6.2 Environmental Review One of the next steps is also to conduct an environmental review for the lands in order to establish the existing environmental conditions. Understanding these conditions will assist in estimating the costs as well as the extent of remediation the site requires. This is necessary to do before finalizing the Master Plan. For instance, certain areas of the site may be too contaminated for the uses that the vision proposes, this would be considered in the Master Plan and that use may need to be changed or altered. Once the Memorandum of Understanding is finalized and signed by all parties, the City will obtain environmental studies relevant to the lands from OPG. The City will then conduct an assessment to determine how many additional environmental studies are needed as part of the Master Plan process. 6.3 lakefiliinitiative Feasibility On May 31,2010, the Region of Peel, Credit Valley Conservation, and Toronto and Region Conservation approached the City with a proposal to review the feasibility of introdUcing lakefill on the shoreline of the OPG lands, the Region of Peel's G.E. Booth Waste Water Plant, and City of Toronto's Marie Curtis Park. Their proposal provided a unique opportunity to use lakefill to create a continuous connection along the waterfront for public access and it would also provide a saving to the Region that could then be reinvested into infrastructure on the site. This idea was presented to the community. The lakefill feasibility study was proposed as being funded by the Region of Peel but carried out by a partnership between Credit Valley Conservation and Toronto and Region Conservation. This idea was presented to the public during the Inspiration Lakeview sessions in early December of 2010.

32

The public was receptive to the idea and suggested a number of opportunities that the lakefill would provide. The lakefill feasibility study has yet to take place but the City will be working with Toronto and Region Conservation and Credit Valley Conservation in delivering this study. Memorandum of Understanding On February 23, 2011, a report titled iiMemorandum of Understanding among the Ministry of Energy, the City of Mississauga and Ontario Power Generation regarding the former lakeview Generating Station lands, Ward 1" was submitted to Mississauga's City Council by Janice M. Baker, Mississauga's City Manager and Chief Administrative Officer. The report referenced the announcement that was made by the Honourable Charles Sousa MPP for Mississauga South on December 1, 2010 which stated that the Province of Ontario would be working with the City and Ontario Power Generation on a vision that is shared by all parties for the redevelopment of the lands. In response to this announcement, Bruce Carr was assigned to be the City's representative during this process. On January 13, 2011, City staff had an introductory meeting with the Province and OPG to discuss the approach that will be taken for completing this Memorandum of Understanding. The purpose of this Memorandum will be to facilitate future studies to enable the development of the site in accordance with the vision, determine future ownership of the lands, define obligations between the three parties, and establish a timeline for meetings, studies and other deliverables. However, the City could proceed on these negotiations without receiving direction from Council. Upon receiving this report, City Council passed Resolution 0044-2011 that was moved by the Councillor pf Ward 1, Jim Tovey and seconded by Ward 2 Councillor, Pat Mullin:

33

1. That the report entitled Memorandum of Understanding amongst the Province of
Ontario, the City of Mississauga and Ontario Power Generation regarding the former lakeview Generating Station lands, Ward 1, dated February 11, 2011 from Janice Baker, City Manager and Chief Administrative Officer, be received for information. 2. That staff be hereby authorized to enter into negotiations with the Province of Ontario and Ontario Power Generation ("OPG"), and other parties if required, and to take all necessary actions to execute a Memorandum of Understanding which reflects a common vision for the redevelopment of lands at the former lakeview Generating Station (Ward 1). With Council's support and direction, the City's next steps are to continue these negotiations and hopefully have a final Memorandum of Understanding brought before Council for execution in the spring of 2011. This is a very significant milestone because despite the work that Mississauga was dOing, without a formal agreement or acknowledgement of Mississauga's efforts, the Province and OPG could have at any time turned around and done whatever they wanted to the lands. However, the Memorandum of Understanding will ensure that there is coordination of efforts and a consistent vision for the future of these lands.

34

7.0

OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Current growth and sprawl is not sustainable. Continuing with these trends will result in

building more new infrastructure. The future goal is to have a land use development pattern that successfully reduces sprawl and encourages intensification. The focus needs to be on renewing and upgrading existing infrastructure not building new infrastructure. To achieve this, the Provincial Policy Statement encourages intensification and defines it as, "the development of a property, site or area at a higher density than currently exists through: a. redevelopment, including the reuse of brownfield sites; b. the development of vacant and/or underutilized lots within previously developed areas; c. infill development; and the expansion or conversion of existing buildings." In other words, the use of existing lands and infrastructure needs to be optimized before expanding current boundaries. However, when looking at the bigger picture of intensification, brownfield redevelopment, and sprawl, there are some initial recommendations that the Inspiration lakeview Project presents for other municipalities trying to undertake similar initiatives. Recommendation 1: Be Flexible It is important to be flexible with schedules and be able to shift focus when asked to do so. With this project, momentum on the project was slow however upon receiving Council direction, the core team had to put their current work on the back burner and immediately prepare a request for proposals and a statement of work for the Inspiration lakeview project. This was a lot of time consuming work because project parameters and scope had to be defined in a short period of time. Thus it is not only important to be flexible but also be able to change

35

pace and adjust to the amount of work that needs to be completed. Within a year, the Inspiration Lakeview project has already completed Phase 1 and Phase 2. Recommendation 2: Remain Positive Brownfield redevelopment is not an easy task; in fact it is an uphill battle. Municipalities and project team members need to be a project champions at the local level and truly believe in their project. Nothing comes easy; direction on projects is always changing based on factors such as stakeholder interests, financial constraints and political pressures. At times, the barriers may seem unsurpassable and municipalities may question how to continue on such a project. The easy thing to do would be to give up and say that there are too may roadblocks that cannot overcome. However, municipalities need to continue looking at the bright side - the project could serve as a local, regional, and international example for brownfield redevelopment! Recommendation 3: Have Open Communication and Transparency With brownfield redevelopment, there are usually many stakeholders at the table: the public, landowners, external agencies, and other levels of government. It is hard to balance all these different interests and there is a need to recognize and accept that everyone cannot get what they want, however lines of communication need to be kept open between all parties, allowing for constant capacity building and negotiations. Municipalities need to be honest about their intentions as well as about the challenges they are facing as this will open up the door for others to help. Also, transparency between municipal departments will help coordinate efforts reSUlting in greater efficiency and greater support for the project across the corporation. The Inspiration Lakeview team was in constant communication and partnership with the Province of Ontario, the Region of Peel, CVC, and TRe.

36

Recommendation 4: Be Visionary and Realistic It is easy to get carried away with big ideas and an elaborate vision. While this is great way for getting people excited about a project, there is a need to always think about available resources. The vision needs to be innovative but at the same time grounded in the realities of the site and the market and competing priorities across the City. The level of contamination may to a certain extent dictate land uses. For instance, the site may be impossible or extremely costly to remediate for sensitive uses such as schools but a more realistic approach may recognize opportunities for park land in that area. Recommendation 5: Tell a Story Brownfields and issues on contamination may be technical especially when talking about soil contaminants. Unless the people that are being spoken to are proficient in scientific environmental language, generally that type of language should be avoided as it is very likely to confuse people. The use of such language can disinterest people in what might otherwise be a very interesting project. Instead, the utmost effort should be taken to talk about a project like a story, talk about what is trying to be accomplished, what it will take to get there, and what opportunities and potential benefits the brownfield site presents.

37

38

REFERENCES
Baker, J.M. (20ll). Corporate Report. Memorandum of Understanding amongst the Province of Ontario, the City of Mississauga and Ontario Power Generation regarding the former lakeview Generating Station lands, Ward 1. Retrieved February 23, 2011. Baker, 1M. (2010). Corporate Report. Project Plan for Ontario Power Generation (OPG) lands in lakeview. Retrieved August 4, 2010. BMI Consulting! Pace Architects. (2008). lakeview and Port Credit District Policies Review; Directions Report. Retrieved October 2009 from: http://www.mississauga.ca/portal/residents/lakeviewportcreditreview City of Mississauga. (2009). Action Plan: Our Future Mississauga. Mississauga: Strategic Community Initiatives. City of Mississauga. (2011). Inspiration lakeview. Retrieved January 10, 2011 from http://www.mississauga.ca/lakeview City of Mississauga. (2008). Mississauga Plan Review. Sustainable Living. A Growth Management Strategy. Retrieved October 2009 from: http://www.mississauga.ca/portal/residents/mississaugaplanreview City of Mississauga. (2009). Strategic Plan: Our Future Mississauga. Mississauga: Strategic Community Initiatives. City of Mississauga. (2007). Zoning By-law 0225-2007 adopted by the Mississauga City Council on June 20, 2007. Retrieved November 15, 2009 from: http://www.mississauga.ca/portal/residents/zoningbylaw Duguid, B. (2010). Retrieved September 16, 2010 from: http://wwws.mississauga.ca/marketing/websites/lakeview/down loads/letter. pdf Hemson Consulting Ltd. (2008). Employment land Review Study. Retrieved October 10, 2009 from: http://wwws.mississauga.ca/agendas/planning/2008/06_23_08/ltem06EmployLandsStudy.pdf Lakeview Ratepayers Association (lRA) & the Centre for landscape Research, University of Toronto. (2008). Mississauga's lakeview Legacy Project. Retrieved October 15, 2009 from: http://www.lakeviewresidents.com/files/LRA_lEGACY_PRESENTATION.pdf Ontario Power Generation. (2005). lakeview GS 43 years of service to the Province of Ontario. Urban Strategies Inc. (20ll). Inspirotion Lakeview: A Vision. Poster Session presented at the 39

Inspiration Lakeview Vision Unveiling by the City of Mississauga, Mississauga, Ontario. Urban Strategies Inc. (2009). Inspiration Lakeview Phase 1 Background Report. Retrieved November 2010 from: http://wwwS.mississauga.ca/marketing/websites/lakeview/downloads/PhaselReportDRAFTlo 1124.pdf Urban Strategies Inc. (2010). The Lakeview Sessions Wrap-Up. Retrieved on January 11, 2011 from City of Mississauga Website: http://www.mississauga.ca/lakeview Sajecki, E. R. (2010) Corporate Report. Planning and Development Committee. Protection of the Ontario Power Generation lands in Lakeview. Retrieved May 31, 2010 from: http://wwwS.mississauga.ca/agendas/planning/201o/oS_31_1o/item030PGLandsCorpRpt.pdf Sajecki, E.R. (2008). Corporate Report. Planning and Development Committee. Waterfront as a Premier Destination: Update and Action Plan. Retrieved May 31, 2010 from: http://wwwS.mississauga.ca/agendas/pla nning/2oo8/11_17_ o8/ltem03WaterfrontPrimeDestin .pdf Sajecki, E.R. (2011). Corporate Report. Planning and Development Committee. Proposed Review of the Land Use Planning Framework for Power Generation Facilities. Retrieved February 28, 2011 from: http://wwwS.mississauga.ca/agendas/planning/2011/o2_28_11/ltem02LndUseFramewrkRpt02 _28_11. %2028. pdf Sousa, C. (2010). Sousa Announces Next Steps for Lakeview. Retrieved December 1, 2010 from: http://www.chariessousa.ca/pressreleases.aspx?id=17S Verna M.W. (1990) Lakeview: More than just land 1804-1939 (VoL I). Chelsey, ON: V.M. Weeks. Verna M.W. (1990). lakeview: More than just land 1939-1967 (Vol. II). Chelsey, ON: V.M. Weeks.

40

