Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2007

Analysis of the card photograph mounts and imprints of nineteenth century Rochester portrait photographer J.H. Kent, in the George Eastman House collection
Elizabeth Reilly
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Visual Studies Commons Recommended Citation
Reilly, Elizabeth, "Analysis of the card photograph mounts and imprints of nineteenth century Rochester portrait photographer J.H. Kent, in the George Eastman House collection" (2007). Theses and dissertations. Paper 162.

This Thesis Project is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

iFe>
\& i,:., 1.)

· [?i;"___

Analysis of the Card Photograph Mounts and Imprints of Nineteenth Century Rochester Portrait Photographer 1. H. Kent. in the George Eastman House collection.

by

Elizabeth Reilly BA Art, University of California, Santa Cruz, 1997

A thesis project presented to Ryerson University & George Eastman House International Museum of Photography and Film

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in the Program of Photographic Preservation and Collections Management

Toronto, Ontario, Canada 2007 ©Elizabeth Reilly 2007

PROPERTY OF
I;"" '" "f'~N UNI\lEQSITY 1I ;ifi/l!IY

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis project.

I authorize Ryerson University and George Eastman House International Museum of

Photography and Film to lend this thesis project to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University and George Eastman House International Museum of Photography and Film to reproduce this thesis project by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

ii

ABSTRACT

Analysis of the Card Photograph Mounts and Imprint Designs of Nineteenth Century Rochester Portrait Photographer J. H. Kent, in the George Eastman House collection, Master of Arts, 2007, Elizabeth Reilly, Photographic Preservation and Collections Management, Ryerson University.

This essay summarizes a survey of a group of cartes de visite and cabinet card photographs by one photographer. A history of nineteenth century card photography styles and practices, and a brief biography of photographer J. H. Kent provide context for the objects examined. The study took into consideration 207 photographic objects that were sorted, analyzed, researched, and cataloged. The card mounts were evaluated principally in comparison to William C. Darrah's book Cartes De Visite in Nineteenth
Century Photography in an attempt to ascertain the ease of dating card photographs based

on the mounts, imprints and other factors of the overall presentation. The results of the comprehensive assessment and analysis of Kent's card photographs proved that dating by addresses imprinted on mounts, details in imprint design and typography, and comparisons of imprint designs and card mount styles to those outlined by Darrah and others is indeed achievable.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Above all, I would like to thank Joe Struble for being very generous with his time to help me access, catalog and reproduce the Kent photographs for this thesis project. I am also grateful to Barbara Galasso who quickly fulfilled all of my photographic work orders to shoot the front and back of every photograph that I cataloged. Thank you to David Wooters and Laurie Soures for assisting me in the cataloging process and the use of TMS, Sean Corcoran for offering his invaluable advice and support, as well as Jessica Johnston for lending me her fabulous desk chair, without which I would not have been able to physically complete this project. Lastly, I would like to thank Robert Burley, my thesis advisor, and Mike Robinson, my secondary reader.

Elizabeth Reilly August 2007

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Author's declaration Abstract Acknowledgements Table of contents Section I Introduction Approach and methodology Literature survey

II

iii

iv v - vii

1-2 3-4 5-8
Section II

History of card photography Biography J.H. Kent

9-24 25 - 27
Section III

Survey of Kent card photographs Card dating and evaluation Conclusion

28 -40 41 - 51 52 - 53 54-57 58 - 59
60 - 106

Bibliography Appendix A Appendix B Appendix C

107 - 158

v


