I'f) I'f)

'I'"" .-.T
I'f) ~

00
I'f)~

'I'""-.T
~-.T1'f)

~~~

MAR - 51981

·

0

RESIDENTIAL SOLAR HEAT STORAGE WITH ROCKS: A Comparative Study
ERNEST TAMBURRI

RYERSON POLYTECHNICAl lNSTJTUTE

A FOR

THESIS THE

SUBMITTED BACHELOR

IN OF

CONFORMITY TECHNOLOGY

WITH

THE

REQUIREMENTS

DEGREE.

(ARCHITECTURAL

SCIENCE)

RYERSON

POLYTECHNICAL

INSTITUTE

TORONTO. CANADA

APRIL. 1979

ERNEST TAMBURRI 6503 Churchill Street Niagara Falls, Ontario L2G - 2X9

APRIL 12, 1979

DEPARTMENT OF ARCHITECTURAL TECHNOLOGY RYERSON POLYTECHNICAL INSTITUTE 720 KING STREET TORONTO, ONTARIO

GENTLEMEN: I submit for your consideration a thesis entitled, "Residential Solar Heat Storage With Rocks: Degree (Architectural Science). This report is an examination of the popularity of using rock beds to store energy collected from solar air heaters for residential space heating in Canada. This paper includes a discussion on solar energy as a viable alternative source for heating residential houses and the importance of solar heat storage in this alternate method. beds. A comparative analysis of solar heat storage systems justifies the popularity of rock Attention was then paid to rock bed design factors with Finally, a
prelimana~y

A Comparative Study,"

it is submitted as a requirement of the Bachelor of Technology

parameters such as pressure drop across the bed and temperature stratification within the bed. investigation into alternative storage possibilities such as structured storage assemblies as the packing medium in the beds indicate such alternatives merit future development. The thesis excludes discussion of solar heat storage systems that might be found in commercial or government buildings. Since emphasis was placed on the performance of the storage systems rather than the cost, excluded is a descriptive cost analysis of the storage media discussed in the report. The thesis is of great relevance to the
architec~,

builders,

and student who may use the report as a design tool or to anyone for the interest sake of solar energy development.
\

It is hoped that this report is satisfactory in meeting the requirement for a degree. studies in this field. The preparation of this research was both enjoyable and informative and I look forward to further

ResDectfnllv.

ERNEST TAMBURRI

i

ABSTRACT

This report describes a study which investigated the popularity of using rock beds to store energy collected from solar air heaters used for residential space heating in Canada. In justifying the popularity of rock beds, a comparative analysis of solar heat storage systems was conducted. was then paid to rock beds design factors. Attention

Finally, a preli-

minary investigation into alternative storage possibilities as the packing medium in the beds indicate such alternatives merit future development.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I would like to extend my sincerest thanks to all who have given their time and support while undertaking this project. Specific informative time, and encouragement provided

by Mr. P. Meridew, Mr. D.R. Zapanta, Mr. H.A. Powell, Mr. W.D. Stainton, and Mr. T. Jansen were invaluable in preparing this thesis. I express gratitude to the faculty of the Department of Architectural Technology at Ryerson Poly technical Institute for preparing me to write the thesis. Of noteworthy mention

in this regard are. MR. P. Meridew and MR. D.R. Zapanta. I wish to recognize the contributions of the solar energy societies and trades for their co-operation in with much of the research information.
providi~g

me

Ernest Tamburri April, 1979

iii

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PART 1 Intrduction 1.1 Solar Energy: An Alternative Source 1.2 The Need For Storage 1.3 Heat Storage With Rocks 1.4 History of Rock Storage 1
1

2 3

PART 2 Types of Storage Systems 2.1 Choosing the Storage System 2.1.1 Short Term and Long Term Storage 2.2 Storage Media: A Comparative Analysis 2.2.1 Sensible Heat Storage 2.2.1.1 Rock Medium 2.2.1.2 Water Medium 2.2.2 Latent Heat Storage 2.2.2.1 Salt Medium 2.2.2.2 Paraffin Medium 2.2.3 Chemical Heat Storage

5
6
8 8

11 13

15 15
17 19

PART 3 Air Distribution System with Rock Storage 3.1 Air Distribution System 3.1.1 Collector to Storage Mode 3.1.2 Air Flow Through Rock Storage 3.1.3 Storage to Room Mode

20
21 22 23

iv PART 4 Rock Storage Design Factors 4.1 Pressure Drop 4.2 Temperature Stratification 4.3 Rock Shape 4.4 Rock Size 4.5 Storage Bin Shape and Configuration 4.5.1 Aspect Ratio 4.6 Storage Bin Size 4.7 Location of Storage Bin 4.7.1 Underground Storage 4.8 Construction of Storage Bin 4.8.1 Insulation of Storage Bin 4.8.2 Prevention of Heat Loss 24 25
27

29
31 31 33 35 36
37 37

39

PART 5 Conclusion 5.1 Design Recommendations 5.1.1 Storage Bin Size 5.1. 2 Container Shape and Configuration 5.1. 3 Bed Particles 5.1.4 Air Flow 5.1. 5 Insulation 6.1. 6 Performance of Rock Bed 5.2 The Future of Heat Storage 5.3 Sum.rnary 41 41 41 42 42 42 42
43

44

v

PART 6 Appendix A - History of Rock Storage A.l Boulder House A.2 Denver House B - Storage Media B.l Analytic Study of Rock and Water Hedia B.l.l Water Example B.l.2 Rock Example B.2 Study Solution to Problems with Phase Change Materials 50 50 50 46 46
48

52
54 55

B.3 Chemical Reactions Used for Heat Storage C - Air Distribution System D - Study on the Effect of Bed Aspect Ratios and Pressure Drop on Flow Distribution in Rock Storage Beds E - Performance Equation F - Bed Simulation Studies F.l.l Temperature Stratification G - Particle Sizing- Biot Criterion H - Study on Storage Volume to Collector Area Size I - Underground Storage of Heat in Solar Heating Systems J - Solar Energy Trades Literature J.l Solaron Solar Energy Systems J.2 Watershed Energy Systems Ltd. J.3 Solartech Ltd.

57

64

65 65
70

72

74

78 78 80
83

References Bibliography

85

88

vi
LIST OF FIGURES

1.1 2.1 2.2 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4

Denver House Rock Contact Points Heat Exchange Solar Warm Air Heating System Storing Heat Reve.rse Air Flow Through Rock Storage Heating From Storage Temperature Stratification Rock Resistance to Air Flow Biot Criterion Plot for Rocks Proportion of Surface Area to Volume Optimum Storage Size Rock Bin Insulation Prevention of Heat Loss From Storage Bin

3

11 12 20 21 22 23 26

27
30 32 34

4.5
4.6

38
40

4.7

LIST

OF

TABLES

2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4

Hours of Bright Sunshine Properties of Heat Storage-Materials Water and Rock Comparison Thermal Storage of 10
6

7
9

13 16

BTU

PART 1
Introduction

1

1.1 - SOLAR ENERGY: AN ALTERNATIVE SOURCE

The supply of Canada's natural resources such as oil, hydro-electricity, and natural gas used for heating purposes is not inexhaustible (ref.39). There is concern for rapidly

increasing costs of conventional forms of energy, their decreasing supply, and a need to develop alternate sources of energy before a serious shortage occurs. Solar energy has an

abundant supply of potential heat (ref.35) that can be used to provide heat for buildings.

1.2 - THE NEED FOR HEAT STORAGE

Efficient use of solar energy applications for space heating in buildings lies in storage. For the greater part of

the heating season the average size collector will provide an excess of heat above the heat demanded by the home during the solar day period (ref.30; p.97). This excess heat must be

considered for use during night time periods because of lower ambient temperatures usually prevailing during that period (ref.24). The duration of night hours is also greater than

sunlit hours in winter. Since northerly climates typically experience many consecutive days without sunshine (ref.38; p.76), a solar heated house requires some form of storage to retain excess heat from the sunny days to be used for sun-obscured days.

2

1.3 - HEAT STORAGE WITH ROCKS

Most Canadian houses have forced air heating systems using conventional fuels (ref.34), therefore, a storage system utilizing air as the transfer medium is assurnably prefered. Solar heat collectors are able to heat the storage medium gO°F to 130·F (ref.4S; p.9l), high enough to be practical with warm air systems. Presently, rocks are the most popular storage medium for air systems due to their relatively low cost (ref.2S), 33; p.217), and their simple operation (ref.17; p.S). (ref. Rocks

will be looked at in greater detail and compared to other storage media to justify their popularity.

3

1.4 - HISTORY OF ROCK STORAGE

In air type collectors and storage systems, air that is heated in the collector is ducted through an insulated storage container filled with rocks. collector is cooled
~n

The solar heated air from the

its passage through the rock as it gives

up heat and cycled again through the collectors.

/ S o l a r Energ~ To

Rock Storage

---f.;;ij

A- Auxiliary Heat B- Blower c- Cold Return Air D- Oamper w- Warm Solar Heated Air Solar heated air passes down through a hot air duct inside one of the rock cylinders to the bottom of the beds before flowing up through the rock gravel and returning to the collector. Automatic dampers divert this flow to the rooms when heat is needed. Heat from storage is accomplished by another damper adjustment that permits house air to flow down through the heated rocks to the blower and back to the rooms. Auxiliary duct heater prov~ces extra heat i! solar warm air is not enough.

FIGURE 1.1 -

DENVER HOUSE

[ref. 2 : p. 341

4
The first analysis of thermal storage for buildings using rock was introduced by Dr. George Lof, a pioneer of solar heating, who first applied a rock storage system in the Boulder House; Boulder, Colorado in 1945 (refer Appendix A.l). The

second application was in his own home in Denver, Colorado in 1958. In this design thermal rock storage is contained in two

vertical cylinders (fiberboard tubes for concrete formwork), each 3' in diameter and 18' high (figure 1.1), (refer Appendix A.2). The house air return duct is located in the centre of Rocks, approximately
~,

one cylinder.

in diameter, fill both

cylinders except for the lower 2', which contains wire mesh to allow air to pass between the cylinders (ref.45). The cy-

linders, painted red with hanging plants, is exposed to the living area and is visually pleasing (ref.20). Since the original Lof installation, operating efficiencies of air systems have been improved with factory produced collectors and rock storages and better air distribution layouts.

PART 2
Types of Storage Systems

s
2.1 - CHOOSING THE STORAGE SYSTEM

Thermal energy can be stored by three types of storage medium systems: 1) Sensible energy stores heat by raising the temperature of the storage medium such as rocks or water. 2) Latent heat stores energy in materials such as salts or paraffin when the material changes phase from a solid to a liquid. 3) Chemicals are able to store energy by utilizing the heats of chemical reactions. The storage system is composed of three basic components (ref.3?; p.S), the storage medium, energy transfer equipment, and the containment system. The storage medium along with

the tranfer equipment should be chosen together with the solar collector, which could be a liquid type or air type collector (ref.2; p.lSS). Liquid and air collector systems have approximately equal heat transfer characteristics, but air type collectors have the advantage over water type collectors by being simple in operation, lower in first cost (ref.36), and lower in maintenance costs (ref.30; p.lOl). Air as a transfer medium is

not restricted to any temperature range, whereas water boils and freezes (ref.39). Lastly, air can be used as space heat

at a lower temperature than water.

6

2.1.1 - SHORT

TE~l

AND LONG TERM STORAGE

There are two methods of storing the solar energy for use during times when the sun is not shining. The first, short

term storage, is collected only during the heating season (winter), with excess heat produced on sunny days stored for a short term, for use in overcast weather (ref.44; p.18S). Short term storage does not attempt to store heat for longer periods than a few days (ref.39). On the other hand, long term or seasonal storage stores heat from summer to winter where solar radiation is collected when the sun is shining in summer with collectors operating at high temperatures. Northern climates generally experience a

sustained period of cloudiness during the winter, where November and December have the least amount of sunshine during the year (table 2.1). Designs for annual storage are calculated The result is

to store sufficient heating for this period.

a storage system that effectively functions for two months of the year while for the other ten months the system is not effectively used. Long term storage can contribute almost 100% of the home

heating demand while short term less than 60%, but to increase the energy efficiency SO% (from 60% to 90%) the cost increases by a factor of 2 (ref. 3D; p.97). Most experts in Ontario feel

that long term storage systems are more suited to larger buildings and multiple housing units which can accomodate the larger storage tanks required (ref.12). For single family

11

City

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

....
0.
CD

en

CD

VANCOUVER,S.C

48

80

126

168

226

223

280

254

17B

110

53

38

Pl
0 C

rt ....

::t

......

::r'
IWMONTON,ALTA.

81

117

168

219

253

251

302

268

lS8

154

97

75

en CD en

~

":1 NIH PEG, ":AN.

100

130

167

204

245

250

294

263

178

133

84

78

en
0

::r'

11 rt
'1'0 RON '1'0 , OUT.

77

106

149

184

223

263

286

256

201

151

84

61

I

CD

rt

~
t-10NTREAL.QUl~.

79

102

145

167

203

222

244

223

170

126

69

61

en
0 Ii Pl
CD

rt

I.Q

ST. JOIIU·S,UFI,D.

6G

bO

97

101

166

173

232

181

151

lOS

58

51

.... m
C Pl I..c:!

TABLE 2.1- HOURS OF

BRiGUT

SUNSHINE

(ref. 17 )

m

C

...... ......
Pl 0.

!O C Pl
CD

CD

rt
-..J

·

8

2.2 - STORAGE MEDIA: A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS

A comparative analysis of rocks and other storage media is required to understand why rocks is the most popular storage medium for air distribution systems. The three methods

of storing heat (sensible, latent, and chemical) are discussed.

2.2.1 SENSIBLE HEAT STORAGE

Heat is stored by increasing the storage medium rature.

tempe~

This is a product of the specific heat, the mass,

and the temperature difference (refer Appendix B.l), where the sensible heat results in the internal energy of the system being altered by increasing the kinetic and potential energy of the molecules of the storage substance (ref.39; p.68). Heat storage capacity is the amount of heat you can store in a cubic foot of material for lOP temperature rise (ref.2: p.83). Heat energy stored in" this way is reclaimed as the

temperature of the storage medium falls when used for space heating. The heat storage capacity of different materials

varies according to their specific heat (table 2.2), which is the number of BTU required to raise the temperature of one pound of material lOP.

Specific;: Material

Heat

Density Ib ,ft 3

Heat

Capacity

Btu lib ,oF

Btu' ft 3 ,oF

No voids
,

30°10 voids
25

ROCK

0.21

170

36

CONCRETE
'.

0.23

140

32

22

BRICK

0.20

140

20

20

\vA'l'ER

1.00

62

62

43

SCRAP IRON

0.12

490

59

41

SCRAP ALUMINUM

0.23

170

39

27

TABLE 2.2- PROPERTIES

of

HEAT

STORAGE

MATERIALS

(ref. 44 )

10

EXAMPLE (ref ..15 i ch .15) 1) specific heat of water = 1.0 BTU/lb. 6 P 1 cubic foot of water weighs 62.4 Ib if the temperature is raised by 1°F 62.4 BTU would be stored.

2) specific heat of rock = 0.20 BTU/lb." F assume 1 cubic foot of rock weighs 100 Ib (30%voids) If temperature raised by 1 of only 20 BTU would be stored.

Theoretically, water performs much better than rock for the same cubic volume of storage area, since water stores 3.12 times as many BTU for each degree rise in temperature above example). (see

Practically, however, rocks are more advanmedi~~.

tageous than water as the storage

A container of

water at 50°F may contain more BTq of heat than rocks at 120

-F , but 50~F is useless as house heat while 120 P is quite
0

acceptable, if usable heat storage must be at least SO°F. Also, water appears adavantageous since i t holds five times as many BTU per ° P rise in storage temperature as the same weight as rock (see above example). On the other hand,

water will release five times as many BTU as rocks under the same conditions (ref.22i p.31). So, if equal amounts of water

and rock are heated to the same temperature under identical insulated container considerations, the rock will still be warm when the water is cold after a period of time.

11

2.2.1.1 - ROCK MEDIUM

Heat storage can be accomplished in a bed of loose solids such as rocks. Rocks serve as the heat exchanger (ref.24) due

to the large surface area (since a pile of closely packed rocks leaves approximately 1/3 of the volume as void space) and the winding path through the bed ensuring rapid heat exchange (ref.
7; p.SO).

The large surface area needed appears to be apparent for heat losses but the loss of heat by conduction to the surrounding walls is limited because the rocks only touch each other in limited areas, at the points of contact- (figure 2.1). The

slow natural convection of heat through the rocks also offsets this apparent heat loss.

Minimum rock contact minimizes the loss of heat by conduction to the surrounding walls.

FIGURE 2.1 -

ROCK

CONTACT

POINTS

Because of rapid heat exchange, heat is not distributed evenly throughout the bed but only in the area where the heat enters the storage container (figure 2.2). The advantage of

this fact is that the air leaving the bed going back to the

12

collector will be at a relatively cooler temperature.

As the

sun continues to shine, the collector supplies more hot air to the bed, heating it to a higher temperature. Even if only

a small portion of the bed has been heated, hot air from the storage can be blown out to the rooms if needed (ref,44; p.189).

HOT

AIR

As the hot air enters the bed,~~e rocks at the top are heated iw~ed iately (shaded on figure). The air leaving the ced,however,is still at the initial temperature of the rocks.

COOL AIR

FIGURE 2.2 -

HEAT

EXCHANGE

13 2.2.1.2 - WATER MEDIUM

Water has the advantage of having the highest specific heat
cap~ity

(table 2.2) of any ordinary material on a volume

basis. ,
(ref.lO~

Water, itself is inexpensive and readily available p.2l). For solar systems using water as the trans-

fer medium, it is the obvious choice for the storage medium. Table 2.3 illustrates that water should deliver more energy per cost of storage material alone (column 1) and more heat per volume (column 2) than rocks, but there are many drawbacks. First of all, systems with water as the transfer

STORAGE MATERIAL QUANTITY OF ENERGY DELIVERED BY STORAGE MATERIAL BTUj$ TAL'JK VOLUME REQUIRED PER UNIT OF HEAT DELIVERED BTUjFT 3

.

WATER

2.3 x 10 6

9,350

ROCKS

1.6 x 10

4

3,000 (with 30% void volume)

TABLE 2.3- WATER

AND

ROCK

COMPARISON

( re f . 23 ; p.121 )

14

medium are harder to install compared to air systems with rocks (ref.32). So, there are actually higher total system costs

using water storage, especially for the storage tank which must be corrosion proof. Secondly, when solar heated water is fed into the storage tank, convection currents are set up causing heat losses. Also, the
t~mperature

of the tank becomes uniform (ref.44; p.

187) and less efficient than rocks because no portion in the storage is hotter than another. Lastly, water is subject to

freezing, therefore anti-freeze compounds, such as ethylene glycol must be used (ref.33; p.3) since storage in winter is of primary concern. Water storage systems are just too complex and filled with associated problems; diversely, rock storage systems are simple in operation and perform at a highly acceptable standard.

15
2.2.2 - LATENT HEAT STORAGE

Unlike sensible heat storage, the temperature of the phase change medium stays the same during its change from a solid to a liquid. When a solid melts or liquifies a certain When the substance re-solidifies, Some materials

number of BTU are stored.

the stored BTU are released (ref.22; p.33).

are able to melt at temperature not far above room temperature to utilize their heat of fusion properties (table 2.4). Latent heat storage offers the possibility of storing a great deal of heat in a small volume. Phase change storage

is capable of storing up to 9 times more heat for the same volume containment of rocks (table 2.4). This fact is of

great importance for retrofits where space might be limited (ref.3D: p.lD4). Phase change materials are not presently considered for widespread solar space heating applications primarily of the relatively high cost of the storage media (ref.12: p.14), 34). Also, after years of use the compounds tend to break (ref.

down and remain in the solid state (ref.32).

2.2.2.1 - SALT MEDIUM

Salt hydrates are among the simplest types of chemicals used for storage. When the temperature of salts is raised to a

specific value dependent on the chemical composition, heat is absorbed, releasing water of crystalliztion which dissolves

Sensible Heat Property Rock
0.20

Material Water
1.0

Latent Heat Material average phase change
0.5 100

SPECIFIC HEAT (BTU/LB/oF) HEAT OF FUSION (BTU/LB)

DENSITY (LD/CF)

140

62

100

Storage of 106 BTU
1
WEIGHT (LD)

250,000

50,000

10,000

·2

RELATIVE WEIGHT 3 VOLUME (FT ,

25

5

1

3

2,150

1,000

125

4

RELATIVE VOLUME

17

8

1

TABLE 2.4- THERMAL STORAGE

OF 10 6 BTU

(ref. 37; p.124)

17 the salt. When the temperature drops below the crystalliza-

tion temperature the stored heat is released (ref.l; p.30). The most common phase change material is Glauber's Salt, pioneered by Maria Telkes (ref.43). One pound of this salt absorbs 104 BTU as it melts at 9l.4°F (ref.46) and then absorbs 21 BTU as its temperature rises another 30°F. To store the

same total of BTU in the same temperature difference, 20 pounds of rocks is needed. Many problems are associated with salts as the storage medium. Although the material is able to hold a relatively

large amount of heat in a small volume, the surface area of the container must be about 25 times as great as the cubic volume contained in the storage tank (ref.22; p.34). This suggests

that a long tubular container be used which imposes an expensive tank. Furthermore, salt hydrates break down after many

phase change cycles thus discontinuing their heat - evolving crystallization (ref.li p.30). Possible solutions to these (refer Appendix

problems are being developed (ref.22i p.47),

B.2), but the cost and effectiveness of salts as a storage medium remains to be seen.

2.2.2.2 - PARAFFIN MEDIUM

Paraffin also utilizes its heat of fusion properties. It melts and absorbs 65 BTU per pound (ref.l; p.3l), less than Glauber's Salt, but does not have the crystallization problems common with salt hydrates.

18
Most of the problems with paraffin evolve around the container. Paraffin corrodes plastic containers and some The medium expands by 20% when it melts

metals, such as copper.

causing problems of containment, then when it solidifies, releasing the stored heat, paraffin shrinks and pulls away from the storage tank walls which drastically slows the transfer of heat out of the container (ref.2; p.191). Finally, unless the

container is tightly sealed, paraffin will slowly oxidize and disappear into the atmosphere (ref.4). One of the greatest problems of using paraffin is its combustability. Most building codes resrict the use of such

materials inside buildings.

19
2.2.3 - CHEMICAL HEAT STORAGE

Chemical storage is a relatively new concept for storing solar heat. It is achieved when energy is stored by utilizing For example:

the heats of chemical reactions.

1) the dissociation of S03 into S02 and °2 2) the hydration of MgO to form Mg (OH)2 3) refer to Appendix B.3 - ItChemical Reactions Used for Heat Storage. It

Chemical change materials have larger heat storage potential than phase change materials (ref.lS). One advantage

of chemical storage is its heat collector and delivery over a short period of time. Another is that the delivery from

the storage is potentially higher than the collector temperature in principal. It is anticipated that the major cost

of a storage system using chemical storage will be associated with the heat exchange equipment and container as is the case with phase change materials (ref.4; p.77). Presently, there are too many areas of research for chemical storage to be used practically as the medium in solar design. One major area of research is to identify chemical

reactions which progress at low temperatures (120°F) to be used usefully for residential buildings. A second area of

research lies in controlling these reactions (ref.13).

PART 3
Air Distribution System with Rock Storage

20

3.1 - AIR DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM

In air systems employing rock storage, the controls perform the sensing, evaluation and response functions required to operate the set up in the desired mode (ref.12i p.14). Blowersare activated by thermostat controls and dampers are used to direct the air flow (figure 3.1), (ref.4).
An

auxi-

liary energy system using conventional fuels provides the supply of heat when stored energy is depleted or does not sufficiently meet the space heat need (ref.29; p.2).

-

Damper

T- Air Space

F- Fan
T - Thermostat ...----.

-+

Supply Air

Auxiliary Heat

T-Rock
Storage

".

I

Return Air

J-------------------------..., O~tside ~ ~
AIr ..,-

FIGURE 3.1 - SOLAR

WARM AIR HEATING SYSTEM

! ret.1S ; p. 25)

21 3.1.1 - COLLECTOR TO STORAGE MODE

Solar collection and delivery of heat to storage (figure 3.2) is achieved whenever a sufficient temperature arises in the air, passing through the collector at approximately 2 cubic feet per minute per square foot of collector (ref.24). As

solar intensity on the collector surface increases, mid-day air temperatures from the collector can reach 130°F to 170·F (ref.38, p.77). The collector to storage loop is turned off

automatically by a thermostat when the stored heat exceeds the temperature available from the collector.

,..............., Air

a
Rock
Storage

Handler

When the space temperature is satisfie~ the automatic control system diverts the a~r into the heat storage unit where the heat is absorbed by the rocks. The air returns to the collector where it is heated and this cycle is repeated.
FIGURE 3.2 STORING HEAT
eref. 21 ; p.31)

22

3.1.2 - AIR FLOW THROUGH ROCK STORAGE

Air flow through the rock storage is usually top to bottom while collecting solar heat, and from bottom to top while supplying the heat to the house. In this way stratifi-

cation allows house air to be heated to the highest possible temperature by the warmest rocks at the top of the storage. Conversely, if solar heated air comes in at the bottom, the heat would transfuse upward distributing itself evenly through the entire storage resulting in a lower temperature throughout the bed (ref.2; p.19l). Stratification provides a warmer air

supply to the home and cooler air supply to the collector (figure 3.3) increasing the efficiency of home heating and collector.
HOT AIR FROM COLLECTOR HOT AIR TO ROOMS

HOT

END

COOL. AlA FROM ROOMS

COL.D

END

COOL AIR TO COLl.ECTOR

FIGURE 3.3 -

REVERSE AIR FLOW THROUGH ROCK STORAGE (ref. 30 i p. 108)

23

3.1.3 - STORAGE TO ROOM MODE

When heat is required in the house and solar collection is not taking place, the room thermostat signals the blower to operate and dampers to move into position such that room Cold

air will flow to the cold end of the storage (ref.24).

air from the room, drawn in at the bottom of the storage bin, is heated as it rises through the warmer top rocks. The hottest rocks on top transfer heat to the air just before it is sent to the rooms (figure 3.4).

r
I I

HEATED

SPACE

I
Solar Heated Supply Air

I

1

I

Return

L_~

__ _

I _..J

r----,

Air

a
ROCk
Storage

Handler

o
Auxiliary Heating

At ni;ht or on cloudy days when solar energy is unavailable and when heat is needed in the space, the automatic control system directs the building return air into ~~e bottom of the heat storage unit, up through the pebbles where the air is heated and through the air handling unit and into the-space. When the solar heated air does not maintain the space ~~ermostat setting, the automatic control turns on t~e auxiliary heater to add to the re~uired heat.

FIGUR E 3.4 - HEATING

FRO M

STORAGE

{ref. 21 ; p. 31 ]

PART 4
Rock Storage. Design Factors.

24 4.1 - PRESSURE DROP

A difference in pressure through the solar system (storage bed, collector, and duct work) causes a resistance to air flow through the system. It is important to keep a pressure

drop through the entire solar system equal to or less than 0.5 inches W.G. (125 N/m2), (ref.4: p.3) in order to ensure

that the work spent in passing air through the system is less than that of the solar collected. The pressure drop through the rock bed is directly proportional to the air velocity through the bed, thus, it is the pressure drop that governs the air flow distribution characteristics (ref.5) To secure proper flow distribution in the (35 N/m2) be the

bed it is recommended that 0.14 inches W.G. accepted pressure drop (refer Appendix D).

Of major concern is the necessity to provide a pressure drop through the storage bed a minimum of 5 times higher than in the plenums leading to the storage; this will ensure good flow distribution through the bed (ref.30; p.104). To overcome

the required pressure drop, fans are used to force or draw the air through the bed (ref.46).

25
4.2 - TEMPERATURE STRATIFICATION

Ideal air systems with rock storage allows the heat to stratify. The hot and cold air is separated as the air passes As mentioned previ-

through the rock storage (ref.38i p.79).

ously, the air at a high temperature can be used for space heating while the lower temperature return air may be circulated back to the collector (figure 4.1). Heated air should

be supplied at the top for minimum loss of temperature stratification (ref.24). The energy obtained by the solar system is maximized by low return air temperature going back to the collector (ref.2l; p.30). Heat losses from the system are at a minimum with low
te~perature

collector inlet

because the temperature differen-

ces between the collector inlet temperature and ambient air temperature are small. Since the main variable to control for

utmost solar efficiency is collector inlet temperature (refer Appendix E), this should be as low as possible with temperature stratification (refer Appendix F.l; F.l.l).

26
Hot Air From .. Collector

I
~.

Cool

ROCK STORAGE _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _....1

,..

Air To

Collector

T

Hhen heat is being stored, the collector air enters the storage unit at one end and leaves the other end at a temperature lower than the mean storage temperature.

A - Heat Into Storage
Hot Air_ 4 _T_o_--II.._ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _-'14 .... ROCK STORAGE ... Rooms

Cool Air

Return

T

When heat is being extracted from the storage unit, the return air from the space e~ters at the cool end. The air heats up during its passage through the storage and leaves at a temperature that is greater than the mean storage temperature.

B - Heat

From

Storage

FIGURE 4.1- TEMPERATURE

STRATIFICATION (ref. 39; p. 3)

27

4.3 - ROCK SHAPE For the storage medium, washed (round) gravel has a resistance to air flow up to 3 times less than crushed stone (ref. 30; p.l07). Figure 4.2 illustrates how the irregular shapes

of crushed rocks creates more resistance than round rock. Also, washed gravel has dust particles around them that would hinder the passage of air through the storage bed.

ROUND ROCK RESISTANCE

CRUSHED
ROCK ·

FIGURE 4.2- ROCK RESISTANCE TO

AIR FLOW Iref.30;p.107)

28

The major constraint associated with rock beds is that rocks be uniform in size and shape so large void fractions

are present to minimize the pressure drop (ref.12; p.2l9). Uniformity is accomplished when the rocks are screened. Although washed (round) rock is prefered, in practical cases the air flow through, the rock bed is usually too slow over the rock surface that the velocity lacks the power to dislodge and carry particles. For example, the Solar 1 pro-

ject at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (ref.3l) has 192 cubic feet of rock with an of surface area. estimated 62,000 square feet
~fm

The average air flow of 600

through the

system produces an average velocity of only .0096 feet per minute over the rock surface. Conclusively, all the installations with crushed rock thus far have not required a change of air filters (ref.16) (ref.3l)
I I

(ref.34).

This fact suggests that washed rocks are

not imperative for rock medium efficiency.

29

4.4 - ROCK SIZE

Rock sizes can vary from 3/8/1 to 2" diameter depending upon the size of the storage container and the distance that the air must travel to get through the storage from inlet to outlet (ref. 1 ; p.28), both factors establishing the flow rate. A well designed packed bed should be such that particles are large enough to ensure a reasonably low pressure drop

across the bed while at the same time are small enough to ensure that the heat supplied to the surface of each particle reaches the centre of the particle as fast as the rate of heat supply at the surface (ref.4 temperature stratification. It is believed that the heat transfer considerations are more important in optimizing particle size in view of the fact that the pressure
~rop

i

p.16) to fully utilize

is reasonably low over most

practicle size ranges considered for residential solar heat storages with rocks. To do this, one can use the Biot Criterion (refer Appendix G). Figure 4.3 shows a plot of the maximum allowable particle size, Dp, against the flow rate, Go. It's obvious that as flow rate increases the maximum permissible size of the particles decreases. In optimizing the particle size it must be remembered that a decrease in pebble

size increases the air resistance and pressure drop through
the storage bin which may affect the blower size and air distribution efficiency of the total solar storage system. Most residential heat storage systems use 3/4" to 1-1/4"

30

diameter rocks to obtain the desired pressure drop and heat transfer considerations since washed rounds are readily available in this size (ref. 11).

2.00

1.75

1.50

0
t:;J
N H

1.25

a.
1.00
Ul

en
p.:J

u
H

~

.c
.~

Q)

s::

0

0.75

~

0..

~

0.50

25 0.

1
AIR FLOW
(cfm)

I

0.00 ~----------~-----------+------------~----~ 2,000 3,000 1,000

Assume bed of cross-sectional area 8 square feet and void fraction of 0.5.

FIGURE 4.3 - BlOT FOR

CRITERION PLOT ROCK (ref. 4 j p. 18 )

31 4.5 - STORAGE BIN SHAPE AND CONFIGURATION

Storage configuration is designed on the basis of a geometry that allows for a high proportion of volume to surface area of containment (ref.30; p.106). an increase in
surfac~

In heat storages,

area produces a corresponding increase

in heat loss, therefore, heat retention will be enhanced by keeping the surface area of the storage to a minimum. As the configuration of the rock store approaches a sphere, the heat retention efficiency increases due to the increased ratio of volume to surface area (figure 4.4). Less surface

area for a given volume allows for less heat loss or longer heat storage capacity (ref.3l). Although spherical shapes provides the maximum volume with minimum surface area exposed to potential heat losses, spheres are difficult to construct on a cost effective basis (ref.32; p.5-7). Financial constraints dictate that a cubical

configuration be considered the optimal choice for a heat storage bin.

4.5.1 - ASPECT RATIO

The aspect ratio, length to diameter, of the storage bin affects the performance of the store. Too high an aspect (deep

beds) produces a high pressure drop across the storage bed resulting with increased blower requirements. Too Iowan as-

pect ratio (shallow beds) produces a low pressure drop that

32

will yield maldistributed air flow in the bed (ref .. 4 i p. 8) and poor usage of the storage volume (ref.43; p.4). Experiments were conducted to determine the optimum aspect ratio (refer Appendix D). The results indicated that (cubical) are desired

aspect ratios approaching a value of "1"

s9 that the rate through the bed will produce the recommended pressure drop value of at least 0.14 inches W.G (35 N/m2) ensure even air flow distribution (ref.5; p.2). to

Hencely, the

cubical configuration has a twofold advantage, minimum heat loss and optimum air flow distribution within the storag-e.

RECTANGLE

Surface Volume

175 SF 125 CF

Surface Volume

150 SF 125 CF

SPHERE

Surface Volume

138 SF 125 CF

FIGURE 4:4- PROPORTION OF SURFACE AREA TO VOLUME (ref. 30 ; p.IOS) .

33

4.6 - STORAGE BIN SIZE

The optimum capacity of a solar heat storage system depends on the amount of solar radiation available over a certain period of time, the manner in which auxiliary energy is supplied, and how much of the total heat loads should be carried by solar energy source and how much by the auxiliary source (ref.12i p.2l5). The discussion on 2.1.1 "Short Term and Long Term Storage," illustrates the necessity to determine which storage system to use in order to analyze data for the coldest and least sunny months. If storage will supply heat during the

longest period of overcast weather, the system will be overdesigned for the remaining months of the heating season (ref. 44; p.193). The amount of heat stored is only what the solar For example,

collectors gathers and not used during the day.

a storage large enough for 5 days is of no use if the collector is not large enough to collect 5 days worth of heat (ref.2l: p.32). The heat storage ability is only useful"if the solar capacity is sized amply to bring the storage unit

collector

up to its data (longest period of overcast weather) analyzed capacity (ref.7: p.55). Consequently, the storage unit should not solely be sized for a certain number of "days of storage
II

(ref.2l; p.3l) which

would incorrectly assume storage container can be filled with heat no matter how much or how little collector area is used. The optimum size of rock storage to use is between 1/2 to 3/4

34

cubic feet of collector (figure 4.5).

Similarly, studies for

Toronto determined the optimum ratio to be 0.66 of storage volume to collector area (ref.17; p.86), (refer Appendix H).

The storage temperature is linked to the collector efficiency. For example, if the storage temperature is l20°F,

air will not be circulated to the storage until the collector reaches a temperature over 120°F. Therefore, the collector

efficiency falls as the temperature of its absorber rises (ref.2; p.l95). In conclusion,to increase the storage tempe-

rature and to keep storage size to a minimum, use collectors that are efficient at high temperatures.

100

0
flIP

....
flIP

so
70 60

20

>< Q:;
.(

.:: ~
til

Q:;

... x
~

....

0

:::> 0

.::
r:..
Q:;

:t
0

:t

40

~

'" !:l
£-< 0 0
Co

£-<

'"
r:..
Z

~

40

r.ltll \'!l Zr.:l

...
N

r.l

'" !:l
60
~

£-<

.::
r:..
Z

....

0

20

:to :::>£-< :<:tIl

a1~

£-< 0 £-<

0

.... E-iQ:;

SO

0

...
Eo< tJ

a1 ....

Eo< tJ

Q.O

or:..

< Q:;
r:..

0

100 0 0.25
0.50 0.75 1.00

FT3 ROCK PER FT2 COLLECTOR

FIGURE 4.5 - OPTIMUM

STORAGE. SIZE

(ref. 8)

35

4.7 - LOCATION OF STORAGE BIN

The rock storage does not necessarily have to be located in close proximity to collector, but as the distance increases the heat transfer losses between the heated air and the rocks also increases. Correspondingly, larger air ducts and more

electrical power for blowers are required for moving air between the collector, storage, and heated spaces (ref.l; p.28). The location of the rock storage must take into account its great volume, which could incur into expensive living space, and its great weight , which requires strong foundations. There are three basic types of foundation construction
I

where the rock storage could be located (ref.33; p.s) or partial basement, crawl space, and slab on grade.

full One

unique rock storage location is found in the '''Denver House" by Dr. George Lof at his residence (ref.I.3- "History of Rock Storage and Appendix A.2). The design allowed the rock storage However, it is

to be directly viewed in the living space.

usually more difficult and expensive since it is a waste of space. Generally, heat stores should be located conveniently to the collector and care should be taken for the interference with interior living spaces.

36

4.7.1 - UNDERGROUND STORAGE

Heat storage with rocks is often located Lelow ground level for convenient mechanical support supplied by the ground itself and ideal evasion of living space. The heat conducti-

vity through the earth is usually low, especially if the earth is dry (ref.7; p.53), (refer Appendix I; table 1.2). The heat

taken up by the surrounding earth can be recovered when colder air is passed through the storage unit. Large scale rock storage units are feasible to be located underground but in small storage units the fraction of heat absorbed by the ground is too large (ref.40). Even undergrou-

nd storage without insulation is feasible since the heat loss to the ground is rather small for systems of a size appropiate for large solar assisted space heating (refer Appendix 1, table 1.1). On the other hand, the ground surrounding a typical

underground rock storage facility contributes very little to the systems' storage capacity on a daily or seasonal time scale (refer Appendix 1; figures 1.1 and 1.2) · Practical problems for underground heat storage with rocks involves water fluxes around the storage area, estimating thermal conductivity and capacity of the ground, and determining the ease of either using or suppresing the heat loss upwards from the storage (typically to a basement or crawl space), (ref.40).

37

4.8 - CONSTRUCTION OF STORAGE BIN

The material used for the storage container is not as critical with rocks as it is with water or phase change chemicals (ref.4i p.23). The construction materials of the bin could be 11), poured concrete/block, or wood (ref.21i p.32), (ref.34)
I

(ref.

(ref.16),

(ref.36),

(refer Appendix J).

There is special consideration for the method of supporting the packed rocks and the plenums so that air can be circulated within the storage bin. The plenum at the bottom of

the bed must be constructed to carry the weight of the storage medium and to allow air to pass through it (ref.5), (refer

Appendix D).Ultimately, there is particular consideration for insulation in the construction of the storage bin.

4.8.1 - INSULATION OF STORAGE BIN

It is not usually desirable to allow heat to escape from the storage container, even if heat is released to a living space·it might not be needed at the time so it is important to retain all the heat within the storage by using insulation completely around the bin. The amount of insulation required depends on the design temperature of the heat store and the temperature difference between the heat store and ambient, which is dependent on the location and construction of the bin walls. For example, a bin next to an exterior wall requires more insulation than a

38

wall next to a living space. Figure 4.6 gives possible R-values for a type of storage location. Insulation should be placed on the inside of the bin construction so that the heat flow can be controlled. If insulation is on the outside of the bin walls,heat will be stored in the walls rather than the rocks where it is easily removed when needed (ref. 28). Since rocks stratify the heat

stored, more insulation would be required at the hot end than

Living

Space

NOTE' HYPOTHeTICAL CASE ONLY

I
Rocl<

R-30
Grade

·

Storage Crawl Space
R-20

---.--~::;:=:::~~:::::==¥=:=:==~
' ··· ;

~::

'..

'~~.. '

. . . . . . ._.

4:

·

· ·11.···

<1 _' "'... ~ '.

1

· .,.

,.:., .. ·

..

.:

~

FIGURE 4.8- ROCK BIN INSULATION

39

the cold end,therfore, to utilize the stratification

fect

tapered insulation could be used to minimize heat losses from the storage bin and to optimize insulation considerations. Insulation materials suitable for heat storage bins with rocks should not shrink or produce holes at maximum temperatures of 180°F to 200°F (ref.21 i p.32) and should not crush from the weight of rocks (refer Appendix J for insulation materials used by manufacturers of heat storage containers).

4.8.2 - PREVENTION OF HEAT LOSS FROM STORAGE BIN

There should be provision in the design of the storage bin construction for damping the convection of air through the top of the bed. Since heat always rises in free
convect~

ion, heat could come in at the bottom so that heat is contained here rather than at the top where "thermal syphonage" would occur (ref.28). If hot air does travel up to the top of the storage bin, a hot water tank could be placed in the rock storage to serve as a pre-heater to save on fuel costs (ref. 26; p.66), (refer figure 4.7). The objective is to provide

a portion of the energy needs for domestic hot water without significant reduction in the solar energy supply for space heating (ref.30 ; p.I09).

40

HOT

WATER

TANK

ROCK STO,RAGE

TO HOUSE

TO
COLLECTOR

HOT SIDE

COLD SIDE

FROM COLLECTOR

FROM HOUSE

FIGURE 4.7 ::"" PREVENTION OF HEAT LOSS FROM STORAGE BIN (ref. 28)

PART 5
Conclusion

41

5.1 - DESIGN RECOMMENDATIONS

Heat storage is essential for solar energy to be a viable alternative source to provide heat for residential buildings. A comparative analysis of the different types of heat storage systems disclosed sensible heat storage with rocks to be the most advantageous for air distribution systems. The simple operation of rocks brings about minimum maintenance but is able to store heat quite efficiently. Consequently, rocks are the most popular storage medium for residential solar heated buildings. From the earlier sections, it is now possible to set up practical recommendations for designing packed bed storage systems.

5.1.1 - STORAGE BIN SIZE

The first design guideline to consider is to determine 2 3 the size of the bed which is 0.66 ft /ft of collector area for residential homes in Toronto that would supply 50% to 60% solar contribution.

5.1.2 - CONTAINER SHAPE AND CONFIGURATION

A cubical shape with an aspect ratio value of one is recommended to be used for optimum pressure drop and air flow distribution considerations. The advantage of the square crosssection is that it fits conveniently into a basement corner.

42

5.1.3 - BED PARTICLES

It is suggested that washed gravel be used as the bed material since it is readily available in the accepted particle size range of 3/4" to 1-1/4".

5.1.4 - AIR FLOW

The air flow should be in the opposite direction during the discharging mode from the direction followed during charging. Otherwise, the air flow will tend to destroy the temperature stratification and little heat will be supplied by the storage.

5.1.5 - INSULATION

The location of the storage bin governs the amount of insulation required. Tapered insulation could be used to utilize temperature stratification within the bed and optimize the insulation. The insulation material must be placed on the inside of the bin walls and must be suitable for high temperatures.

5.1.6 - PERFOID1ANCE OF ROCK. BED

The rock bed can be charged and the heat stored for not usually longer than 2 days or the temperature stratification

43

shows a tendancy to get destroyed.

5.2 - THE FUTURE OF HEAT STORAGE

The future of heat storage relies upon the development of storage assemblies that utilize the simplistic behavior and performance of rock beds. Two storage assemblies utilizing the packed bed sensible heat system are monolithic or struct-

ured storage assemblies and a packed bed of silica gel (ref.4i p.36), both merit future development.

".

44 5.3 - SUMMARY

A review of sensible heat storage systems, latent heat storage systems, and chemical energy storage systems has been completed. A summary of each system type, complete with ad-

vantages and disadvantages has been included in the individual sections. A closer, detailed look of packed bed energy storage with rocks was emphasized since they, at least in the immediate future, appear to be the best alternative for solar energy storage based on reliability, simplicity, expected life, and cost considerations. Very little practical experience has been

gained in the use of phase changes materials and chemical energy storage systems. This report recommends suitable design guidelines to allow one to make necessary estimates to ensure an effective rock storage subsystem using short term storage and an air collector that is able to supply 50% to 60% of residential building's heating demand. Since sensible heat storage with rocks is the best practical alternative for" solar energy storage, the immediate future relies upon the utilization of their performance (ref.

34)

I

(ref.36).

Future work considers various alternative

materials which can be used in a packed bed as well as the commonly used
material~

rocks.

PART 6
Appendix

APPENDIX A History of Rock Storage

46 A.l - BOULDER HOUSE

(ref.2i pp.22.23)

In 1945 Dr. George Lof designed a collector and installed it on an existing house in Boulder, Colorado. The primary

objective in his design was simplicity and economy in construction. The solar collector consisted of a sheet metal trough containing a series of overlapping glass plates arrayed in stair-step fashion (figure A.l). A pane of glass was blackened on one third of its area. The glass was arranged so that each

black surface was beneath two clear surfaces and separated from them by a 1/4" air gap. Sunlight penetrated the transparent

surfaces and was absorbed in the black area, raising their temperature to between 150°F and 250 o P. Warmed air from the

roof-mounted collector was gathered in a duct at the roof ridge and transported to the gravel heat storage bed in the basement. This air returned to the collector after transfering most of its heat to the gravel bed to bring heat to the house. Warm air also circulated to the rooms from the collector. The primary significance of this project was its successful integration of a functioning solar system with a conventional gas furnace heating unit.

47

Boulder House Bp'ulder, Colorado (42°N) Lof, 1945-47 Heated floor area: 1000 ftl Collector· type: air area: 463 ft l tilt: 21° S Storage. type: gravel -volume: 180 ft 3

Heat distribution: warm lir Auxiliary heating: gas furnace
Percent solar heated: 26%

The Boulder House.

~NID
Overlapping-plate collector.

FIGURE A.l -

BOULDER HOUSE

(ref. 2: p.22)

48

A.2 - DENVER HOUSE

After his experience with the Boulder House , Dr. George Lof designed a single storey contemporary home in Denver, Colorado with a solar heating system that added an appliance rather than being made an integral part of the house. The following diagrams illustrate the different operation modes of the solar system.

House Heating from Col· lectors. Hot air is supplied directly from the cellectors to the rooms of the house when heat is demanded and when adequate solar cnerg)1 is being received. Cold air from the house enters the cold air return duct and is distributed to the solsr collectors. The air is heated and delivered to the rooms via the hot air manifold and distribution ducts. ~en required, gas heat may be supplied to the warm solar air to boost it to useful temperatures.

A- HOUSE HEATING FROM COLLECTORS FIGURE A.2 - DENVER HOUSE (ref.38; p.93)

49

Storing Hoat from Collectors. This cycle operates when the house does not need heat and the intensity of soJar radiation is great enough to justify collection. Cold air from the storage tubes enters the cold air manifold and is distributed to the solar col/ector:. The heated air moves down the vertical duct, through the hot water preheater and into the rock storage bins.. The air loses its heat to the rocks 8$ it is passed through the storage tubes, and thus cooled, returns to the collectors..

B - STORING HEAT

FROM COLLECTORS

House Heating from Storage. This cycle operates intermittently, usually during evening or night hours.. Cold air enters the cold air retum duct. The air passes through the storage bins absorb-' ing heat. If temperatures are too low, gas heat is added to the air before distribution in the house. Air is circulated through the storag'! unit evt::n if it contains/ittls or no heat, thereby ensuring its full utilization but at greater pumping costs.

C - HOUSE HEATING FROM STORAGE FIGURE A.2 - DENVER HOUSE (ref.38; p.93)

APPENDIX B Storage Media

50

B.l - ANALYTIC STUDY OF ROCK AND WATER MEDIA 39)

(ref.42; pp.38,

B.l.l - WATER EXAMPLE

If water is the storage medium, the storage capacity will be the product of the volume, specific heat of water, and the operating temperature range. water as 1.16 Wh/litre deg C. highest temperature obtained lowest useful temperature operating range 3 1 m of water would give a storage capacity of: 1000 x 1.16 x 35 Assume volume specific heat of

=

= 40,000

Wh 40.6 (KWh)

If the daily heat required of a house is 40 KWh and 2 days heat is to be stored, the volume required will be: 40 x 2 40.6

=

3 1.97 say 2 m

B.l.2- ROCK EXAMPLE

If the storage medium is crushed rock, the heat storage capacity can be established as the product of the volume of container, the solidity ratio (% void), the density and specific heat of the storage, and the operating temperature range. solidity ratio density of stones specific heat

= 0.70 (30% void) 3 = 2,400 to 3,000 Kg/m = 0.30 to 0.32 Wh/Kg deg
J

C

51
So, if 2m2 from the water example is filled with crushed rock instead, the storage capacity would be: 2m 3 x 0.7 x 2,800 x 0.30 x 35

=

=

41,160 Wh 41.16 KWh

41.16 KWh is about half of the storage capacity of an identical

3 volume (1m ) of water.

52
B.2 - STUDY: SOLUTION TO (ref.3i pp.47,48)
PROBLE~ffi

WITH PHASE CHANGE MATERIALS

Scientists at General Electric Research and Development Centre have developed a solution to the problems associated with phase change materials. The solution promises to be

compact enough to fit conveniently in the basement of most homes, since size of the storage is a great disadvantage of rocks and water storage. The scientist came up with an experimental rolling cylinder device (figure B.l) designed to accomodate any of a number of heat storage materials that have high latent heats of fusion. Their efforts focused on Glauber's Salt. Until now,

there have been problems with the "encapsulation effect" of salts that prevented complete solidification of the material after 5 to 10 freeze-thaw cycles, which decrease the ability to store heat. Also previously, freeze-melt storage materials

saw a salt build up on the walls of the container during the freeze cycle. The solution is to stir the heat storage material,very gently (3 rpm) with the invention of the rolling cylinder systern which has just enough stirring action to keep the temperature of the Glauber's Salt uniform. Under these conditions,

the material crystallizes on nuclei in the liquid and not on the cylinder walls. A thin tubular device, called a "nucleator" plays a key role in the liquid to solid phase change. Inserted through

53

one end of the rotating vessel, the nucleator contains seed crystals of Glauber's Salt that ensures initiation of the crystallation process when the temperature of the liquid salt drops below its freezing point. This solution is only in the experimental stage so the cost and effectiveness of the unit remains to be seen for practical purposes.

The GE rolling cylinder fleat-storage concept Though there IIr. many possibilities. this artist' 8 rendering snows one method in which the GE developmental rolling cylinder heat-storage device might be employed in a solar home. On sunny days. air heated by rooftop solar eolleetors would enter the system and be drawn around Ihe heat-storage cylinder in the basement. The solar-heated air would then be blown through'the system to warm the rooms in the house. In the evening-or on 8unless days~aps in the duets to the solar collectors would close automatically, disconnecting the collectors from the balance of the system. Cut all from a supply of colleclor-heated air, the heat-storage material inside the eylinder would begin to solidify, gradually releasing its stored heat. Air passing IIround the cylinder would be warmed by this released heat, then cltculated throughout the house.

FIGURE B.l - ROLLING CYLINDER SYSTEM (ref.3; p.47)

54 B.3 - CHEMICAL REACTIONS USED FOR HEAT STORAGE (ref.4; p.78)

The following are candidate reactions involving dehydration - hydration:

1) Ca S04. H2O (solid) + 150 cal/g Ca S04. (solid) + 2 H2O (gas) 2) Ca C1 " 2 H2 (solid ) + 86 cal/g 2 Ca C1 " H2) (solid) + H2O (gas) 2 3) Ca (OH)2 (solid) + 200 cal/g Ca 0 ( solid) + (liquid)

= = =

In the above 3 reactions the product, water, can be vented to the atmosphere or alternately retrieved from the atmosphere when reverse reaction is required. Relatively high temperatures

are required for these reactions unless vacuums are used.

APPENDIX C

Air Distribution System

55

AUxtL,tARY tfEAT e:XCHAHGER

!!OCK
STOl!.t.G£

a,,,

FIGURE C.I - HEAT SPACE FROM STORAGE (ref.18i p.26)

r-----___

J~j

/~~£_ij:
ROCK
STORAGE
·· H

AUX,UAItY HEAT pc_tit

FIGURE C.2 - STORING HEAT FROM COLLECTOR (ref.18i p.27)

56

I.) COlLEC'TOR ON. STORING HEAT 180,--------------,

w g

... «
rr

140

w
:::Ii ~ 100
It

"-

C

60~-----------------~ o
2 " DISTANCE (FTI 6

II

(b) COLLECTOR OFF. REMOVING HEAT 180 , . . - - - - - - - - - -_ _ _ _-.....

... .
~ 140
It
II. ~

::> ... «

w

TIME OF DAY

~ 100
It

:(

600~------------------~
2 " 6
DISTIINCE 1FT)

Rock Bed Temperatu,-e Distribution as 8 Function of Time and Distance from Heat Inlet Assume the bed is cold in the moming. As the dal' prrr gresses, air temperature from the co/lector rises, peaking at noon, and d~ creasing in the aftemoon. The resulting air temperature distributions in the rock bed are shown at different times during the day. Note that the exit air from the bed is always cold and therefore the collector operates at peak efficiency '811 day, In the evening, when the co/lector is off and the building needs heat, air flow direction through the bed is reversed so that the air exits from the hottest pan of the bed. (If flow were not reversed, one would have to wait hours to wash the heat, through the bed and even then would get only moderately warm air.) As evening progresses, remperature out of the bed rises until 8 o'clock and then fal/s, resembling the time profile of the inlet temperature during the day, but in reverse. (Source: Los Alamos Sci~ntifjc Laboratory Report LA-5957,

FIGURE C.3 - ROCK BED DISTRIBUTION AS A FUNCTION OF TIME AND DISTANCE FROM HEAT INLET (ref.38: p.79)

APPENDIX D Study on the Effect of Bed Aspect Ratios and Pressure .Drop on Air Flow Distribution in Rock Storage

57

D - STUDY ON THE EFFECT OF BED ASPECT RATIOS AND PRESSURE DROP ON FLOW DISTRIBUTION IN ROCK STORAGE BEDS. (ref.5i pp.l-ll)

Experiments were conducted by the Energy Resource Group at the University of Waterloo to study the flow distribution characteristics across any plane normal to the direction of flow and factors that influence them. The purpose of the study

was to determine the importance of insuring even or uniform" flow distribution to avoid any adverse affect on the thermal performance of the rock bed. The set-up included a container 6 1 x 6 1 x 6'with rock 3/4" diameter rounds (all rocks will pass through a 3/4" screen). Plenums were located at the top and bottom of the container for air distribution.

FIGURE D.l - Shows the ducting system used to convey air to and from the rock bed storage which is capable of reversing air through the storage container for a discharge mode.

FIGURE D.2 - The side view of the container shows the fine mesh at the bottom plenum used to prevent the smaller rocks from falling into the lower plenum. gth to hold up the rocks. The metal grid provides stren-

FIGURE D.3 - The blocks used to support the metal grid has two channels in them that run parallel to each other in such a manner that the flow channels are in the same direction as the

58

FIGURE 0.1 - OUCTING ARRANGEMENT FOR STORAGE SED (ref.5, p.?) (arrows indicate charqing mode)

FIGURE 0.2 - SIDE VIEW OF CONTAINER (ref.51 p.7)

FIGURE 0.3 - SONO

BE~~

SLOCK (ref.51 p.s)

59

ducting to and from the lower plenums.

FIGURE D.4 - The velocity distributions in the bed are shown on the 3 graphs, with the height of the rocks at 3' and the flow rate at 330 Kg/hr.m.
2

The 3 graphs indicate that the

velocity distribution along 3 different diameters, AB, CD, and EF, in the square bed. NOTE: VIVo is the recorded velocity to the centre-line velocity in the bed.

OBSERVATIO~S

OF FIGURE D.4

i)

A and B, which are at the far corners of the bed, are almost 2.75 times lower than the air velocity at the centre, Vo.

ii)

C and D, which are at the sides of the bed, are approxi-

mately 2 times lower than the air velocity at the centre, Vo. iii) E and F, which are at the sides of the bed, are approximately 2.5 times lower than the air velocity at the centre, Vo.

FIGURE D.5 - As in the previous set-up, the velocity distributions in the bed are shown on the 3 graphs with the same height of the rocks at 3' but the flow rate increased from 330 2 to 516 Kg/hr.m ·

60

3

330 kg I hr. m2

(540 efm)

2
1)
v Vo

BED HEIGHT: 0.91 m
(3-)

. I

0
I

,
o.~

A
1

,,
'

xlO

0

. 0.5

I

....

C

~-- D
I ' , I;:'

... OIRECTlON AS

.'
I

t

, B

t
INL.ET TOP VIEW
2)
v Vo

I

oL I
3

0.5

I

,0 'x/W

I

.0.5.

I

r
I

·

· OI~CO

2
3)

..:!.
"0

·

·

DIRECTION EF

FIGURE 0.4 - VELOCITY DISTRIBUTION

(ref.S; p.9)

61

515 kg Ihr.m% (845 cfm) I).!.

Vo

2

BED HEIGHT: 0.91 m

(3' )
J

err
I

1

0.5

!
x.lO 0

0.5

I

T

I

·
3

·

ORECTION AS E
I

2) :!.
Yg

2

,.. I ..... , ,
' .. I

~----

iF ",

.,

0
B

INLET
I 01: I

,
0.5 xIW
II

0

I

,
0.5

T

TOP VIEW

I

· OtREC1l0N CO

3

3) ~

v

2

oI

0.5 '1./W ·

0

0.5

I

· DIRECl10N EF

FIGURE D.S - VELOCITY DISTRIBUTION

(ref.S; p.lO)

62

OBSERVATIONS OF FIGURE D.5

It can immediately be seen on all 3 graphs that the flow distribution in the bed is much more uniform since a subs tantial portion of the bed at the centre being subject to a flat velocity profile. NOTE: The measured pressure drop was 23.4 N/m2 which is closer to the accepted value of 35 N/m

2

(ref.32; p.l).

D.I - RESULTS

A dramatic improvement in the flow distribution is evident from an increased in the pressure drop through the bed. This

reveals the importance of an acceptable pressure drop of 35 N/m2 to ensure proper flow distribution in the rock bed. Similar data was obtained at bed heights increased to 4',
5' and 6'.

The minimum optimum'flow distribution was found to

be between 5' and 6', where the pressure drop was close to 35

2 N/m , since the improvement in flow distribution was more dramatic to 5' and less dramatic after 6'. This fact suggests

that the optimum bed aspect ratio to be approaching a value of "one" (6' x 6' x 6' cubical).

63

FIGURE D.6 - Effect of Bed Aspect Ratio on the Particle

Si~e

The

volume of the bed was maintained at 6m

3

with the flow

rate at 1632 Kg/hr.

The graph indicates the maximum particle

size necessary for a given aspect ratio if a pressure drop of at least 35 N/m2 is to be maintained for the flow rate and bed volume specified. The result is that for shallow beds, much

smaller particles are required.

0.2 - CONCLUSIONS

1) Beds of low aspect ratio (shallow beds) are not recommended since there is a fear that flow maldistribution would occur. 2) It is the pressure drop that governs the flow distribution characteristics.
Aspect: Ratio Effects .

4

Volume of bed · 6 .' now ute · 1632 q/br [800 .ct.] Pre··ure Drop · 35 N/. t

! ...
.:

,

· · 'il

·

-:· ..
1

o

0.4

FIGUR!! 0.6 - EFF1':C'l' OF BED ASPEC'l' M.TIO ON PARUCU: SIZE

(ref.S; p.ll)

APPENDIX E Performance Equation

64

Inthe Hottle and Woertz performance equation below, the solar gains depend on the radiation IntensJt'/ and the optical properties of the transmitting and absorbing surfaces. Toe values of FR. l' and a are constant for a given collector. Therefore. in order to maximize solar system autpu; the thermal losses must be minimized. The value of UL is constant for a given system alid T a cannot De controlled. Therefore, the main variablp..1O control in order to mcuimize sola output is Tj, collector inlet temperature. .
Qu --At;

Btu
HRft~

,.. (solar gains]' [system losses] energy collected collector arel'! heal removal factor solar energy avaiiable ., .. .. .. .. cover transmittance plale absorblance over aU loss coefficient collecto( inlet temperature ambler,t air temperature

!-.--------------------------------------------------~
SOLAR SYSTEM PERFORMANCE COMPARISON Companson Of various types of solar heating systems can only be done properly it the entire solar system is evaluated over an entire heating season. Collector efficiency is an instantaneous pOint in time in time measurement and is not a valid parameter to evaluate the solar system performance. The ideal situation for a solar system is to keep the fluid inlet temperature to the collector 2S low as possible and have a high usuable temperature for space heating. Therefore, the ideal solar system has heat stratified in tile storage unit. An air solar sytem using rocks as the thermal storage provides this stratification. Therefore, the inlet temperature to an air collector is typically 70" f where the liQuid collector inlet temperature is 130" F.

Two collectors of similar construction can be compared using the performance eQuation shown above. When the average liquid collector inlet temperature (Ttl is used. the liQuid sys.tems produce less heat output than the air system. AIR:

~

- 0.64[(300) (0.77) - (1.3) (70" - 4O")J - 123 ~

LlaUID:~

- 0.90[(300) (0.77) - (1.3) (130" - 40")] - 103 ~

However, this is still an instantaneous point in time measurement which doesn't take into account the 1act that the air system will typically collect for longer perXlds of time and therefore deliver more total heat output. Wnen these systems are evaluated over an entire season, the results are as reported by the C.S.U. report *,COD-Z868·,. ".... Because of the stratificaticr:. 1betemperature orthe air returning to the collector from the bottom of storage is always near room temperane. Thus, the air collector can deliver useful heat trom early morning to late afternoon: the liQuid system stans up later in the morning and shuts off earlier in the afternoon ...." Therefore. when system pertolTl1llllCe is evaluated over an entire season it shows that AIR soJar systems actually produce more usable energy than liquid systems'Df the same size.

E - PERFORMANCE EQUATION (ref.19)

APPENDIX F Bed Simulation

Studies

65
F.l - BED SIMULATION STUDIES (DYNAMIC BEHAVIOR) (ref.4; pp.20-26)

The heating or cooling mode of packed bed rocks is a time dependent process. A simple way of predicting the storage

system dynamic behavior was done by Mumma and Martin (ref.27) using a numerical computer technique. on figures F.l, F.2, F.3, and F.4. The results are shown

F.l.l - TEMPERATURE STRATIFICATION

(ref.4i p.27)

As demonstrated in the preceding study on the dynamic behavior of a packed bed, there is a temperature wave front which moves through the bed in either direction depending on whether the bed is in the charging mode or discharging mode. On each side of this wave front there is either a high temperature region or a low temperature region as seen on figures F.l to F.4.

Inlel Air Temperature: 65.s<'C IniUal Bed Temperature: 21°C

65-5----------------------------------------------------, .'

o
o

60

a:
W
~

50

l-

«
o a

n:

40

...J

~

I-

::::>

30

a:J

w

21~--------------

o

4

8

12

16

TIME OF CHARGING. hr.
FIGURE F.l - BED TEMPERATURE PROFILE DURING CHARGING MODE
(ref.4~

p.22)

Initial Bed Temperature D:s!ribution: 21°C Uniform Air Inlet Temperature = 65.5° Const~nt Bed Operating Mode: Charging

65'51-~~==:::::~::::::::::~;==::==~:l
60

· ...
n:
::E
LLJ

0

50

.m

40

.0 LLJ

0-5

1-0

1·5

2·0

2·4

BED DEPTH, m
FIGURE F.2 - OUTLET AIR TEMPERATURE OF BED WHILE CHARGING (ref.4; p.23)

Initial Bed Temperature Distribution: As shown by dotted line Air Inlet Temperature: 21°C Bed Operating Mode: Discharging

65·5
60

r----_-----.. . . ----.. . ". '....,.,
.

,,
\

\

o
o

50

\
\

...

.~
o w

a.:
m

40

\ \ \ \
\

.

\

\

\ \ \

\

\

\

"
1·5
2-0
2-5

o

0-5

1·0

BED

DEPTH

t

m

FIGURE F.3 - TEMPERATURE PROFILES IN BED DURING CHARGING (ref.;p.25)

Inlet Air Temperature: 21°C Initial8ed Temperature: Profile obtained when a 21°C (uniform) bed is heated for p hours with 65.5"C air Bed Operating Mode: Discharging .

65-5
0
0

60

..

a..· :E w
Jo<{

-

0::

I-

!5 0
a w m
0
2

W ..J

4

6

a

10

12

14

TIME' OF DISCHARGING. hr.
FIGURE F.4 - TEMPERATURE OF AIR SUPPLIED BY STORAGE BED (ref.4;p.26)

APPENDIX

G

Particle Size· Biot Criterion

70

G - PARTICLE SIZING - BIOT CRITERION (ref.12i pp.22l-222) I (ref.4i pp.16-l9)

In optimizing particle size, it is important to ensure the rate of conduction through the solid particle is as fast as (or faster) than the rate of convection between the fluid phase and the particle surface to fully utilize the sensible energy heat capacity of the bed. The Biot number is defined as h fp · a where Bi = K s Fluid-particle convection heat transfer co-efficient 2 ( w/m · K ) a Effective radius of packing particle (m). Thermal conductivity of the packing material (N/m.K) It is important to keep the Biot number as low as possible

ie Ks should

be much larger than hfp.a to ensure

that the heat transferred by convection does not accumulate at the surface of the particle owing to the slower conduction into the bulk of the particle while heating or causing a depletion of heat near the surface while cooling. The accepted (ref. 12). criterion is that the Biot number should be equal to or less than 0.1 to avoid thermal gradients within the. particles. For a given bed material, Ks the solid thermal conductivity is fixed (provided the temperature does not vary too much) and once the flow rate is established h fp is also fixed.

71

The flow rate is established by the size and aspect ratio of the bed. The size is fixed at about 0.66 ft 3 /ft 2 of collector area (ref.17) and the aspect ratio from pressure drop considerations discussed in Appendix D. Therefore, the only parameter which can be adjusted to give a low Biot modulus is the particle size. Figure G.l shows the plots of maximum particle size allowable against the flow rate (h fp in the Biot

number varies with the flow rate , Go , and therefore the particle size, Dp, varies with Go to keep Bi at a con-

stant value of 0.1). Biot criterion plots were obtained for rocks, brick, and alumina particles. For the three materials Dp was obtained at a void fraction of 0.5. For example, a flow rate of 277 kg/m 2 hr which corresponds to 750 cfm in a bed of cross-sectional area of 6 m2 (approximately 8 ft. square) the maximum size of rock particles is 2.5 cm.
~o~----------------------------,

FIGURE G.1 - BlOT CRITERION PLOT (ref.4;p.18j

u
Q

e
~

o

2000

APPENDIX H Storage Volume I Collector Area

72

H - STUDY ON STORAGE VOLUME TO COLLECTOR AREA RATIO

(ref.17)

The ratio of storage volume to collector area considered for an air base system with rock storage was examined. The

study was based on flat plate collectors whose performance and cost parameters were described. The effect of this ratio

on solar contribution to the energy demand for a single family dwelling located in Toronto is shown on figure H.I. The opti-

mum ratio is in the order of 0.66 cubic feet per square foot of collector area. The tendency for the solar contribution to be reduced for large ratios is due to the fact that larger storage systems store heat at a lower temperature, thus reducing the efficient use of such heat in an air heating system whuch has a minimum temperature requirement (90°F) mal comfort.
I

(ref.38; p.76) to ensure ther-

73

LOCATlON: TORONTO
BUILDING TYPE: SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING ,. A" SOLAR SYSTEM TYPE: AIR- BASED SYSTEM SHORT TERM STORAGE
100~------~------~------~------~

80
AREA

= 100m 2

U)

:5 0

r:r 60
AREA

= 70 m2

t0

Z

< a: t.&..

(.)

40
AREA

= 40m 2

20

o

.1 .2 .3 .4 STORAGE VOLUME I COJ,..LECTOR AREA Cm 3 /m 2 )

FIGURE H.I - EFFECT OF STORAGE VOLUME ON THE PERFORMANCE OF AN AIR SYSTEM (ref.17i p.S7).

APPENDIX I
Underground Heat Storage

74

I - UNDERGROUND STORAGE OF HEAT IN SOLAR HEATING SYSTEMS (ref.40)

This study examines to what extent the ground itself contributes to storage capacity without insulation.

FIGURE I.l - Typical example of the assumed storage geometry and temperature profiles in the initial analytical portion of this study. The upward heat loss is easy to minimize, the heat that does move upwards contributes to the heating needs of the building (as long as it is needed at the time). Of particular interest is the rate of heat loss compared to the total heat stored, as this is a measure of the characteristic time for the stored heat to leak out to the surrounding soil and have bearing on the possible need for added insulation. The heat loss is proportional to the perimeter of

storage region and therefore to its radius (figure I.l). The total stored heat at any given temperature is proportional to the storage region's volume and therefore to the cube of the radius. heat loss rate to soil heat storage capacity So, the relative importance of losses decreases very noticeably as the size of the facility increases (see last column, TABLE I.l)

75

FIGURE I. I - ASSUMED STORAGE GEOHETRY AND TEMPERATURE PROFILES (ref.40)

ft&41vI or hc.laphcrlcal .tor.,_ ~~lcn.

H~.~-.tor.s;

11', ,"

c1t1 1" lOo t~y ·

e.Pt-)

u-ractor for

r ...""oel,,s,

.~r-

ft

loll, k/r,1n etu/n ..... 2 h

Mc&~-lo.s ra'e pcr v~lt lc~pcr.tvrr

·r"·}

dlrrrrence.

~.rk.

1 .. IIt ../hr",.

.0&11, h ·· , 10·· ... ""recllII or ator.. , · · lt7(·)

1,..

:I.

C.Cll.l.

C.SO

3

0.30

0.17
0.12
O~O!l

'.f ,
10

,.'
l'

).1

10

,.0
l.l.

1.0

2.'
J.l ,00

0.050

30
100

O.On
0.0050

l' '1 ,.
]10

2.'
C..IO

e..OlQ
O.oDlO

11,000

Ca) A ·· ~1nc ··".11'

··· ~or.,···Clv. (yoluaw .....,. · """"p..ra, ..r ...Hrr.,.,,"c. or e,"p ·.
co~wctl ..1tl,
",

aPleltle heat. &2.3 al.,~~r) opera'lft,

(b) A·· ua1ftl · Crou.. '

or

C.S Bt../hr t,,2·p/~t.
.to~ .. rc~lo ......

Co) A·· u=1ne 12e"T
lar,.

t«epera'y~

d1rr .. r .."e .. bet···" the

the . . 11 at

dl.~."cc. (11'0.),

whlch S. ,e".. rov ··

TABLE I.I - STEADY STATE CHARACTERISTICS OF HEAT LOSS TO THE GROUND (ref.40)

76

.011 -r.,r;r
... t.

Dr.crlp~lon

in .. /h,.

~t 2°l'ltt

o (-kle y) n. 2/hr·F

IItu/n)

c"

p

lb/U'

."'1:1\0,.1,,.

4,.,. ...11
ClSJ .0110-

O.1-C.2

.011

0.7-2.0

"...
O.OO~_

df'7 Il&II4 ... t .lU'I4

c.l
1

O.C'i
C.Ol~

l'

2~

.

COd......

.
· ..

-

."""7 ,,1&,.
t~)

c.6
1.6
fI.l

eDftc.-.t.. .,.pn1c .011

ac' ......117 a011

..,.....st. .....11:
.one .. ' .
dr,. ca,.,h.
.ancl
~.c . . .

0.7 0.26

0.0" c.on c.Ol! 0.008

n,II ,.
3'

Len...
od,n"

n

o.S0.037

0.025
0.011

.22'

lH.

I$!UU"!

o.n

11

'S
ss
10)
200

.010' hl;h-coft6~c'lYl'7 1.2 0 .. 11 .olat. .pdSu.-l..v .on4~.-

o.oU
o.CU

nyu,. 0011 .....n ..., 0.,11_

0._

"

1,,&..,..03

~

C.3-1.)

,o-no

ASMUI

TABLE 1.2

-

THERMAL PROPERTIES OF SOILS (ref. 40)

.~

..
til

8

.iii
Q

FIGURE 1.2 - RATE OF HEAT TRANSFER FROM GROUND TO STORAGE (ref.40)

c; ·
II:

·

:·

'i

o o
Time. Cloy'

"2
0

iii

..
~

FIGURE 1.3 - CUMULATIVE HEAT GAIN FROM GROUND (ref.40)

'l ,
~
c
E

'i

....

..
· ~

g,

"i
u

"0

e ,.
0

77
CONCLUSION

1) The average daily net heat loss into the surrounding ground from uninsulated underground heat storage is estimated to be only a few % of the heat capacity for typical home size units (refer TABLE I.l) in low-conductivity ground in the absence of liquid-water flow. The economics of add-

ed insulation under these circumstances appears to be critically dependent on the specialized site and system.

2) The ground surrounding a typical heat storage facility contributes very little to the system's storage capacity on

a daily or seasonal time scale (figures I.2 and I.3).

APPENDIX J Solar Energy Trades

Literature

78

~ ~

GENERAL SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
A drawing of a typical installation is shown to the left. The collectors can be grouped as shown or in any of the configurations shown on page 2. Typical Collector Arrays. Due to the Solaron internal manifolding technique (Le., airflows from one panel to another internally) the external duct connections are minimized as shown (Le .. one inlet and one outlet for 30 panels. 563 ft.2). This technique reduces field labor and air leaks and leads to an economical installation. Contact Solaron to obtain system schematics showing how to combine solar heating with: · Air conditioning · Make-up air heating · Process air htg.-drying · Heat pumps · V.A.V. systems · Swim pool water heating · Industrial and agricultural heating · Multiple zones · Process water heating

SOLARON~
CORPORATION

PEBBLE-BED HEAT STORAGE UNIT
The pebble bed allows heat to be stored at nearly the outlet temperature of the collector. This is possible because of the high degree of stratification exhibited by the pebble bed and the flow direction reversal between "storing heat" and "heating from storage." When "storing heat," the high temperature air from the collector outlet enters the top of the pebble bed where it gives up its heat to the pebbles and returns to the collector as cool air. This allows the collector to operate at the highest possible

Suop/tNl

SOLARON SYSTEM SIZING CRITERIA Solaron provides the designer with

a complete solar system sizing procedure for approximately 250 locations in the U.S. and Canada. The procedure is summarized below: 1. Solar Collector Area: The collector area can be determined using the Solaron Conversion Factors (SCF) which are available from tile Solaron Distributors and Dealers. The C')lIector area is determined by dividing the building UA (Le. building design heat loss + the destgn temperature difference - BTU per hour"F) by the Solaron Conversion Factor. This provides the solar collector area required for a given annual fuel savings percentage. 2. Air Flow Rate: 2 SCFM to 3 SCFM per ft.2 of solar collector area. Contact Solaron tor special applications such as makeup air heating. out-

by

efficiency.
SelectiDII EDmpIe: ,. Assume tt.t the S.C.F. have been used to determine that a specific project requires 1000 11.2 of

collector. .. 2. Row rate - (2 SCFM per 11.2) x (collector area) - (2) x (1000) - 2000 SCFM 3. Heat storage unit - (Vz 'It.' rock per ft.!) x

side air heating for drying or industrial or agricultural process heating. 3. Heat Storage Size: 1k to ~ ft.3 rock per ft.2 of solar collector area. Rock size :114" to 'lh" dia.

(collector area) - (lh) x (1000) - 500 ft.' rock volume This can be .obtained with a storage unit having inside dimenSions of 10' W. x 10' L. x 5' rock depth. The air plenums on top of the rock make the box about 7 ft. high inside.

J.l - SOLARON SOLAR

E~ERGY

SYSTEMS

79

300 GALLERIA TOWER · 720 SOUTH COLORADO BLVD. DENVER, CO 80222 · (303) 759-0101 · 1WX 910.931·2580
0&l1li*

tIoI ~r Inlet
ClllIIe Ioc:aI8d III tnCI of unit.

MD-1\

t. InJet Air. t. Air going IIIl1lllcenl miami! manitold. :a. Air llltanng absor1ler wet.
4.
~rllawino undtr~.

_OIlIer.

.. Air flawing 10 nat teIieS 3000 c:oIllICIIIf.

I
Moo,' Ho.
AU-0400
A

AIr ~ndling
Unrt(m.)

Cool
E 16

Illmpers ..
F

B

e

()

i AU-{)500

42 20 18 14 16 300 1111.00 51 24 22 18 20 20 10 12001112400

G 8

.t 1.2·S.P.

C.F.M RallO'
Panel Dimensions: 35"W x 17"l x 8lio"H Wlig/lt 1351111.

IlJIrger. custom bui" lir llandlm Ire .'so ....labIe.

AIR HANDLING UNIT
Sclaron provides standard factory preassembled air handling units including blowers and motor driven dampers. A separate backdraft damper pair is furnished for mounting in the duct system.

THE PAT~NTED SOLARON 3000 COLLECTOR PANEL
~ by Patent 4.073.283

Atypical installation for the air handling unit. near the auxiliary heater and heat storage, is shown in the General System Description (upper left). The air handler can be mounted either vertically or horizontally with proper orientation and clearance to ra. ceive all connecting ducts without interference.

SOLARON AUTOMATIC CONTROL UNIT
The automatic temperature control unit is included as part of the Solaron system. The control· Ier handles all of the operational modes Which are shown in the schematics on page 2. The controller operates the solar side of ·the system and ties into a 2·stage thermostat to provide solar and/or auxiliary heat to the space as required. A standard Solaron controller is available to interface with heat pumps or other types of auxiliary heating systems. Solaron can provide technical assistance to design specIal controllers tor large projects Of unique applications.

Completely modular, the 3000 is the most advanced air heating flat plate collector in the industry. Expanded internal manifolding distributes the air flow, minimizes heat transfer loss and requires only minimal ducting. Other installation simpUfications in dude mounted silicone gaskets for between-collector sealing and attractive capping and perimeter strips for weathertight security, simptified collector hold-down. Sclaran Series 3000 features: · Collector Glazing-single. lightly textured, ~. thick., low Iron tempered glass. Easily removable for replacement · Absorber Coating-black ci1rame over nickel. Absorptivity-C.9S minimum . Emissivlty-o.15 maximum · Pan-20-0auge steel. · Insulation-2.5 inches of glass batt plus 0.5 inci1 semi-rigid foil backed; R·13 insulation value. · Connection Ports-unique flange configuration gives automatic airtight seal as modules are Installed. · Cap Strip-aluminum with high quality porcelain enamel finish provides weather sealing between panels.

J.l - SOLARON SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS

80

WATERSHED STORAGE SUB -SYSTEM

Above ground storage (typical section)

tggJ ?f~~~~~l~~S)
.-

~Tns-u15fed~-~-eta'r . -=--=--.:tank for optional . hot water rock 5 torage roc k. 5 j Z e :3/4·-/'12."
(dla) .

r-------

R2.~

,..:-_':':~':.-_-

==-_":.

air.handling unit" "

Lbose: Iz"(min·} depth of gravel bed "
insulation:,high tem,perature ego esl.en Rib '-----footing :poured concrete

.

walls:~olured

DOCK

concrete or

J.2 - WATERSHED ENERGY SYSTEMS LTD.

81

Section 'a' (pattern of first'layer of blocks)

Yi·screen-LJl~~~¥I~.~~=~

bottom air channel

------I

Section ·b· . (pattern of first and second layer 0 f blocks) sc r ee n --I-~;::;;::;;:::;:;;;;~:;~~;::;:~=~~

r

J.2 - WATERSHED ENERGY SYSTEMS LTD.

The system consists of four major parts: 1. The honeycomb panels, with mounting brackets and glazing caps.
2.
3.

I====~'. ';

'R:. ~ Honeycomb Collector

~ATERSHED

The sheet metal ducting. The air handling unit complete with temperature sensors, dampers, motors and controls. The thermal storage tank.

~======~~r-----~
Domestic Hot Water System

4.

THE WATERSHED SYSTEM
A properly installed system will supply 100% of the heat for a house during spring and fall, when sunshine is abundant, and about 20% in midwinter (December, January). Over a complete heating season. a system will supply 50% to 60% of the building heat requirements. The rock pile storage will provide about one day's storage in the dead of winter, and a week's storage during the early (October) and late (t1arch) winter.
J.2 - WATERSHED ENERGY SYSTEMS LTD.
00

tv

o

~!n~~O~!!!4~6~~~
2. PRODUCT
Materials:

1. QENERAl The Gravel Bed Heat Storage Unit is not supplied by Solartech because the unit is site constructed from common construction materials. However, the heat storage unit must conform to Solartech . approved design. While the gen: eral formula for heat storage UOit. sizing is given here, exacl sizing is a function of the relationship between anticipated collector perfonnance and building heat loss. Mechanical and structural consultants are required to consult with Solarlech for details of sizing and loading. The following Information Is provided for general guidance. Related Work , Heat Storage is part of a complete solar system. See also Sofartech specifications for Air Collectors and Solar Air Mover. Forced air dueling connecting these components Is specific to each installation site. Standard duct sizing formulas and materials are used.

Quality Assurance

Working drawings for heat storage unit are provided as part of the Solartech contract. Solartech approvals are required for final plans Incorporating Its product and for plans of certain related work not specified by Solartech but connecting Its components, e.g. ducting.

INSULATION - High density fibre glass. rndoor Storage: walls .and. bottom of container, R·12 min.; lid, R-20 min. Outdoor Buried Storage: walls and lid, R·20 min.; bottom of container, R-12 min. STEEL MESH - Expanded metal wire mesh, 11mm ('/2 ") No. 18. BEAM BLOCK - Concrete bond beam blocks 200 x 200 x 400mm (8 x 8 x 16"). WALLS- Typically 200mm (8") concrete block wall, grouted in all cells. and No.4 rebar on 1.2m (4') centres, or equivalent poured con· crete construction. FLOOR-Concrete slab, 160mm (6") min. thickness, incorporating 160 x 160mm (6" x 6; 10/10 mesh, horizontal reinforcing. LlD- Timber frame. with 12.7mm Ph; exterior grade plywood top and bottom, covered again on bottom with 12.7mm (1/2; moisture resistant drywall. Fibre glass insulation inside framework.
Operating Conditions

See drawing for general arrangement. DIMENSIONS - Sized according to collector area and building heat load. Sizing Formula:' Inside volume, approximately .15m3 per m 2 of collector (.5 ftl/ft 2). Typically, heat storage chamber will be between 1.5m and 1.8m (5' to 6') In depth. Plenums: Top and bottom are 200~m (8; deep. Duct Connections: Sized at 250m/min (800 'pm). GRAVEL-Washed round aggregate, not more than 35% crush,ed. Size: 20mm (3/ ..; nominal. Weight: . 1600 kg/m 3 (100 Iblftl) approx.

Pressure Drop: typically 37.3Pa (.15" H20). Gross Face 0.1 m/sec. (20 fpm) Velocity: typically. Air Flow .design is for Direction: vertical flows only.

J.3 - SOLARTECH LTD.
co w

84

o ch GraNd Bed Heat StorageUnit
~
I

,/'''. /1 . ' "
,
"

~"'-~""'~~I

~1

/ ; - ' UOSECUREDWITH LAG BOLTS AT 2 FT. CENTERS IN EACH CORNER

..

'"",1

H
TYPICAU.Y I ' COHCR BLOCK WAU. WITH AU. C£U.S GROUTED .. NO." FlEBAAVEFITICAU.Y AT .. FT. CENTERS

,.,
INSULATE INTERIOR WAU.$

.. aOlTOY WITH 2" AlGI!) . FIBERGLASS AF570 aOAAD

J.3 - SOLARTECH LTD.

References

&

Bibliography

85

REFERENCES
1.
2. 3. 4. AlA Research Group, Solar Dwelling Design Concepts, Washington, D.C., May 1976. Anderson, B., hire, 1976 The Solar Home Book, New Hampshire: Ches-

Balakrishnan, A.R., "Solar Heat Storage Systems," Canadian Engineering Digest: Volume 24, No.9, October, 1978 Balakrishnan, A.R., J.F. Orgill and E.C. Shewan, "Solar Energy Storage Systems," NRC, Waterloo Research Institute Report, May 1977 Balakrishnan, A.R., H.F. Sullivan and K.G.T. Hollander, "Studies on the Effect of of Bed Aspect Ratios and Pressure Drop on Flow Distribution in Rock Bed Storage Systems for Solar Energy Applications,1I Proceedings: Renewable Alternatives, London, Canada; August 1978 Barker 1 J. J. Engineering,
1

5.

6.
7. 8.

"Heat Transfer in Packed Bed," No.4; 1975

Industrial Whitter,

Bradly, Q.M. and J.F. Carlson, Cal., Solarc; pp.50-54

Solar Primer One,

Bulcomb, JD., J.C. Hedstrom and B.T. Rodgers, "Design Considerations of Air Cooled Collector / Rock Bin Storage Solar Systems," ISES Conference, Los Angeles, 1975 Close, D.J. and T.L. Pryor, "The Behavior of Adsorbent Energy Storage Beds," ISES Conference, Los Angeles, 1975 London: Yale

9.

10. Daniels, F., Direct Use of the Sun's Energy, University Press, 1964, pp.136-148

11. Drucker, F., Future Resources and Energy Ltd., 20 Ashwarren Street, Toronto, ontario. Interviews on December 18, 1978 and January 8, 1979, 1 hour. 12. Duffie, J.A., "Energy Storage," SOlar Energy Thermal Processes, Toronto: Wiley - Interscience, 1975, pp.215-239. 13. Erwin, G., "Solar Heat Storage Based on Inorganic Chemical Reactions, II Proceedin s, Worksho on Solar Ener Sub-S terns for Heating and Cooling of BuildJ.ngs ,., Char ottesvJ. e, VA., 1975 14. Goldes, A.A., SOlar Energy Structures, 279 Eglinton Ave. E., Toronto, Ontario. Interviews on January 29, 1979 and February 5, 1979, 1 hour. 15. Grodzka, P.G., "Some Practical Aspects of Thermal Energy Storage," Proceedings, Workshop on Solar Energy Sub-Systems for Heating and Cooling of Buildings, Charlottesville, VA., 1975

86 16. Hix, J., Architect; 207 Queen's Quay West, Toronto, Onta-

rio; Interviews on November 27, 1978 and December 14, 1978; 2 hours. 17. Hollands, K.G.T. and J.F. Orgill, Potential for Solar Heating in Canada, Waterloo: NRC., February, 1977. 18. Honeywell Solar Energy, "Systems and Controls Guide for Tomorrows Energy," Minnesota, Minneopolis, 1977. 19. Hottle, H.C. and B.B. Woertz, "Performance of Flat PlateHeat Collectors," ASME Transaction, 1942. 20. Jansen, T., Ryerson P.I., Mechanical Technology Department; Interviews on November 24, 1978; December IS, 1978; January 15, 1979; February 5, 1979, and March 8, 1978; 6 hours. 21. Junk, J., "Stratification in Storage for Solar Air Heating Systems," Solar Engineering, September, 1977. 22. Keyes, J., Harnessing the Sun, Morgan, 1975 New York; Morgan and

23. Kreiker, J.F. and F. Freith, Solar Heating and Cooling, Toronto: McGraw - Hill, 1977. 24. Lof, G., "Systems for Space Heating With Solar Energy, ASHRAE Journal; September, 1976. 25. Loriman, D., Raymond Moriyama Architects and Planner; 32 Davenport Road; Toronto, Ontario; interview on November 23, 1978; 1/2 hour. 26. Lucas, T., How to Build a Solar Heater, Ward Ritchie Press, 1975. Pasadena, Cal.:

27. Marvin, W.C. and S.A. Mumma, "A Method of Simulating the Performance of a Pebble Bed Thermal Energy Storage and Recovery System," Solar Energy Magazine, September 1977. 28. Meridew, P., Ryerson P.I., Architectural Science Department; Interviews on November 17, 1978; December 14, 1978; January 23, 1979; January 30, 1979; February 12, 1979; March 8, 1979; 6 hours. 29. National Solar Heating and Cooling Centre, ter and Your Home," Rockville, MD.; 1978.
~Solar

Hot Wa-

30. Nicholson, N., Harvest the Sun, Ayers Cliff, Que: Centre for Solar Research, 1978, pp.97-l11. 31. Nicholson, N., Nicholson Solar Energy Catalogue and Building Manual, Quebec: Metrolithe Inc., 1978

87

32. Nicholson, N., Nicholson Solar Energy Catalogue and Building Manual, Update Supplement, Quebec: Metrolithe Inc., 1978 33. Pickering, E.E., "Residential Hot Water Solar Energy Storage Subsystems," National Research Institute, Sprinfield: NTIS: January, 1976. 34. Piitz, E., Watershed Energy Systems Ltd, 301 King Street East, Toronto, Ontario; Interviews on December 18, 1978 and January 26, 1979; 1 /2 hours. 35. Quiroutte, R.L., "Solar Heating - The State of the Art," Building Research Note, No.102; Ottawa: NRC, 1975. 36. Rhind, R., Solartech Ltd., 207 Queen's Quay West, Toronto, Toronto, Ontario; Interviews on December 19, 1978 and January 25, 1979: 2 hours. 37. Riaz, P.L., "High Temperature Energy Storage in Native Rocks,1I volume 8, Sharing the Sun, Joint Conference, ASISES and SESC; Winnipeg, 1976. 38. Sabady, P.R., The Solar House, ed. I.F. Dickinson, Toronto: Newnes-Butterworths, 1978, pp.67-80. 39. Sasaki, J.R., "Solar Heating Systems for Canadian Buildings," Building Research NOte, No.104, Ottawa: NRC, 1975. 40. Sheldon, J., IIUnderground Storage of Heat in Solar Heating Systems," Solar Energy, volume 17, Pergamon Press, 1975, pp.137-143. 41. Solaron Solar Energy Systems, 300 Galleria Tower: Denver, Colorado. 42. Szokolay, S.V., Solar Energy and Building, tectural Press, 1977. 43. Telkes, M., II Solar Energy Storage, tt September, 1976. London: Archi-

ASHRAE Journal,

44. Vale, Robert and Brenda, The Autonomous House, New York: Universe Books, 1977, pp.185-203. 45. Watsun, D., Designing and Building and Solar House, Vermont: Garden Way, 1977, pp.91-98. 46. Yelliot, J.I., Solar Energy Utilization for Heating and and Heating, Arizona: State University, 1974.

88
BIBLIOGRAPHY

TEXTS Anderson, B., Books, 1976. The Solar Home Book, New Hampshire: Cheshire Whitter,

Bradley, Q.M. and J.F. Carlson, Cal., Solarc, 1977.

Solar Primer One,

Daniels, F., Direct Use of the Sun's Energy, 'University Press, 1977. Duffie, J.A. and Beckman, Energy Thermal Processes, 1974.
~~.A.,

London: Yale

"Energy Storage," Solar Toronto: Wiley - Interscience, New York:

Halacy Jr., D.S., The Coming Age of Solar Energy, Harper and Rowe, 1973. Keyes, J., gan, 1977. Harnessing the Sun, New York:

Morgan and Mor-

Kreider, J.F. and F. Kreith, Solar Heating and Cooling, Toronto: Mcgraw - Hill, 1977. Lucas, T., How to Build a Solar Heater, Ward Ritchie Press, 1975. Nicholson, N., Harvest the Sun, Centre for Solar Research, 1978. Pasadena, Cal.:

Ayera Cliff, Quebec:

Nicholson, N., Nicholson Solar Energy Catalogue and Building Manual, Quebec: Methrolithe Inc., 1978. Sabady, P.R., The Solar House, ed. I.F. Dickinson, Newnes - Butterworths, 1978. Szakolay, S.V., Solar Energy and Buildings, tural Press, 1977. Vale, Robert and Brenda, Universe Books, 1977. London: Toronto: Archi-

The Autonomous House,

New York: Vermont:

watsun, D., Designing and Building a Solar House, Garden Way, 1977.

Williams, J.R., Solar Energy, Technology and Applications, Ann Arbor, Mich., AA Science Pubs., 1974. Yellot, J.I., Hill. 1977. Solar Energy Utilization, Toronto: Mcgraw-

89

PROCEEDINGS FROM CONFERENCES Balakrishnan, A.R., H.F. Sullivan and K.G.T. Hollands, "Studies on the Effect of Bed Aspect Ratios and Pressure Drop on Flow Distribution in Rock Bed Storage Systems for Solar Energy Applications, Proceedings, Renewable Alternatives; London, Canada; August 1978. Balcomb, J.D., J.C. Hedstrom and B.T. Rodgers, "Design Considerations of Air Cooled Collectors / Rock Bin Storage Systems, It ISES Conference; Los Angeles, 1975. Bolton, J.R., "Photochemical Storage of Solar Energy,1t Proceedings, Joint ISES - SESCI Conference; Winnipeg, 1976. Chahroudi, D., "Suspension Media for Heat Storage Materials," Proceedings, Workshop on Solar Energy Sub-systems for Heating and Cooling of Buildings, Charlottesville, VA., 1975. Close, D.J. and T.L. Pryor, liThe Behaviour of Adsorbent Energy Storage Beds," ISES Conference; Los Angeles, 1975 Grodzka, P.G., IIS ome Practical Aspects of Thermal Energy Storage," Proceedings, Workshop on Solar Energy Sub-systems for Heating and Cooling of Buildings, Charlottesville, VA., 1975. Hodkins, J.W., "Chemical Energy Storage,1t SESCl Conference, The Potential of SOlar Energy for Canada, Ottawa, June 1975. Offenhartz, P.O., IIChemical Methods of Storing Thermal Energy,1t Joint ISES - SESCl Conference, Winnipeg, 1976. Orgill, J.F., liThe Potential of Solar Energy for Canada,lt SESC Conference, Ottawa, 1975. Rogers, B.T., "Rock Bed Storage Storage Systems Group Report," Proceedings, Workshop on Solar Energy Storage Subsystems for the Heating and of Buildings, Charlottesville, VA., 1975. Sharing the Sun, Solar Technology in the Seventies, Volume 8, Jo~nt Conference, ASISES and SESC, Winnipeg, 1976. Swet, C.J., "New Directions in Heat Storage for Buildings," Proceedings, Joint Conference, lSES - SESCl, Winnipeg, 1976.

90

PERIODICALS Alanis, E., L. Sarvia and L. Rovetta, "Measurement of Rock Pile Heat Transfer Co-Efficient," Solar Energy, vol.19, Pergamon Press, 1977, pp.571-572. Balakrishnan, A.R., "Solar Heat Storage System, Canadian Engineering Digest, vol.24, no.9, October, 1977. Barker, J.J., "Heat Transfer in Packed Beds," Engineering Chem., 1,7, No.4, 63, 1975. Duffie, J.A. and W.A. Beckman, Science, 191, No.4223, 1976. Industrial

"Solar Heating and Cooling,"

Hughes, P.J. and S.A. Klein, "Packed Bed Thermal Storage Model For Solar Air Heating and Cooling Systems," Solar Energy Magazine, September 1977. Junk, J., Systems, II "Stratification in storage for Solar Air Heating Solar Engineering, September, 1977.

Marvin, W.C. and S.A. Mumma, "A Method of Simulating the Performance of a Pebble Bed Thermal Energy Storage and Recovery System," Solar Energy Maqazine, September, 1977. Sheldon, J. "Underground Storage of Heat in Solar Heating Systems," Solar Enerqy, vol. 17, Pergamon Press, 1975, pp.137-l43.

JOURNALS , TRANSACTIONS , PAPERS Chan, C.K. and C.L. Tien, "Conductance of Packed Spheres in Vacuum, II ASME, 95, 302. 1973. Hollands, K.G.To, and J.F. Orgill, "Potential for Solar Heating in Canada," WAterloo: N.R.C., February, 1977. Hottle, H.C. and B.B. Woertz, "Performance of Flat Plate Heat Collectors," ASME Transaction, 1942. Lof, G., "Systems for Space Heating With Solar Energy," ASHRAE Journal, September, 1976. Lorsch, H.G., IIThermal Energy Storage for Solar Heating," ASHRAE Journal, November, 1975. Schurr, N.H., H.D. Walker and D.F. Salmon, "A Study of the Economic Feasibility of a Thermal Energy Storage System for Solar Heating Applications Using a Phase Change Material," ASME Paper 76 - WA!HT - 63.

91

Telkes, M., "Solar Energy Storage," ber, 1976. CANADIAN GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS

ASHRAE Journal, Septem-

Balakrishnan, A.R., J.F. Orgill and E.C. Shewon, "Solar Energy Storage Systems," N.R.C., Waterloo Research Institute Report, May 1977. Ener Research and Development Administration, "Energy Storage Technology, So ar Energy Fact eet No.16, Ottawa, Canada, 1977. Ministry of Energy (Ontario), 1977. "Turn on the Sun," Toronto,

Orgill, J.F., "Watsun - Solar Heating Simulation and Economic Evaluation Program," Waterloo Research Institute Report, 1976. Quiroutte, R.L., "Solar Heating - The State of the Art," Building Research Note, No.102, Ottawa: N.R.C., 1975. Sasaki, J.R., "Solar Heating Systems for Canadian Buildings," Building Research Note, No.104, Ottawa: N.R.C., 1975.
<

Stephenson, D.G., "Determining the Optimum Thermal Resistance for Walls and Roofs," Building Research Note, No.lOS, 1976. U.S.A. GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS AlA Research Group, "Solar Dwelling Design Concepts," Washington, D.C., May 1976. Energy Research and Development Administration, "Solar Heating Cooling of Buildings," Solar Program Assesment: Environmental Factors, Report, Washington, D.C., March, 1977. National Program for Solar Heating and Cooling of Buildings, Volumes 1, 2, 3, Washington, D.C., 1976. pickering, E.E., "Residential Hot Water Solar Energy Storage Subsystems, II National Research Institute, Springfield: ~; January, 1976.

92

CANADIAN TRADES Amherst Renewable Energies Ltd. BOX 87 Bath, Ontario KOH-IGO attention: Mr. G. Allen Envirotron Solar Ltd. 40 Metior Dr. Rexdale, Ontario M9W-IA4 Hix, J., Architect 207 Queens Quay West Toronto, Ontario M5J-IA7 Lee, Elken, Beckstead, Paulsen, Fair 207 Queen's Quay West Toronto, Ontario M5J-IA7 Mechanical Consultants Western Ltd. 207 Queen's Quay West Toronto, Ontario M5J-IA7 attention: Mr. G. Bellamy Moriyama Architect and Planners 32 Davenport.Road Toronto, Ontario M5R-IH3 attention: Mr. D. Loriman Solarfin Products 108 Ottawa Street Hamilton, Ontario Architects

L8H-3DI

Solar Energy Structures 279 Eglinton East Toronto, Ontario attention: Mr. A.A. Goldes Solartech Ltd. 207 Queen's Quay West Toronto, Ontario MSJ-IA7 attention: Mr. R. Rhind Solartherm Energy Products 1711 Mattawa Ave. Mississauga, Ontario L4X-IK5 Attention: MR. Slattery Solcan Ltd. 126 Wychwood Park London, Ontario M6G-IR7

93

Solco Energy Systems 61 Waterford Drive Suite 606 Weston, Ontario M9R-2N7 Watershed Energy Systems Ltd. 301 King Street East Toronto, Ontario attention: Mr. E. Piitz U.S.A. TRADES American Solar Companies Inc. Building No.4, Ford Road Denville, NJ., 07834 Colorado Sunworks Corp. P.O. BOX 455 Boulder, CO., 80306 Florida Solar Power Inc. P.O. BOX 5846 Tellahassee, FL., 32301 National Solar Sales Inc. 165 West Wieuca Road Atlanta, GA., 30342 Solar Energy Research Corp. 7018 South Main St. Longmont, CO., 80501 Solar Innovations 412 Longfellow Blvd. Lakeland, FL., 33801 Solar Systems International 6025 NW 82nd Ave. Miami, FL., 33166 Solar Technology Inc. 3927 Oakclif Industrial Court Atlanta, GA., 30340 Solarmetrics 23 Bridge St. Manchester, NH.,

03101

Solaron Solar Energy Systems 300 Galleria Tower Denver, CO., 80222

94

Sunwall Inc ·. P.O. BOX 9723 Pittsbirgh, PA.,

15229

Sundog Solar 3800 N. Virginia St. Reno, NV 89506 Sun-saver Inc. Thomson Solar HOmes Inc. 6802 Waleker Mill Rd. Wahington, D.C., 20027 Zomeworks Corp. P.O. BOX 712 Alburquerque, NM.,

87103

INFORMATION CENTRES AND SOCIETIES Energy Probe 43 Queen's Park Crecent Toronto, Ontario M5S-2C3 National Research Council of Canada Division of Solar Energy Montreal.Road Ottawa, Ontario KIA-OR6 National Solar Heating and Cooling Information Centre P.O. BOX 1607 Rockville, MD., 20850 Office of Renewable Energy 580 Booth Street . Ottawa, Ontario KIA-OE4 Solar Energy Society of Canada, Inc. P.O. BOX 1353 Winnipeg, Manitoba United States Government Energy Research and Development Administration Division of Solar Energy Washington, D.C., 20545 United States Government Superintendent of Documents Government, D.C., 20402

95

THESIS STYLE GUIDES Charles, R., Hill, 1970. Manuscript Style Guide, Toronto: McGraw-

Glidden, H.K., Reports, Technical Writing, and Specifications, Toronto: Mcgraw - Hill, 1964. Stainton, W.D., 1979 Notes on Technical Report Writing, paper:

