h aoto ~ () 8'7 /

Load Distribution in Concrete Solid Slab Bridges

~O -ntfi
;>o(~

BY

Muhammad Ishtiaq Bsc. Civil Engineering University of Engineering & Technology Lahore, Pakistan, 1992

A Project Presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirement for the degree of Master of Engineering in the program of Civil Engineering . Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2011

RYtRSm~ Wi~W~lmnm1U:rY

PROPfiRIY OF.... ··.

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this project. I authorize Ryerson to lend this document to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce the document by photocopying or by other means, in total or part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Muhammad IshtIa

. I

ii

BORROWERS' PAGE
Ryerson University requires the signatures of all persons using or photocopying this project. Please sign below, and give address and date.

Student N arne

Signature

Date

.

I
j

0'

-

iii

Load Distribution in Concrete Solid Slab Bridges

By Muhammad Ishtiaq Ryerson University - Civil Engineering Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2011

ABSTRACT
Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code (CHBDC) specifies empirical equations for the moment and shear distribution factors for selected bridge configurations. These empirical equations were based on the orthotropic plate theory with equivalent slab bending and torsional rigidity. Also, they were based on analysis procedure and CHBDC truck loading condition slightly different from those specified in the current CHBDC code of 2006. In this study, a parametric study was conducted, using the finite-element modeling to determine the moment and shear distribution factors for solid slab bridges subjected to CHBDC truck loading. Shell elements were used to model the bridge deck slab supported over bearings on each side of the bridge at 1.2 m spacing. The results from the parametric study were correlated to those available in the CHBDC code. Results show considerable difference in FEA results and CHBDC equations, especially for shear distribution factors. This project provides research results that can be used further to develop more reliable expressions for moment and shear distribution factors for solid slab bridges.

iv

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author wishes to express his deep appreciation to his advisor Dr. K. Sennah, for his constant support and valuable supervision during the development of this research. Dr. Sennah devoted his time and effort to make this study a success. His most helpful guidance is greatly appreciated. The author is very grateful to his father, mother, wife, son, and daughters for their great support and encouragement during the course of this study. The financial support from Ryerson University is greatly appreciated.

v

DEDICATED TO MY FAMILY

vi

TABLE OF CONTENTS ABSTRACT ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS NOTATIONS LIST OF TABLES LIST OF FIGURS CHAPTER I INTRODUCTION
1.1 GENERAL 1.2 THE PROBLEM

IV
V

IX
XI XII

1
1 1 1

1.3 OBJECTIVES 1.4 SCOPE 1.5 CONTENTS AND ARRANGEMENT OF THIS STUDY CHAPTER II LITERATURE REVIEW 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.4.1 CONCEPT OF LATERAL LOAD DISTRIBUTION FACTOR BRIDGE TYPES SLAB BRIDGES REVIEW OF PREVIOUS RESEARCH ON LOAD DISTRIBUTION REVIEW OF STUDY ON DISTRIBUTION FACTORS FOR STRAIGHT BRIDGES

3

3
4

5 5

5 6
7

7

7 7 10 11 13 144 15 155 17 23 233 23 24 28 30

2.4.1.1 Concept of orthotropic plate 2.4.1.2 ORTHOTROPIC PLATE ANALOGY (GUVON-MASSONNET OR G-M METHOD) 2.4.1.3 Grillage Method 2.4.1.4 Finite Element Method 2.4.1.5 AASHTO Methods 2.4.1.5.1 AASHTO Standard Method 1996 2.4.1.5.2 AASHTO LRFD Method 2.4.1.6 Simplified method of analysis, 2006 (CHBDC) CHAPTER III FINITE-ELEMENT ANALYSIS 3.1 GENERAL 3.2 FINITE-ELEMENT APPROACH 3.3 SAP2000 COMPUTER PROGRAM 3.4 FINITE ELEMENT MODELLING OF SOLID SLAB BRIDGES

vii

3.4.1

Geometric Modeling

30 30 31

3.4.1.1 Modelling of solid slab bridge

3.4.1.2 ASPECT RATIO
3.4.1.3 MODELING OF MOVING LOAD PATH

32 32
33 34 35

3.4.2
3.4.3 3.5

Boundary Conditions
MATERIAL MODELING

CHBDC DESIGN LOADING CHBDC SPECIFICATION OF TRUCK LOADING COMPOSITE BRIDGE CONFIGURATION LOAD DISTRIBUTION FACTOR
CALCULATION OF MOMENT DISTRIBUTION FACTOR CALCULATION OF SHEAR DISTRIBUTION FACTOR CALCULATION OF DEFLECTION DISTRIBUTION FACTOR

3.6 3.7
3.8 3.8.1

36
37 37 38 39

3.8.2
3.S.3

CHAPTER IV
RESULTS FROM THE PARAMETRIC STUDY

40 40 40 40
41 41 41 42 42 43 43

4.1 GENERAL 4.2 EFFECT OF SPAN LENGTH

4.2.1 MOMENT DISTRIBUTION FACTOR 4.2.2 SHEAR DISTRIBUTION FACTOR
4.2.3 DEFLECTION DISTRIBUTION FACTOR

4.3

EFFECT OF NUMBER OF LANES

4.3.1 MOMENT DISTRIBUTION FACTOR 4.3.2 SHEAR DISTRIBUTION FACTOR 4.3.3 DEFLECTION DISTRIBUTION FACTOR

4.4
4.5

EFFECT OF LOAD CASES
CORRELATION OF MOMENT & DEFLECTION DISTRIBUTION FACTORS OBTAINED FROM FEA ANALYSIS COMPARISON BETWEEN THE FEA RESULTS AND DISTRIBUTION FACTORS SPECIFIED IN CHBDC BRIDGES

44
44

4.6

45 46 46 46 46 47

CHAPTER V CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE REASEARCH

5.1 GENERAL 5.2 CONCLUSIONS
5.3 RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH

REFERENCES APPENDIX (A): SUMMARY OF SENSITIVITY AND PARAMETRIC STUDIES

48 95

viii

NOTATIONS
A B Be

E
F Fm Fv Fd

It
L
MDL

Bridge width The clear spacing between girders Effective concrete slab width Modulus of Elasticity Width dimension factor Moment distribution factor Shear distribution factor Deflection distribution factor The moment of inertia of the eomposite girder Centre line span of a simply supported bridge The mid-span moment for a straight simply supported girder due to a single girder dead load The mid-span moment for a straight simply supported girder due to a single CHBDC truck loading The Max. shear force for a straight simply supported girder due to a single CHBDC truck loading The Max. Deflection for a straight simply supported girder due to a single CHBDC truck loading Number of design lanes Number of girders Applied loads vector at the nodes Radius of curvature of the centre span of the curved bridge Multi-lane factor based on the number of the design lanes Multi-lane factor based on the number of the loaded lanes Girders spacing Displacement vector at the nodes Deck width Width of design lane The distance from the neutral axis to the bottom flange Maximum shear forces calculated for straight simply supported beam due to Dead Load Maximum shear forces calculated for straight simply supported beam due to truck loading The greater reaction at the girder supports found from the finite-element analysis due to dead load The greater reaction at the girder supports found from the finite-element analysis due to Fully loaded lanes The greater reaction at the girder supports found from the finite-element analysis due to partially loaded lanes The greater reaction at the exterior girder supports found from the finiteelement analysis due to Fatigue loading

VT

n N [P] R
RL

RL '
S [U] We We Yb
(Rstraight)DL

ix

(SDF)DL (SDF)FL (SDF)PL (SDF)Fatext (SDF)Fat int (0' straight) DL

(0' straight) truck
(0- FE)FL (0- FE. )PL (0- FE. )Fat (MDF)DL (MDF)FL (MDF)pL (MD F)Fat.ext (MDF)Fat.int
(~imple)DL (~simple) truck

(DDF)DL (DDF)FL (DDF)PL (DDF)Fat.ext

The greater reaction at the middle girder supports found from the finiteelement analysis due to Fatigue loading Shear distribution factor for the girder due to Deal Load Shear distribution factor for the girder due to Fully Loaded lanes Shear distribution factor for the girder due to Partially Loaded lanes Shear distribution factor for the exterior girder due to Fatigue Loading Shear distribution factor for the interior girder due to Fatigue Loading Maximum flexural stresses in bottom flange fibers, for the straight simply supported beam due to Deal Load Maximum flexural stresses in bottom flange fibers, for the straight simply supported beam due to CHBDC truck loading The bigger flexural stresses of r girder due to Fully loaded lanes case The bigger flexural stresses of e girder due to Partially loaded lanes case The bigger flexural stresses of girder due to Fatigue loading case Moment distribution factor of girder for dead load case Moment distribution factor of girder for full load case Moment distribution factor of girder for partial load case Moment distribution factor of exterior girder for fatigue case Moment distribution factor of interior girder for fatigue case Mid-span deflection in bottom flange fibers, for a straight simply supported girder subject to dead load Mid-span deflection in bottom flange fibers, for a straight simply supported girder subject to CHBDC truck loading Mid-span deflection in bottom flange fibers at point 2 of exterior girder, for the dead load case, obtained from finite-element analysis Mid-span deflection in bottom flange fibers of girder, for the full lane loading case, obtained from finite-element analysis Mid-span deflection in bottom flange fibers of girder, for the partial lane loading case, obtained from finite-element analysis Mid-span deflection in bottom flange fibers at exterior girder, for the fatigue case, obtained from finite-element analysis Deflection distribution factor of exterior girder for dead load case Deflection distribution factor of exterior girder for full load case Deflection distribution factor of exterior girder for partial load case Deflection distribution factor of exterior girder for fatigue case

x

LIST OF TABLES
Table No. Page Table 3.1 Number of Design Lanes (CHBDC, 2006) Table 3.2 Modification Factor for multilane loading (CHBDC, 2006)

50 50

xi

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure No. Page Figure 1.1 Views of common bridge cross-sections in CHBDC Figure 1.2 Schematic diagram of solid slab bridges Figure 2.1 Real Structure and Orthotropic Plate analogy Figure 3.1 Sketch of the four-node shell element used in the analysis, (SAP2000) Figure 3.2 View oDD Model of solid slab bridge (650mm, Width 7.396m, 16m span) Figure 3.3 View of X - Y plan of solid slab bridge (650mm, Width 7.396m, 16m span) Figure 3.4 CL-W truck and lane loading, CHBDC Figure 3.5 Maximum Moment Location Figure 3.6 Maximum Shear Location Figure 3.7 Live Loading Case for 2-lane bridge Figure 3.8 Live Loading Case for 3-lane bridge Figure 3.9 Live Loading Case for 4-lane bridge Figure 4.1 Effect of span length on Fm values for 2L, W= 7.396m Figure 4.2 Effect of span length on Fm values for 2L, W= 8.631m Figure 4.3 Effect of span length on Fm values for 2L, W= 9.866m Figure 4.4 Effect of span length on Fm values for 3L, W= 11.101m Figure 4.5 Effect of span length on Fm values for 3L, W= 12.366m Figure 4.6 Effect of span length on Fm values for 3L, W= 13.571m Figure 4.7 Effect of span length on Fm values for4L, W= 14.806m Figure 4.8 Effect of span length on Fm values for 4L, W= 16.041m Figure 4.9 Effect of span length on Fm values for 4L, W= 17.276m Figure 4.10 Effect of span length on Fv values for 2L, W= 7.396m Figure 4.11 Effect of span length on Fv values for 2L, W= 8.631 m Figure 4.12 Effect of span length on Fv values for 2L, W= 9.866m Figure 4.13 Effect of span length on Fv values for 3L, W= 11.101m Figure 4.14 Effect of span length on Fv values for 3L, W= 12.366m Figure 4.15 Effect of span length on Fv values for 3L, W= 13.571m Figure 4.16 Effect of span length on Fv values for 4L, W= 14.806m Figure 4.17 Effect of span length on Fv values for 4L, W= 16.041m Figure 4.18 Effect of span length on Fv values for 4L, W= 17.276m· Figure 4.19 Effect of span length on Fd values for 2L, W= 7.396m 51 52 52 53 54 54 55 56 57 58 59 61 65 65 66 66 67 67 68 68 69 69 70 70 71 71 72 72 73 73 74

xii

Figure 4.20 Effect of span length on Fd values for 2L, W= 8.631 m Figure 4.21 Effect of span length on Fd values for 2L, W= 9.866m Figure 4.22 Effect of span length on Fd values for 3L, W= 11.101m Figure 4.23 Effect of span length on Fd values for 3L, W= 12.366m Figure 4.24 Effect of span length on Fd values for 3L, W= 13.571m Figure 4.25 Effect of span length on Fd values for 4L, W= 14.806m Figure 4.26 Effect of span length on Fd values for 4L, W= 16.041m Figure 4.27 Effect of span length on Fd values for 4L,' W= 17.276m Figure 4.28 Effect of number of lanes on Fm values for 16m span bridge Figure 4.29 Effect of number oflanes on Fm values for 20m span bridge Figure 4.30 Effect of number of.lanes on Fm values for 24m span bridge Figure 4.31 Effect of number of lanes on Fm values for 26m span bridge Figure 4.32 Effect of number of lanes on Fm values for 30m span bridge Figure 4.33 Effect of number of lanes on Fm values for 32m span bridge Figure 4.34 Effect of number of lanes on Fv values for 16m span bridge Figure 4.35 Effect of number oflanes on Fv values for 20m span bridge Figure 4.36 Effect of number oflanes on Fv values for 24m span bridge Figure 4.37 Effect of number of lanes on Fv values for 26m span bridge Figure 4.38 Effect of number oflanes on Fv values for 30m span bridge Figure 4.39 Effect of number of lanes on Fv values for 32m span bridge Figure 4.40 Effect of number of lanes on Fd values for 16m span bridge Figure 4.41 Effect of number oflanes on Fd values for 20m span bridge Figure 4.42 Effect of number of lanes on Fd values [or 24m span bridge Figure 4.43 Effect of number of lanes on Fd values for 26m span bridge Figure 4.44 Effect of number oflanes on Fd values for 30m span bridge Figure 4.45 Effect of number oflanes on Fd values for 32m span bridge Figure 4.46 Comparison ofFm and Fd values for 2-lanes, W= 7.396m Figure 4.47 Comparison ofFm and Fd values for 2-lanes, W= 8.631m Figure 4.48 Comparison ofFm and Fd values for 2-lanes, W= 9.866m Figure 4.49 Comparison ofFm and Fd values for 3-1anes, W= 11.10lm Figure 4.50 Comparison ofFm and Fd values for 3-lanes, W= 12.366m Figure 4.51 Comparison ofFm and Fd values for 3-lanes, W= 13.571m Figure 4.52 Comparison ofFm and Fd values for 4-lanes, W= 14.806m Figure 4.53 Comparison ofFm and Fd values for4-lanes, W= 16.041m

74 75 75 76 76 77 77 78 78 79 79 80 80 81 81 82 82 83 83 84 84 85 85 86 86 87 87 88 88 89 89 90 90 91

xiii

Figure 4.54 Comparison ofFm and Fd values for 4-1anes, W= 17.276m Figure 4.55 Comparison between the FEA results and those from the CHBDC Equations for solid slab bridges for ULS -Fm Values Figure 4.56 Comparison between the FEA results and those from the CHBDC Equations for solid slab bridges for FLS -Fm Values Figure 4.57 Comparison between the FEA results and those from the CHBDC Equations for solid slab bridges for ULS -Fv Values Figure 4.58 Comparison between the FEA results and those from the CHBDC Equations for solid slab bridges for FLS -Fv Values Figure 4.59 Comparison between the FEA results and those from the CHBDC Equations for solid slab bridges for SLS2 -Fd Values

91 92 92
93

93

94

xiv

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
1.1 General
Solid slab or voided-slab bridges can be used for bridge spans ranging from 5 to 32 m, representing the range for short spans and lower range of the medium span bridges. In the analysis and design of bridges, the calculation of structural response of a bridge to live loads is a complicated and lengthy task. The design values for bending moment, shear or deflection for solid slab bridges depend on the location and the number of moving trucks on the bridge, boundary conditions and the cross section properties of bridge components. These values vary with the change in slab thickness, span, width of bridge, and load cases. In order to calculate the live load carried by slab in case of a straight bridge, lateral load distribution factor is a key element and important in analyzing existing bridges and designing new ones. To simplifY the design process, the Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code (CHBDC, 2006) specified imperial expressions for moment and shear distribution factors which are basically the ratio between them maximum structural quantities in a bridge cross-section resulting from different scenarios of truck loading conditions to the average value obtained from simple beam analysis. As such, the load distribution factors takes into account the two- and threedimensional behaviour of the bridge superstructure when treating the bridge as onedimensional structural (i.e. simple beam) to simplifY the design process.

1

1.2 The Problem
The Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code (CHBDC, 2006) specifies empirical equations for the moment, shear and deflection distribution factors for selected bridge configurations, including slab-on-girders, multiples-spine bridges, cellular or voided slab bridge and solid slab bridges (Fig. 1.1). These empirical equations were based on the orthotropic plate theory with equivalent slab bending and torsional rigidity, in case of slab bridges, shown in Fig. 1.2. Also, there were based on analysis procedure and CHBDC truck loading condition slightly different from those specified in the current CHBDC code of 2006. Despite the general availability of computers and computer software programs for the bridge analysis, bridge designers strongly prefer simplified methods of analysis to reduce the time spent in the design that would be reflected in a considerable reduction in design cost. In addition, most engineers are not familiar with the finite-element modeling and are reluctant to use this technique,· especially in the preliminary designs because of its time consuming in terms of modeling assumptions and verifications and results interpretation. In this study, a parametric study was conducted to investigate the level of confidence of CHBDC simplified analysis method specified in CHBDC for solid slab bridge. This simplified analysis method was aimed at determining the most critical load effect by accounting for the transverse distribution of wheel loads through empirical factors. With this method, load effects were computed considering the bridge structures as an equivalent beam. The load sharing between longitudinal members was then determined using simple relationships that constitute the specificity of the method. In this study, the 3D finite element modelling, using SAP2000 software (Computers and Structures, 2009) was conducted on wide range of solid slabs to obtain their moment and shear distribution factors when SUbjected to CHBDC truck loading

2

conditions. Then, the obtained results were correlated between the FEA results and CHBDC equations for solid slab bridges.

1.3 Objectives
The objectives of this study are:
1. Conduct a parametric study, using the three:dimensional finite-element method (FEA),

on selected solid slab bridges, to determine the maximum flexural stresses, support reaction forces and deflection to provide database for the evaluation of their moment, shear and deflection distribution factors. 2. Correlate the FEA results with CHBDC moment and shear distribution factors so that recommendations can be made on the use of such expression in design new bridges and evaluating existing ones.

1.4 Scope
The scope of this study includes the following: 1. A literature review of previous research, textbooks, and design codes of practice related to the study. 2. Conduct a practical-design-oriented study to investigate the key parameters affecting the load distribution in slab bridges. The range of studied parameters include: (i) span of the bridge; (ii) total width of bridge; (iii) number of design lanes; and (v) truck loading conditions. The parametric study was performed using the commercially-available FiniteElement Software "SAP2000" on 54 solid slab bridges subjected to CHBDC truck loading, leading to more than 2000 loading cases.

3

3. Preparation of database that can be correlated with the available CHBDC simplified method of analysis. 4. Made recommendations on the use of CHBDC load distribution factors on the design of slab bridges.

1.5 Contents and Arrangement of this study
Chapter II:

Contains the literature review which is a thorough explanation of lateral load distribution factor concept and review of previous work.

Chapter III: Describes the finite-element method and "SAP2000" software used in the

analysis, modeling,

bridge

configurations,

loading

cases,

and the

methodology to calculate the load distribution factors.
Chapter IV: Presents the outcome of the parametric study performed on the bridge

prototypes, and the developed empirical equations for load distribution factors.
Chapter V:

Includes

the

summary

and

conclusions

drawn

from

this

study.

4

CHAPTER II
LITERATURE REVIEW
2.1 Concept of Lateral Load Distribution Factor
In the analysis and designing of bridge, the calculation of structural response of a bridge to live loads is a complicated and lengthy task. The design values for bending moment, shear or deflection force for solid slab depend on the location and the number of moving trucks on the bridge, boundary conditions and the cross section properties of bridge components. These values vary with the change in slab thickness, span, width of bridge, and load cases.

In order to calculate the live load carried by slab in case of a straight bridge, lateral load distribution factor is a key element and important in analyzing existing bridges and designing new ones. To simplifY the design process, North American bridge codes, such as
CAN/CSA-S6-06 (CHBDC, 2006), AASHTO-LRFD Bridge Design Specification (AASHTO,

2007, 2004 and 2000), and AASHTO Standard Specifications (AASHTO, 1996), treat the longitudinal and transverse effects of wheel loads as uncoupled phenomena. Based on these codes, to obtain the design moment, deflection and shear force, we calculate the maximum moment, deflection, and shear force caused by a single truck live load per meter of width of the bridge. Then the values are to be amplified by a factor, which is usually referred to as the live load distribution factor. The literature survey conducted in this study includes previous research work on the simplified methods of analysis of bridges.

5

2.2 Bridge Types
Bridge is not a construction but it is a concept, the concept of crossing over large spans of land or huge masses of water. The idea behind a bridge is to connect two far-off points eventually reducing the distance between them. Apart from this poetic aspect of 'bridges', there is a technical aspect to them that classifies bridges on the basis of the techniques of their construction. Bridges can be constructed entirely from reinforced concrete, pre-stressed, post-tensioned concrete, steel, wood or composite concrete deck-steel girders. These bridges may be comprised of a wood deck, concrete slab or steel deck on wood, concrete or steel girders. The box girder bridge can be used in such a way the top flanges of the precast box girders form the bridge deck surface. Many types of bridges have been used significantly on highway and road to facilitate the traffic flow. The bridge types covered by the simplified methods of analysis in the CHBDC are as follows: (a) Reinforced I post-tensioned solid slab

(b) Post-tensioned circular I trapezoidal voided deck
(c) Deck-on-girders, including concrete slab-on-girder, steel grid deck on girder and wood deck on girder (d) Truss and arch (e) Rigid frame and integral abutment types

Cf) Bridges incorporating wood beams
(g) Multi-cell and multi-spine (h) Cable Stayed (i) Suspension

6

2.3 Slab Bridges
Slab bridges are easiest to construct and are frequently used for comparatively smaller span. The form is very efficient at distributing point loads because of it two way spanning ability and high torsional strength. It is relatively easy to construct and this reflected in its construction cost. The principal disadvantages are its high self weight which can be counteracted to some extent, by providing suitable variation in thickness or by providing voids. It may be of reinforced concrete or of prestressed concrete. Solid reinforced concrete slab of constant depth is normally used for span up to 10 m. For larger span say up to 15 m, hunching or variable depth is adopted to reduce the dead load. A solid slab of uniform depth is preferred in highly skewed crossing, particularly if significant curvature and variation in width of deck is involved.

2.4 Review of Previous Research on Load Distribution
2.4.1 Review of Study on Distribution Factors for Straight Bridges
This section summarizes previous research work pertained to load distribution in bridges. According to the level of bridge lateral rigidity, different methodologies are implemented in practice, including hinged joint method, fixed joint method, orthotropic plate analogy, AASHTO Standard, AASHTO-LRFD and CHBDC simplified method.

2.4.1.1 Concept of orthotropic plate
In 1979, Bakht et al. used the concept of orthotropic plate to develop a simplified method for calculating the design live load longitudinal moments. In their research, they conducted

extensive parametric studies, which led them to fmd out that the distribution factor of bridges is

7

related to a torsional parameter a and a flexural parameter B., which are functions of geometry and material properties of the bridge. These parameters are given by:

(2.1)

()=~ Dx

O.25

2L Dy

( J

(2.2)

Where b is the bridge width, L is the span length of the bridge and the various rigidities are given by:

D
x

= Ee
S

Ie + E J 3 12

(2.3)

(2.4)

(2.5)

D
)IX

== Gc t

3

6

(2.6)

(2.7)

Which Ec, Gc and

Vc

are the Young's modulus, the shear modulus and the Poisson's ratio,

respectively, t is the concrete slab thickness, S is the girder spacing, IG and JG are the flexural and torsional moment of inertia of the girder cross section, respectively. The subscript G refers to girder and c refers to the concrete slab. This method gives better results than the AASHTO recommendations that assume the girder spacing S is the only parameter that affects load

8

distribution in slab-on-girder bridges. This method formed the basis of the 1991 version of the OHBDC as well as the CHBDC provisions.

Jaeger and Bakht (1982) used the grillage analogy method for the idealization of slab and beam bridges. In grillage analogy method, the longitudinal members were positioned to

.

coincide with the actual girders centerlines and were given the properties of the composite section. The transverse mem~ers were considered as beams replacing the strips of the top slab. The moment of inertia, l y , of the transverse beam is considered as follows:

(2.8)

And the torsional inertia, Jx, is given by the relationship: (2.9)

In which results to:

(2.10)

Where Lx is the length of the strip in the longitudinal direction, t is the thickness of the strip, Ee and Ge are the concrete material modulus of elasticity and the shear modulus respectively. Details of simplified methods of analysis, which are also applicable for AASHTO loading, are given by Bakht and Jaeger (1985).

9

2.4.1.2 Orthotropic Plate Analogy (Guyon-Massonnet or G-M Metltod)

For concrete bridges with continuous slab and intermediate diaphragms and with the bridge width to span length ratio BIL greater than 0.5, grillage system may be used to simulate the bridge system. Or, the bridge may be analogized to a rectangular thin plate, which is called orthotropic plate analogy or Guyon-Massonnet (G-M) method (Yao, 1990). Orthotropic plate is referred to as a plate with the elastic properties different in x and y directions. Figure 2.10a shows the longitudinal and transverse configuration of a bridge structure. In this case, the girder spacing is considered as S, girder moment of inertia and torsional inertia are Ix and

frx, respectively, diaphragm spacing is Se, and diaphragm moment of inertia and torsional
inertia are Iy and fry respectively. For very small values of Sand Se compared to the bridge width and span length, and for fully composite action, we can distribute girder moment of inertia and torsional inertia Ix and frx to the distance S and distribute diaphragm moment of inertia and torsional inertia Iy and fry to the distance Se- Thus, the real grid system (Fig. 2.1a) is analogized to an imaginary plate (Fig. 2.1 b). In Fig. 2.1 b, the thickness in the x direction is shown in dashed line, which indicates that, the equivalent thickness in the x and y direction is different for the analogized plate. The moment of inertia and torsional inertia per unit width in the x and y directions for the analogized plate are considered as follows:

frx Jx =--, JTx=--, Jy =--, JTY=-S S
Se Se

(2.11)

For beam and slab concrete bridges and prestressed concrete bridges, Poisson's ratio v can be neglected for simplicity. In that case, the bridge can be analogized to an orthotropic plate with rigidity per unit width EJx, Gx JTx, Ex Jy, and Gx JT)" The analogized orthotropic (in configuration) plate differential equilibrium with Ex=Ey=E and vx=vy=v is:

10

c/w
Elx ------- + G(JTx + JTy) - - - + Ely - - = p(X,y) ax4 a:l al
Let Dx = EJx, Dy EJy and H G (JTx + Jry)/2E, Equation 2.9 becomes: (2.12)

Dx

+ 2H

+ Dy""'---= p(x,y)

(2.13)

ax4

ax2 ay2

ay4

which is identical to the differential equation for orthotropic plate (in material elastic properties). This means that analogized orthotropic (in configuration) plate can be solved the same way as orthotropic (in material properties) plate, except that that the stiffness constants contained in the equations are different.

The internal forces can be obtained by solving this equation for displacement wunder applied load. Directly solving the partial differential equation is difficult. For convenience, Guyon and Massonnet had developed solution charts, which can be found in Bridge Engineering (Yao 1990) and can be used to easily obtain the transverse influence line. Once the transverse influence line is obtained, the distribution factors can be obtained by arranging the trucks transversely on the bridge.

2.4.1.3 Grillage Method In 2000, Zokaie (Zokaie, 2000) carried out extensive analysis using grillage and finite element analysis to verify and evaluate the formulas, developed earlier in 1991. In the finite element model, shell element was used to represent the deck slab and frame element to represent the precast girders. In his study, Zokaie calibrated the developed formulas for moment and shear

11

distributien facters to' the interier and the exterier girders fer bridges designed fer ene traffic lane and fer bridges designed fer twO' er mere traffic lanes. Accerding to' this study, the distributien facter ef lengitudinal bending mement fer slab-en-girder bridges fer interier girders was given by the fellewing equatiens: Fer ene traffic lane:

D

f

S)0.4(S)0.3[ Kg ]01 =0.1+ (4/ L Lt; _ (S)0.6(S)0.2[ Kg ]0.1 -0.15+ 3/ L Lts
-3

(2.14)

Fer twO' er mere traffic lanes:

Df

(2.15)

The distributien facter efthe lengitudinal shear fer slab-en-girder bridges fer interier was given by the fellowing equatiens: Fer ene traffic lane:

D=0.6+(-'£) 15/
f

(2.16)

Fer twO' er mere traffic lanes:

D

f

=0.4+(~J-(~)2 6/ 25/

(2.17)

Where: S, L, Kg and t$ are the spacing between girders, the span length, the lengitudinal stifIhess parameter, and the slab thickness, respectively. The facter / is a cenversien facter between metric and imperial systems which equal to' 304.8 mm: and 1.0 ft. Fer exterier girders fer ene traffic lane, the facter 1.0 was previded fer mement and shear related to' the single beam

12

distribution. For exterior girders for two or more traffic lanes, multiplication factors to the factors provided for interior girders are given as follows: For bending moment for two or more traffic lanes:

e=

7f+de 9.lf

~

1.0

(2.18)

For shear for two or more traffic lanes:

(2.19)

Where: de is the edge distance. The factor fis a conversion factor between metric and imperial systems which equal to 304.8 mm. Zokaie concluded that the results from the formulas previously provided in 1991 were within 5% of the results from the finite element analysis that he performed in his study in the year 2000.

2.4.1.4 The Finite-Element Method (Logan 2002)

This is the most famous and widely used method in many engineering applications. The principal of this numerical method is discretizing the structure into small divisions, or elements, where each element is defmed by specific number of nodes (hence this process of modeling a body by dividing it into an equivalent system of smaller bodies or units called fmite elements). The fmite-element method is a numerical acceptable solution, it formulation of the problem results in a system of simultaneous algebraic equations for solution, rather than requiring analytical solutions (solutions of ordinary or differential equations), which because of the complicated geometries, loadings, and material properties, are not usually obtainable. The behavior of each element, and ultimately the structure, is

13

assumed to be a function of its nodal quantities (displacements and/or stresses), which considered as the primary unknown of its nodal quantities. The modern development of the finite-element method began by Hrennikoff in the 1941 and McHenry in 1943 using (onedimensional) elements (bars and beams) in the field of structural engineering. In 1947, Levy developed the flexibility or force method, and in 1953 he suggested that another method (the stiffness or displacement method) could be a promising alternative for use in analyzing statically redundant aircraft structures. However his equations were cumbersome to solve by hand, and hence it only became popular after the advent of the high speed computers. Turner et al. was the fITst who introduced the treatment of two-dimensional elements in 1956, they derived stiffness matrices for truss elements, beam elements, and two-dimensional triangular and rectangular elements in plane stress. The finite-element method extended to cover threedimensional problems only after the development of tetrahedral stiffness matrix which was done by Martin in 1961.

2.4.1.5 AASHTO Methods AASHTO introduced empirical methods which are more convenient to use as compared with the theoretical methods mentioned above. AASHTO defines the distribution factor as the ratio of the moment or shear obtained from the bridge system to the moment or shear obtained from a single girder loaded by one truck wheel line (AASHTO Standard 1996) or the axle loads (AASHTO-LRFD 2004). It should be noted that AASHTO Standard Specifications and AASHTO LRFD Specifications define the live load differently. The live load in the Standard specifications consists of an HS 20 tru<;:k or a lane load. While, the live load in the LRFD specifications consists of an HS 20 truck in conjunction with a lane load.

14

2.4.1.5.1 AASHTO Standard Method (1996)

AASHTO Standard specifications contain simple procedures used in the analysis and design of highway bridges. AASHTO adopted the simplified formulas for distribution factors based on the work done in the 1940s by Newmark (1948). AASHTO typical procedure is used to calculate the maximum bending moment based on a single line of wheel loads from the HS20 design truck or lane loading. This calculated bending moment is then multiplied by the load distribution factor (S/5.5) or in the format of (SID), where S is the girder spacing in feet and D is a constant based on the bridge type to obtain the moment in an individual girder. This method is applicable to straight and right (non-skewed) bridges only. It was proved to be accurate when girder spacing was near 1.8m and span length was about 18 m (Zokaie, 2000). For relatively medium or long bridges, these formulas would lose accuracy.

2.4.1.5.2 AASHTO LRFD Method

The specifications outlined in Load and Resistance Factor Design, LRFD Design specifications were adopted (AASHTO, 2004). This code introduced another load distribution factors based on a comprehensive research project, National Cooperation Highway Research Program (NCHRP) 12-26 which was entitled "Distribution of Live Loads on Highway Bridges" and initiated in 1985, consequently the guide specification for Distribution of Loads for Highway Bridges (AASHTO, 1994) was found. This guide recommends the use of simplified formulas, simplified computer analysis, and/or detailed finite-element analysis (FEA) in calculating the actual distribution of loads in highway bridges. It was noted that those new formulas were generally more complicated than those

15

recommended by the Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges (AASHTO 1996), but their use is associated with a greater degree of accuracy (Munir, 1997). For example the lateral load distribution factor for bending moment in interior girders of concrete slab on steel girder bridge superstructure is:

g = 0.15 + (S/3)0,6 (S/L) 0.2 (Kg/12Lt3s) 0.1
Where g = wheel load distribution factor; S

(2.20)
=

girder spacing in feet, (3.5 < S < 16 ft); L

span length of the beam in feet (20 < L < 200 ft); ts = concrete slab thickness in inches (4.5

< t < 12 inch); Kg

longitudinal stiffness parameter
=

= n(I + Ae2g); n = modular ratio

between beam and deck material; I

moment of inertia of beam (in.4); A = cross-sectional

area of beam (in.2) and eg = distance between the center of gravity of the basic beam and deck (in.).

AASHTO LRFD Specifications have become highly attractive for bridge engineers because of its incentive permitting the better and more economical use of material. The rationality of LRFD and its many advantages over the Allowable Stress Design method, ASD, are indicative that the design philosophy will downgrade ASD to the background in the next few years (Salmon and Johnson, 1996). The research results were first adopted by AASHTO Standards in 1994 and were then officially adopted by AASHTO-LRFD in 1998. More parameters, such as girder spacing, bridge length, slab thickness, girder longitudinal stiffness, and skew effect are considered in the developed formulas which earned them sound accuracy. The AASHTO-LRFD formulas were evaluated by Shahawy and Huang (2001), their evaluation showed a good agreement with test results for bridges with two or more loaded design lanes, provided that girder spacing and overhang deck did not exceed

16

2.4 m and 0.9 m, respectively. Outside of these ranges, the error could be as much as up to 30%. For one loaded design lane, the relative error was less than 10% for interior girders and could be as high as 100% and as low as -30% for exterior girders. Shahawy and Huang presented modification factors for the AASHTO LRFD formulas and the results of the modified formulas showed good agreement with their test results (Shahawy and Huang, 2001).

2.4.1.6 Simplified l\fethods

of Analysis (CHBDC 2006)

The Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code (CHBDC, 2006), as well as the 1991 version of the Ontario Highway Bridge Design Code (OHBDC, 1991)), specifies simplified method of analysis for live load using load distribution factors for slab-on-girder bridges. For OHBDC, the simplified method of analysis for the live load is based on considering the bridge as a rectangular orthotropic plate that was simply supported at two opposite ends on unyielding line supports which were continuous across the width of the plate and did not impose moment restraint. For CHBDC, the simplified method of analysis for the live load is based on the results from many bridge structures using" grillage, semi-continuum and finite element methods for which the idealized structure was essentially an orthotropic plate. There are conditions and limitations for the use of simplified method of analysis, which are specified in the CHBDC. Conditions for applying simplified methods of analysis on straight bridges are as follows: 1. The bridge width is constant; 2. The support conditions are closely equivalent to line support; 3. The skew Parameter (&
=

S tan ro /L) does not exceed 1118 where "S" is the spacing

between girders, "ro" is the skew angle and "L" is the span length;

17

4. There shall be at least three longitudinal girders that are of equal flexural rigidity and equally spaced or with variation from the mean of not more than 10% in each case; and 5. The overhang does not exceed 60% of the spacing between longitudinal girders and not more than 1.80 m. These restrictions have been provided for the consistency between the methods of analysis in CHBDC and OHBDC. Shear-connected beam bridges are analyzed by the methods applicable to shallow superstructure provided that continuity of transverse flexural rigidity across the cross-section is present. If not, analysis for longitudinal moments and shears is by the same method as for multi spine box girders.

When the skew angle "ro" of a bridge is less than 20°, it has usually been considered safe to ignore the skew angle and analyze the bridge as a right bridge whose span is equal to the skew span. The implication of this practice is that the angle of skew is considered to be the only necessary measure of the "skevmess" of the bridge with respect to its load distribution characteristics. Extensive comparative analyses of skew and equivalent right bridges

conducted by Jaeger and Bakht showed that the angle of skew of the bridge is not the only necessary measure of its skew ness, which is also affected by its span, width and girder spacing, if present. In particular, it has been shovm that a dimensionless parameter characterizing the skevmess of a slab-on-girder bridge is S tan ro IL. For permitting the analysis of a skew bridge as an equivalent right bridge, the Code has imposed the upper limits of 1/18 for this parameter to ensure that the shear values in particular are not in unsafe error by more than 5%. CHBDC noted that the force effects in skewed, slab-on-girder type bridges may be analyzed by the simplified methods presented, if the other conditions of the siffiplified method are met. The

18

simplified method presented in the CODE enable the designer to calculate the increased shear effects that occur with increase in skewness.

CHBDC stated that the two limitations pertaining to an overhanging deck slab, noted in condition 5, relate to the need to have the structure remain such that the orthotropic plate approximation is closely applicable. For a slab-on-girder bridge with equally spaced girders a distance S apart, a cantilever overhang of S/2 on either side is the desired condition, since each longitudinal girder can then be associated in a width S/2 of deck on either side of its centreline; a uniformly distributed load over the entire deck area would then result in the girders sharing equally in accepting the total longitudinal responses. If the overhang is permitted to be a maximum of 0.6S, the outer girders then accept rather more bending moment and shear force than the interior ones, but the departure from uniformity is still acceptable. So far as the limitation on the deck overhang of 1.80 m is concerned, when due allowance is made for barrier walls, curbs, etc. this limitation means that when a vehicle is travelling as far over in the outside lane as possible, its centre of gravity will not be significantly outside the centreline of the outermost girder. This limitation is necessarY if the orthotropic plate representation is to be realistic. The bridges selected for establishing analysis results for the simplified methods in this Code had the same limitations for the deck slab overhang, being equal to or less than 60% of the girder spacing, S, with a maximum overhang equal to 1.8 m.

The Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code (CHBDC, 2006) specifies equations for the simplified method of analysis to determine the longitudinal bending moments and vertical shear in slab-on-girder bridges due to live load for ultimate, serviceability and fatigue limit

19

states using load distribution factors. The CHBDC distribution factor equations used for solid slab bridge are as follows: For the longitudinal bending moment per meter of width, m, for ultimate and serviceability limit states:

m =Fmm avg

(2.21)

Where m avg the average moment per meter of width and Fm is an amplification factor for the transverse variation in maximum longitudinal moment intensity (Distribution Factor). nMrRL Be":J> 0
B

mavg =

r f'I
~1.05

(2.22)

Fm

=

(2.23)

F(l+ pC! ) 100
We- 3 .3

J1

=

0.6

~

1.0

(2.24)

Where M T is the maximum moment per design lane, n is the number of design lanes, RL is a modification factor for multilane loading, Be is the effective width of the bridge found by reducing the total width B for the effects of tapered edges, B is the total width of bridge, regardless of whether tapered edges are present in meter, We is the width of the design lane in meter, Cf is a correction factor obtained from tables and F is the width dimension that characterizes the load distribution for the bridge. For the longitudinal bending moment per meter of width, M g' for Fatigue Limit State:

m

= Fm m avg
20

(2.25)

Where: mavg is the average moment per meter of width and

Fm

is an amplification factor for

the transverse variation in maximum longitudinal moment intensity (Distribution Factor).

m
avg

=_T

M

Be

(2.26)

(2.27)

s; 1.0

(2.28)

Where8is the maximum moment per design laneqis the number of design lanes, RL is a modification factor for multilane loading@is the effective width of the bridge found by reducing the total width B for the effects of tapered edges, B is the total width of bridge, regardless of whether tapered edges are present in meter, We is the width of the design lane in meter@s a correction factor obtained from tables, Ce is a correction factor for vehicle edge distance obtained from tables and F is the width dimension that characterizes the load .. - ....... ..
--~ ... -~"~----.".------

distribution for the bridge. For the longitudinal vertical shear per meter of width, V, for ultimate, serviceability and fatigue limit states: (2.29) Where Vavg the average is shear per meter of width and F" is an amplification factor for the transverse variation in ma.xunum longitudinal vertical shear intensity (Distribution Factor).

(2.30)

21

Fli

=-

B F

~l.05

(2.31)

Where Vr is the maximum vertical shear per design lane, n is the number of design lanes, RL is a modification factor for multilane loading, Be is the effective width of the bridge found by reducing the total width B for the effects of tapered edges, B is the total width of bridge, regardless of whether tapered edges are present in meter, We is the width of the design lane in meter and F is the width dimension that characterizes the load distribution for the bridge and can be obtained from provided tables.

22

CHAPTER III
FINITE-ELEMENT ANALYSIS
3.1 General
The advancement of computers in terms of hardware and software engineering let the structural engineering enter into a new era. More extensive and approximate numerical solutions to complicated engineering problems were initiated due to the wide use of the finite element method. The finite element method is considered the most powerful and versatile method of analysis available nowadays. In early 1980's, the grillage analogy method was extensively used and was very popular. Because of the recent development in the finite element method, and the large capacities of high-speed computers, it is possible to model a bridge in a very realistic manner and to provide a full description of its structural response due to different loading conditions. One of the most important advantages of the finite element method is the ability to deal with problems that have arbitrary arrangements of structural elements, material properties, and boundary conditions. Finite element analysis has proven to give reliable results when compared to experimental findings; this built up trust encouraged the designers and code writers to allow the implementation of the finite element method in the analysis and design of different engineering structures. The finite element analysis software "SAP2000" version 10 was used throughout this study to determine the structural behaviour of the prestressed concrete box girder bridges under truck loads. A general

description of this software is presented further in this chapter. The developed finite element
23

methods described herein were used to perform extensive parametric study on the structural response of slab bridges due to CHBDC truck loading conditions.

The Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code (CHBDC 2006), section 5.9, permits the use of six different reflned methods of analysis for short and medium span bridges. The flnite element method is one of the methods recognized by CHBDC. From all the six permitted methods, the flnite element method is considered to be the most powerful, and versatile. In flnite element method solutions can be flnd out without the use of governing differential equations, It permits the combination of various structural elements such as plates, beams, and shells, It is able to analyze structures having arbitrary geometries with any material variations thereof, and It is possible to automate every step involved in the method.

In this chapter a brief description of fInite-element approach will be' reviewed as well as descriptions of modeling the slab bridges. The available commercial flnite-element prog:ram, SAP2000, was utilized through this study to determine the structural response of the modeled bridge prototypes. A general description of this software is presented later in this chapter. The procedure to perform an extensive parametric study on selected straight slab bridge prototypes to evaluate loads distribution characteristics is explained also in this chapter.

3.2

Finite-Element Approach

The flnite-element method is a numerical method for solving problems of engineering and mathematical physics. In structural engineering problems, the solution is typically concerned

24

with determining stresses and displacements and -will yield approximate values of the unknowns at discrete number of points in a continuum. This numerical method of analysis starts by discretizing a model. This numerical method of analysis which begins by dividing a body into an equivalent system of smaller bodies or units (finite-elements) interconnected at points (nodes) common to two or more elements and/or boundary lines
~d/or

surfaces is

called discretization. Hence. instead of solving the problem for the entire body in one operation, it facilitates the formation of equations for each fmite-element and at the end; it will combine them to obtain the solution of the whole body. For the purpose of simplifying the formulation of the above elements equations, matrix methods are implemented. Matrix methods are considered as an important tools used to structure the program of the finiteelement methods to facilitate their computation process in high-speed computers.

In general there are two approaches associated with the finite-element; (1) force or flexibility method, and (2) displacement or stiffness method. It has been shown that for computational purposes, the latter method is more desirable because its formulation is simpler for most structural analysis problems; moreover a vast majority of general-purpose finite-element programs have incorporated the displacement formulation for solving structure problems. The finite-element method uses different types of elements; (1) one dimensional element or so called linear element; (2) two-dimensional element which can be in the forms of plane element or triangular and quadrilateral shape elements; and (3) threedimensional solid shape elements.

25

Selecting the most appropriate element type should be to model the most closely to the actual physical behaviour. An equation is then fonnulated combining all the elements to obtain a solution for one whole body. Using a displacement fonnulation, the stiffness matrix of each element is derived and the global stiffness matrix of the entire structure can be fonnulated by the direct stiffness method. This global stiffness matrix, along with the given displacement boundary conditions and applied loads is then solved, thus that the displacements and stresses for the entire system are determined. The global stiffness matrix represents the nodal forcedisplacement relationships and is expressed in a matrix equation fonn as follows:

[P]=[K][U]
Where: [P]

(3.1)

=

nodal load vector; the global stiffness matrix; the nodal displacement vector;

[K] [U]

=
=

The steps for deriving the above equation can be summarized in the following basic relationships:

a)

v(x,y) = [¢(x,y)][a]
Where:

(3.2)

v (x,y) = [¢(x,y)] =
[a]

the internal displacement vector of the element; the displacement function matrix; and

=

the generalized coordinates matrix. then,

b)

[U] = [A][a]

[a 1 = [A ]-1 [U]
26

(3.3)

Where [AJ is the transformation matrix from local to global coordinates,
c)

[C(X,y)] = [B(x,y)][a] = [B(x,y)][Ar [U]

(3.4)

Where:

[B(x ,y)] =

The strain-displacement matrix; and The strain matrix.
(3.5)

[c (x ,y)] =
d)

[eT(x,y)] =[D ][e(x,y)] =[D][B (x ,y )][A]-1 [U]
Where:
[D]

the constitutive matrix or the elasticity matrix.

From the principle of minimization of the local potential energy, the total external work is equal to![UY[P], then 2 e)
1WE WI

= [UJ [p] =

(3.6) (3.7) (3.8)

u-

LJeY[eT] = [uJ [A r[k'][A ]-1 [U]

[k'] = LJB(x,y)y[D][B(x,y)]
Where:
WE= WI=

the external virtual work; the internal virtual work;

[uj = the vector of virtual displacement; and

27

[k'j

=

the element stiffness matrix.

f)

From the principle of virtual work, WE = WI. By taking one element of virtual nodal displacement vector [u'j equal to unity successfully, the solution becomes:

[p] = [K][U]

(3.9)

Where [K] = r[k'j, so the global structural stiffuess matrix is an assemblage of the element stiffuess matrix [kl g) The solution of the resulting system of equations yields the values of nodal displacement [V] and the internal forces for each element can be obtained from equation (3.4). In the case of a linear (elastic) structural problem, loads are fIrst applied on a model and the solution is obtained directly. In a non-linear case, the analysis follows a different numerical method to obtain a solution. However, such analysis is beyond the scope of this thesis and is not discussed.

3.3 SAP2000 Computer Program
The software "SAP2000" is a structural analysis program that employs the fInite-element method in the analysis and designs of complicated structures. During the 1980's and 1990's SAP engineering software become a popular choice for fInite element analysis. The program is used worldwide to estimate structural responses of structures due to various applied loads. This program has a range of capabilities depending on the version used. SAP2000 is also capable of analyzing structures in static and/or dynamic modes. Its fInite-element library consists of six elements.
28

1. FRAME Element: The Frame element is a two-node three-dimensional element,
which includes the effect of biaxial bending, tension, axial deformation, and biaxial shear deformation.

2. Shell Element: The Shell element is a three or four-node three-dimensional element,
which combines separate membrane and plate-bending behaviour. The membrane behaviour includes translational in-plane stiffuess components and rotational stiffness componen~ in the direction normal to the plane of the element. The plate bending behaviour includes two-way, out of plane, plate rotational stiffuess components and translational stiffuess component in the direction normal to the plane of the element. The program allows using pure membrane, pure plate, or full shell behaviour.

.

3. Plane Element: The Plane element is a three- to nine-node two-dimensional
element, which contributes stiffness only in the two translational degrees of freedom at each of its connected joints. Plane element is used for modeling thin plane stress structures and long plane.strain structures.

4. Solid Element: The Solid element is an eight-node three-dimensional element,
which includes nine optional incompatible bending modes. The solid element

contributes stiffness in all three translational degrees of freedom at each of its connected joints.

5. Asolid Element: The Asolid element is a three- to nine-node two-dimensional
element, which contributes stiffuess only in the two translational degrees of freedom at each of its connected joints. Asolid element is used for modeling axisymmetric structures under axisymmetric loading.
29

6. Nllink Element: The Nllink element is a one joint grounded spring or two joint link
which is composed of six separate springs, one of each of the six deformational degrees of freedom. The Nllink element is used for modeling linear or nonlinear structural behaviour. The nonlinear behaviour is used only for the time-history analysis. In addition, subsets of these elements with varying degrees of freedom are available in the form of truss, frame, membrane, beam, strain, gap, and hook elements.

3.4 Finite Element Modeling of Solid Slab Bridges
A three dimensional ftnite element model was used to analyze the solid slab bridges in this study. A sensitivity study was conducted to choose the ftnite element mesh. The ftnite element mesh is usually chosen based on pilot runs and is a compromise between economy and accuracy.

3.4.1 Geometric Modeling 3.4.1.1 Modeling of Solid Slab Bridge
To analyze solid slab bridges and to determine their structural response, a three-dimensional ftnite-element model was adopted. From SAP2000 library, the four-node shell element was chosen to model all bridge components, see Fig. 3.1. Figure 2 and 3 shows views of the FEA model for a 16 m span bridge modeled using SAP2000 software. The four-node shell element has six degrees of freedom at each node that are three displacements (UI, U2, U3) and three rotations (<1> 1, <1>2, <1>3). A varying width and thickness of slab was considered in this study. In

30

the longitudinal direction of the bridge, number of elements are depends on the length of bridge. A sensitivity study has been carried out to investigate the accuracy of the results from the finite element analysis. In this study, various numbers of elements, in the longitudinal, vertical and transverse directions of the bridge model, have been considered. The various number and types of boundary conditions were used to fmd the accurate results. The level of accuracy of the developed FEA model was examined against results from simple beam analysis for the following loading cases: (i) self-weight of the bridge superstructure; (ii) a uniform superimposed loading of 10 kN/m2 ; and a line load at the mid-span section of total value of 100

kN. The straining actions considered for comparison were maximum bending stresses at midspan location, maximum mid-span deflection and support reaction. The results from the sensitivity study are presented in Table A.l through A.6 for a bridge prototype of 7.396 m bridge width. The analysis was conducted for different span lengths and associated slab thicknesses. The results shown in these tables indicate that the proposed fmite-element models for this parametric study provides results very close to those obtained from simple-beam analysis in case of self-weight and uniform loading. However, this difference increases for maximum flexural stresses and deflections in case of point loads at the mid-span due to plate action.

3.4.1.2 Aspect Ratio
The aspect ratio is defined as the ratio of the longest dimension to the shortest dimension of a quadrilateral element. In many cases, as the aspect ratio increases, the inaccuracy of the solution increases (Logan, 2002). Logan presented a graph showing that as the aspect ratio

31

rises above 4, the percentage of error from the exact solution increases greater than 15%. By maintaining the length of the shell elements in the direction of bridge as 500 mm, the maximum aspect ratio used in the modeling of elements in this study was 2.5.

3.4.1.3 Modeling of Moving Load Paths
SAP2000 software has the ability to run a moving load along a defined frame element path. The program shifts a group of loads, previously defined as static loads, certain interval along a defmed path and provides the extreme straining actions at each node. Therefore, Frame

elements are provided in the longitudinal direction at the top of the shell elements for the paths of the moving loads. These frame elements are modeled with a very small section dimensions so that they do not affect the fmite element model of the structure. Static loads on frame elements were used to reduce the time of computer runs and placed to provide equivalent maximum bending moment, deflection and shear force resulted from SAP2000 moving loads

runs.

3.4.2 Boundary Conditions
Nodal constraints were used in the analysis as boundary conditions to represent the supports of the bridge. The roller support condition at the node 1.22m apart of the bottom of the slab was provided at the one end of the bridge to restrain both vertical and lateral displacements. While, the hinged support condition at the node I.22m apart of the bottom of the slab was provided at the other end of the bridge to restrain displacements in all directions.

32

3.4.3 Material Modeling
The material properties can highly affect the results of the analysis. Therefore, it is important that the material properties are defined so that SAP2000 software can provide suitable properties for elements. Material properties are considered linear elastic and isotropic for these
,

structures. The required properties for SAP2000 software are the elastic modulus, Poisson's ratio, and the weight density. In SAP2000 software, the shear modulus is defmed in terms of Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio as per the following equation:
E

G

2(1+ v)

(3.1 0)

Where: G= the shear modulus; Young's modulus; and Poisson's ratio.

E=

u=

Materials and their properties are chosen based on the CHBDC and the common materials available in Ontario. The compressive strength of concrete ifc) is considered 35 MFa As per

CHBDC, the weight density (Yc) for normal concrete is considered 24.0 kN/m3· The modulus
of elasticity of concrete (Ec) is calculated from the following equation: (3.11)

Ec = 27,900.0 MPa
Poisson's ratio for elastic strains of concrete is taken as 0.2. Mass density for concrete is taken as 2500 kglm
3 ·

(3.12)

33

3.5 CHBDC Design Loading
The design of Highways and Bridges in Canada has its own criteria in terms of the critical live loads selected in the design. Two types of live loads were specified in CHBDC; namely: truck loading and lane loading. Both above mentioned loads were investigated in this study. Figure 3.4 shows schematic diagram of the above-mentioned CHBDC live truck and lane loads namely; CL-W truck loading and the CL-W lane loading. The CL-W truck is an idealized five-axle truck, the number "W" indicates the gross load (625) of the CL-W truck in KN. Wheel and axle loads are shown in terms of W, and are also shown specifically for CL-625 truck. Whereas the CL-W lane loading consists of CL-W truck loading, with each axle load reduced to 80% of its original value, and superimposed within a uniformly distributed load of 9 KN/m over 3.0 m width. For the purpose of this study, the following different CHBDC truck loading configurations were considered.

Figure 3.5 presents a schematic diagram of truck axle load locations to produce maximum bending moment. By inspection, Level 2 loading was used in the analysis of the 16 m and 20 m span bridges, while Level 1 was used to analyze bridges of 24, 26, 30 and 32 m spans. Figure 3.6 presents a schematic diagram of truck axle load locations to produce maximum reaction force. By inspection, Level 2 loading was used in the analysis of the 16 m span bridges, while Levell was used to analyze bridges of 20, 24, 26, 30 and 32 m spans. In studying the moment, shear and deflection distributions, the loading on the bridge
~rototypes

was applied in such a way to produce maximum reaction forces and longitudinal

flexural stresses.

34

3.6 CHBDC Specifications for Truck Loading
The live load specified in CHEDC consists of CL-W Truck or CL-W Lane Load. CL-W Truck, provided for all other provinces, in the axle loads. The selection between the two different CHBDC types oflive loads (CL-625 truck and CL-625 lane) depends on whichever
,

gives the greatest design values. Dynamic load allowance is applied to both CL-W and CL625-0NT Trucks. The CL-W Lane Load consists of 80% of the value given for each axle of the CL-W Truck superimpose9. within a uniformly distributed load of 9 kN/m and a space of 3.0 m wide (Figure 3.4). No dynamic load allowance is considered for both CL-W and CL625-0NT Lane Loads. A sensitivity study was carried out in this regard showed that the CL625 truck loading is governing the extreme design values for the box girder of 16, 20, 24, 26, 30 and 32 m span lengths. CL-625 truck loading giving higher values, accordingly the CL-625 lane loading was utilized in this study. CHBDC requires considering three limit states in bridge designs; namely: a. The Ultimate Limit State (ULS), that involve failure, including rupture, overturning, sliding, and other instability. b. The Serviceability Limit State (SLS), at which the effect of vibration, permanent deformation, and cracking on the usability or condition of the structure are considered, c. The Fatigue Limit State (FLS). at which the effect of fatigue on the strength or condition of the structure are considered. For fatigue analysis, an equivalent static load is specified in the CHBDC. Only one truck, either CL-W Truck or CL-625-0NT Truck, can be placed at the centre of one travelling lane. The lane load is not considered for the fatigue limit state. CHEDC states that for longitudinal

35

bending moments and associated deflections for Fatigue Limit State and superstructure vibration, the vehicle edge distance (the distance from the centre of the outer wheel load to the edge of the bridge) shall not be greater than 3.0 m. Different loading configurations were also considered in this study represented by: two-lane, three-lane and four-lane bridges. As a result, a total of 48 different load cases were employed of the above mentioned design requirements. Figures 3.7,3.8 and 3.9 presents the loading cases considered in this study for two-, three-, and four-lane bridges, respectively.

3.7 Composite Bridge Configurations
A total of 54 solid slab bridge prototypes were considered for the finite-element analysis in this parametric study. Below are the major parameters were considered: a. Span length (L): 16, 20, 24, 26, 30, and 32 m b. Slab Thickness (t): L/25 m based on the span length of the bridge. For the above-mentioned bridge configurations, the number of design lanes in a bridge cross-section was determined based on Table 3.1 (CHBDC, 2006).

3.8 Load Distribution Factor 3.8.1 Calculation of the Moment Distribution Factors
The longitudinal stresses (OFE) in concrete slab was determined in order to calculate the load distribution factor for longitudinal bending moment (Fm) due to truck loadings. The maximum flexural stresses (0'
straight) truck,

were calculated for the straight simply-supported

beam due to CHBDC truck loading. 36

(3.13) Where MT = the mid-span moment for a straight simply supported per meter width due to a single CHBDC truck loading; Yb the distance from the neutral axis to the bottom of slab;

and It = the moment of inertia per meter width. Also the results of the above equations were verified by SAP2000 program using the developed FEA model. The finite-element modeling was then used to calculate the maximum longitudinal flexu.ral stresses along the bottom flange for fully-loaded lanes, partially loaded lanes, and fatigue loading conditions presented in Figs. 3.7 to 3.9. Consequently, the moment distribution factors (Fm,) due to truck loading conditions were calculated as follows: )- «Fm)FL )- (Fm)PL Where: B
n
RL
=

(0' FE)FL X B / « 0' straight)truck

X

n)
X

(3.14) n x Rd (3.15)

(0' FdPL X B X RL' / «0' straight~ck

=
=

total width of bridge number of design lanes; multi-lane factor based on the number of the design lanes; as shown in Table 3.2, considering Class A highway.

RL'

=

multi-lane factor based on the number of the loaded lanes; as shown in Table 3.2,

(0' FE.)PL

=

the maximum average flexure stress, resulting from FEA bridge

analysis, at the bottom surface of the concrete slab;

37

(0' FE)FL

the maxImum average flexure stress, resulting from FEA bridge analysis, at the bottom surface of the concrete slab due to fatigue Loadings;

3.8.2 Calculation of the Shear Distribution Factors
In determining the shear distribution factor (Fv) for slab bridges, the maximum shear forces, (Rstraight)truck, were calculated for straight simply supported beam due to a single CHBDC truck loading. By using finite-element modeling, the maximum shear forces (RFE) for different truck loading conditions were determined. Consequently, the shear distribution factors (Fv) were calculated as follows: (Fv)FL

= (RFE)FL X B / «Rstraight)truck x n)

(3.16) (3.17) (3.18)

(Fv)PL = (RFE)PL X B x R L'/ «Rstraight)truck x n x Rd (F v)Fat B n (RFE)Fat X B / (Rstraight)truck

=
= =

total width of bridge; number of design lanes; multi-lane factor based on the number of the design lanes; as shown in Table 3.2, multi-lane factor based on the number of the loaded lanes; as shown in Table 3.2,

(RFE)FL

=

the maximum total reaction, resulting from bridge analysis, at the slab supports;

(RFE)FL

=

the maximum total reaction, resulting from bridge analysis, at the slab supports due to fatigue Loadings;

38

3.8.3 Calculation of the Deflection Distribution Factors
In order to determine the load distribution factor for deflections (Fd) for the slab bridges, the deflection resulting from bridge analysis at the critical section (~FE), due to truck loadings at fatigue load case was identified. Also, the maximum deflection resulting from the analysis at the corresponding critical section of the bridge (~straight) truck, due to single truck loading was identified. The distribution factors for deflections were calculated in accordance with CHBDC as follows: For deflection at the bottom of slab for fatigue (FfO): (Fd)Fat. = (~FdFat X B /(~straight)truck Where: (3.19)

B
~FE =

=

total width of bridge;

the maximum deflection, resulting from bridge analysis, at the bottom surface

of the slab due to fatigue.

39

CHAPTER IV
RESULTS FROM THE PARAMETRIC STUDY
4.1 General
A practical-design-oriented parametric study on 54 simply-supported straight, solid slab bridge prototypes was conducted to investigate the moment, shear and deflection distribution factors at the ultimate, serviceability and fatigue limit states. The bridges were analyzed to evaluate their structural responses when subjected to the Canadian Highway Bridge Design truck loading, CHBDC truck CL-625. The results generated from the parametric study were then correlated with the values obtained from the load distribution factor equations specified in CHBDC.

In this study the following major key parameters were considered: (i) bridge width (8), (ii) bridge span length (L), (iii) number of design lanes (n), and (vi) truck loading conditions. The following sections present the results from the parametric study as compared to the available equations in CHBDC and FEA for solid slab bridges.

4. 2 Effect of Span Length
To investigate the effect of span length on the structural response of studied bridges, 6 different span lengths were considered, namely: 16,20,24,26,30 and 32 m. The following subsections explain the effect of span length of the moment, shear and deflection distribution factors of the studied bridges.

40

4.2.1 Moment Distribution Factor
Figures 4.1 to 4.9 show the relationship between the change in span length and moment distribution factor, Fm , of selected bridge geometries. To explain the trend, Fig. 4.9 depicts the change in moment distribution factor with increase in span length of a four-lane bridge with constant width of 17.276 m. It can be observed that Fm changes from 1.15 to 1.04 when increasing span length from 16 to 32 m for ULS design. This considers a decrease of 9.6%. In the same sense, Fm decreases from 1.9 to 1.32 when increasing bridge span from 16 to 32 m (a decrease of 30.5%) for FLS design. Similar trend was observed in other Figures for 2-, and 3lane bridge cross-sections.

4.2.2 Shear Distribution Factor
Figures 4.10 to 4.18 show the relationship between the span length and the shear distribution factor, Fv, for selected bridge geometries. To explain the trend, Figure 4.15 is considered here as an example. This figure shows the change in shear distribution factor with increase in span length from 16 to 32 m for a two-lane bridge of 13.571 m width. It can be observed that Fv changes from 1.73 to 2.4 when increasing bridge span from 16 to 32 m for ULS and FLS design, an increase of 28%. Also, Fv changes from 2.49 to 3.64 when increasing bridge span from 16 to 32 m for FLS design, an increase of 31.5%. Similar trend was observed in other Figures for 2-, and 4-lane bridge cross-sections.

r

4.2.3 Deflection Distribution Factor
Figures 4.19 through 4.27 depict the change in deflection distribution factor, Fd, with increase in bridge span length. As an example, Figure 4.25 depicts the change in deflection

41

distribution factor with increase in bridge span of a four-lane bridge of 14.806 m width. It can be observed that Fd changes from 1.65 to 1.20 when increasing bridge span from 16 to 32 m, a decrease of27.7%. Similar trend was observed in other Figures for 2-, and 3-lane bridge crosssections.

4.3 Effect of Number of Design Lanes
As stated earlier, three different numbers of design lanes were considered in this study, namely, 2,3 and 4. Bridge width is dependent on the lanes of bridge as given in CHBDC Table 3.1. It should be noted the simplified method of analysis specified in CHBDC provides sets of F and Cr parameters shown in Equation 2.23 for bridges made of one-design lane to more than four-design lanes. This effect directly includes the effect of change in bridge width, in addition to change in design lane width implied in the parameter J.1 in Equation 2.24.

4.3.1 Moment Distribution Factor
Figures 4.28 to 4.33 present the effect of the change in number of design lanes on the moment distribution factor of selected bridges. One may observe the general trend of insignificant effect of the change in number of design lanes on Fm values at the ULS design as compared to those at FLS design. As an example, Figure 4.29 depicts the change in Fm values with increase in number of design lanes for a 20-m span bridge. It can be observed that Fm changes from 1.19 to 1.57 (an increase of 24.2%) when changing the number of design lanes from 2 to 4 for FLS design. While the increase in Fm for ULS was 5.2% (Le.

42

change from 1.09 to 1.15) when increasing the number of design lanes from 2 to 4. Similar trend was observed in other bridge geometries.

4.3.2 Shear Distribution Factor
The parametric study revealed that the shear distribution factors increase with increase in number of design lanes as depicted in Figs. 4.34 to 4.39. As an example, Figure 4.38 depicts the change in Fv values with increase in number of design lanes for a 30-m span bridge. It can be observed that Fv changes from 2.55 to 4.81 (an increase of 45%) when changing the number of design lanes from 2 to 4 for FLS design. While the increase in Fv for ULS was 32.6% (i.e. change from 1.88 to 2.79) when increasing the number of design lanes from 2 to

4.

4.3.3 Deflection Distribution Factor
Figures 4.40 through 4.45 depict the change in deflection distribution factor, Fd, with increase in number of design lanes. It can be observed that the deflection distribution factor increases ",ith increase in number of design lanes. As an example, Figure 4.45 depicts the change in deflection distribution factor with increase in number of design lanes for 32-m span bridge. It can be observed that Fd changes from 1.06 to 1.27 when increasing the number of design lanes from 2 to 4, an increase of 16.5%.

43

4.4 Effect of Load Cases
Few loading cases for CHBDC truck loading were considered in the analysis to obtain the maximum effect on the studied slab bridges. These loading cases were presented in Chapter III and can be divided into two main groups; namely: bridges with fully loaded lanes and bridges with partially loaded lanes. Tables A.7 to A66 in Appendix A summarize the values of the moment; shear and deflection distribution factors obtained from the parametric study due to fully loaded lanes and partially loaded lanes. There is no specific trend to reach regarding which type of loading provides the maximum effect on slab. However, the greatest value of the distribution factors for each bridge geometric was considered for further analysis to developed new expressions for designers. It should be noted that the Fro, Fv and Fd determined in this study were determined as the greatest values calculated from a set of loading cases for each specific bridge geometry.

4.5 Correlation of Moment and Deflection Distribution Factors obtained from FEA analysis
CHBDC did not specify imperial expressions for deflection distribution factors. However, it specified that the deflection distribution factor can be taken as the moment distribution factors in structural design. Figures 4.46 through 4.54 show the change in both the moment distribution factors and deflection distribution factors for the studies slab bridges. It can be observed that the deflection distribution factors are always less that the corresponding moment distribution factors. As such, CHBDC provided conservative values for the deflection distribution factors by taking them as those calculated from the moment distribution factors.

44

4.6 Comparison between the FEA Results and Distribution factors specified in CHBDC for Slah Bridges
The Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code specifies equations for calculating the moment, shear and deflection distribution factors for
str~ight

slab bridges and voided slab bridges. It

should be noted that CHBDC specifies the Fd values for such bridges can be taken as those for Fm values for simplicity. Figures 4.55 to 4.59 present correlations between the results from the current study and those obtained from the CHDBC simplified method for straight slab bridges. By inspection of these figures, it can be observed that the moment, shear and deflection distribution factors for the studied slab bridges scattered with no general trend except for Fv values for ULS, on which FEA provides values considerably greater that those specified in the CHBDC. This may be attributed to the assumption associated with the use of orthotropic plate theory in analyzing such bridges with equivalent torsional and bending stiffness with line supports rather than point supports. Due to these discrepancies in correlation, the author suggests extending this study to develop more reliable expressions for moment and shear distribution factors for slab bridges based on the data generated from this study.

45

CHAPTER V
CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH

5.1 General
A practical-design-oriented parametric study, using finite element method, was conducted to investigate the static response of simply-supported solid slab bridges. A literature review was provided in order to establish the basis of this study. The influence of few key parameters on the moment, deflection and shear distribution factors for ultimate, serviceability and fatigue limit states designs was investigated using commercially-available fmite-element computer program "SAP2000". The key parameters considered in this study included span length, number of design lanes, and truck loading conditions.

5.2 Conclusions
Based on the results from the parametric study on slab bridges, the following conclusions are drawn: 1. Bridge span length and number of design lanes play a significant role on the values of the load distribution factors. 2. Deflection distribution factors are generally smaller than the corresponding moment distribution factors for a typical bridge configuration. 3. The correlation between FEA results for slab bridges and those obtained from CHBDC showed scattered trend. However, CHBDC showed underestimating the structural response of slab bridges in few bridge geometries.

46

4. The database generated from the parametric study can be further used to develop empirical expressions for moment, shear and deflection distribution factors for ULS, SLS2 and FLS designs. The proposed expressions can be used with

confidence to design new bridges and evaluate existing bridges more economically and reliably.

5.3 Recommendations for Future Research
It is recommended that further research efforts be directed towards the following:
1- Based on the data generated from this study, imperial expressions can be

developed for the moment and shear distribution factors for slab bridges. 2- Study the load distribution in skew slab bridges. 3- Study the load distribution in curved slab bridges.

47

REFERENCES
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, AASHTO. 2004. AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications. Second Edition, Washington, DC. American Association for State Highway and Transportation Officials, AASHTO. 1994. AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications. First Edition, Washington, DC. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, AASHTO. 1996. Standard specifications for highway bridges. Sixteenth Edition, Washington, D.C. Bakht, B., Cheung, M. S., and aziz, T. S. 1979. Application of Simplified Method of Calculating Longitudinal moments to the Ontario Highway Bridge Design Code. Canadian Journal of Civil Engineering, 61(1): 36-50. / Bakht, B., and Jaegor, L. G. 1992. Simplified Methods of Bridge Analysis for the Third Edition
/

ofOHBDC. Canadian Journal of Civil Engineering, 19(4): 551-559. Bakht, B. and Jaegor, L. G. 1985. Bridge Deck Simplified. McGraw-Hill, New York, N.Y. CHBDC. 2006. Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code (CHBDC and Commentary),

CAN/CSA-S6-06. Canadian Standards Association, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
Computers and Structures Inc. CSI. 2009. SAP2000, Integrated Finite Element Analysis and Design of Structures, version 14. Berkeley, California, USA. Jaeger, L. G., and Bakht B. 1982. The Grillage Analogy in Bridge Analysis. Canadian Journal of Civil Engineering, 9: 224-235. Logan D., "A first course in the finite element method", 3rd Edition, Text Book, 2002 Highways, and Revisions. St Catharines, Ontario, Canada. Ministry of Transportation Ontario, MTO. 1991. Ontario Highway Bridge Design Code, OHBDC. Third edition, Downsview, Ontario, Canada.
48

Ministry of Transportation and Communications Ontario (MTO). 1983. Ontario Highway Bridge Design Code, OHBDC. Second Edition, Downsview, Ontario, Canada. Yao L., "Bridge Engineering", 1990 Zokaie, T. 2000. AASHTO-LRFD Live Load Distribution Specifications. ASCE Journal of Bridge Engineering, 5(2): 131-13 7. Zokaie, T., Imbsen, R. A., qnd Osterkamp, T. A. 1991. Transportation Research Record, CA, 1290: 119-126.
1st

Edition, People's Transportation Publisher, P.R. China,

49

Table 3.1 Number of Design Lanes (CHDBC, 2006) We 6.0 m or less Over 6.0 m to 10.0 m incl. Over 10.0 m to 13.5 m incl. Over 13.5 m to 17.0 m incl. Over 17.0 m to 20.5 m incl. Over 20.5 m to 24.0 m inel. Over 24.0 m to 27.5 m incl. Over 27.5 m n 1 2 2or3 4 5 6 7 8

Table 3.2 Modification Factors for Multilane Loading (CHDBC, 2006) Number of Loaded Design Lanes
1 2 3 4 5 6 or more

Modification Factor 1.00 0.90 0.80 0.70 0.60 0.55

50

.I-- 512 ..... ,L_ _ 5

,

-~tlL--- 5 --.~t<----5 --.I"--t-

u

u

u

5

--.l~1<----5

u

----.Io-t 512..j-

F

T-Beam

Slab

.Ie- 512 ~

II
5 5

II
~
5 5

Cellular Box Girder

.Ie- 512

IE

II
5.

~<

5

~

II
5

..

~

5

~

II
5

..L 512~

Multi-Box Girder

5/4 -..It-----512 - - -..... " -5/4-----.r

Single Box Girder

if" 512

I.

1:::> <::: I:::> <:::: I:::> <:::: J L L . L
>]

5

,

5

·r

5

'I 512-.r

I.

Multi-Box Girder

----;7"..---/'
/' /'

""

.J.---- sJ4 -

"

..... ,L-_-s/2

~

s/4

Single Box Girder

Figure 1.1 Views of Common Bridge Cross-Sections in CHBDC

51

a) SoUd Slab

b) Solid Slab Figure 1.2 Schematic Diagrams of Solid Slab Bridges

~Q~
a)

~Q~

x

b)

x

Ix. Ir.
a) Real Structure

J.=L/S ·Jrx=Irx!S

b) Analogized Equivalent Orthotropic Plate

Figure 2.1 Real Structures and Orthotropic Plate Analogy
F-MIN .\

",AXIS 2

Forces are per unit of In-plane length

\
\

j3 .._

~~ ~\ \ -.:--__ \ ~ _\(~ j \
__.At~,"
\ F12 F11 \

~ '; / "

~~
1\

~ / ' \, ANGLE

/0
p

. / ' F-MAX

" . _ '" ...--- AxiG 1

Transveae Shear [no! shown)

....

... \"P\

\
'\

\
~

PosiliVe !raMverse SlIear forces and slresses acting on positive faces point toward !he viewer

.------------------~

\

a) Stress and membrane forces

52

.. AxiS 2

b) Plate bending moments
u2

).

uz

.,r2
rf"
· --Joint

z
... rz
JIIw- u1
· f' Joint
ux

ry",

,

rl

'"

u3 Joint Local Coordinates

Global Coordinates

'"

rx
uy

x

y

c) Global and local coordinates

Figure 3.1 Sketches of the four-node shell element used in the SAP2000 analysis

S3

£ft '''" iC-ll<f... _ _ :;.Mrt

)lIii Iil~

,~~" fll~fj_'fjJ~~~.,

6". . __ _1-_
CI<oQn

_~

.. _~_ ..

<t~ __ .~~.l~~_.i\W;)QilCJ l!ii:i:iiL~__ii_6.

nhM-"

~llil_!:'.J!:!___.£

tt"z :iaN- .~;,?

~rgJ'"

H8 '\!Ill,

Figure 3.2 View of 3D Model of Solid Slab Bridge (7.396m Width and 16 m span)

-1.iI< idit ¥i<w _ _ _ :;.Mrt _ _ _

CI<oQn _

I.....

___~~_Iil~.~La ...!.....~~~f/J~L~~"'_"'_.!!_.. ~H _+ .!..!.~~~CI~W~~...':'~~!!_IiI_~_~..&._k!~_2c_-,-:_~_.,
~1!lI'"

rta '\!lib

Figure 3.3 View ofX-Y Plane of Solid Slab Bridge (7.396 m width and 16 m span)

54

1
CL-W - [ CL-62S-[

~:~~
50

2 3 O.lW O.lW O.2W O.2W

4 O.14W O.28W

5 AXLE NO. O.12W WHEEL LOADS O.24W AXLE LOADS 150
6.BIn

25

62.5 62.5

125 125

· I
:

i
3.6m
ill

1'
·

..
l
I

87.5 175
B.Bm

75

2m
ill

·

18m

-I.
I ·

..

.
I .

WHEEL LOADS. kN AXLE LOADS. kN

:1

~ ~-----ffi--ffi------ -~-------~----_ID-ffi_-----

0.25m.I

I "

t

! .

!

!

-J l.

o.25m
(TYP.)

--..J I "D.25m (TYP.)
,.

--St--- -----61-----.40 8 m

!

----9------!J
~ (TYP.)
CL·WTruck

Clearance Envelope 3.00m _I

I

i
1

i

i i
,

I

1 I

I

i

i ! D.~~J

llil

1..c::J. fl-fl j

L.Hm__,J I . A~.rn
O.D8W O.1BW

u=u i~rb
UNIFORMLY DISTRIBUTED LOAD 9kNlm

0.032W O.064W

O.D8W O.16W

O.096W O.192W

WHEEL LOADS AXLE LOADS

I

~I=mnm
6.6m l8.0m 6.6m

CL·W Lane Load

Figure 3.4 CL-W Truck and Lane Loading, CHBDC

55

Level 1

50KN

125

(
~

125KN

I

Level 2

125KN '25K~

I

~---15.80-----"I

1--------16100---------1

Level 3
5DKN 125KN 125KN
175K~

5DKN

1.7 0-1---3.60

1----6.60---.j

Dimenssions are in meters

Figure 3.5 Maximum Moment Locations

56

Level 1

125KN 125KN

mKN

I

I
I

Level 2

IS0KN

115KN

I
I
1&JBO

lZSKN 125KN

f
Level 3
150KN

6.60

f

I
I
I

6.60

~rllO~.61 J

I
I

17SKN

1

6.QO

~

6'611~
2400

11Z5KN

TKN

50KN

1,20 i---J,IO

f

UD

Dimenssions ore in meters

f

Figure 3.6 Maximum Shear Locations

57

c;):;c

(l}; Dedd LoIlJ

...

........:
....

'F

.~ .. "

..... 0. .'. ·... "... OW'''.
-oil

···· : · · , . :

~

'1Ir:, - .. "

OW·

: ~ Oft-

.. : ... ~ ...... t .. " · ..
.... ",-II.

. ' ·· '" ·· ,.".-" .. " . " ....
.. , ..
"'",0" ..

...... '.'

~.w .·:·· .. ~

....

,: .... ' . '

.. ...-"

.'1

.....

C::Jse (2}: Parti:1I lood
D.S[ [l b.601,

~-------F~F-------C~~-----7~~~------~

.,

,~

.~

1

1.8:)

"
.
FF
~

I..

Case (J): FaJl Lood

-

i·6~i,
,!,.

FF

0.50 ~l o.601~
'.,

1.80

I.,.

1SO

~

\

\.

i

III.

~:.1

C::Jst (I.): FaJl Lood

Sh::ul:ler

, -..
., I
1OO

.. ...
I

~oulder

~

"

IF

(Dimension is in meter)

Figure 3.7 Live Loading Cases for Two-Lane Bridges

58

,If ...

. ..
~

Qlse (2~ Partial Load

~----~~----~o-----~-----c.o----~~----~

Case (3): P<lrtial load

~----~~--~~~----~-----c~----~~----~

Case (4): Full load

~----~~----~o-----~-----D~----~~----~

~. ~ .. ".
, ·· . "
,. 6-

....... "; :: ... ~. ,: . : .·t ",.: · ... _ . .
..........

,

.. ·

"

.,...

....

'..

~""

.".
···

;;

.... . .

4

.,HI" ··,,:" .'.,,: ..... ,:."··
·

!,i:.·~.: ...· : " ~.'.. : ..!.". ..

......

~

..

(Dimension is in meter)

Figure 3.8 Live Loading Cases for Three-Lane Bridges (Continue)

59

Case (5): Partfal Lood

~------~------~~~----~~----~~r-----~~----~

Case (6): Partial load

~------~------;>~------~~----~~r-----~~----~

eo , .
0 · ··

:

. . .".

iii'

:

...
,....

...
·· 0

.......

°0

:: '.~: ~ ': ~ ·· "
~
·· : · · ·: . :....

"0:: .~ ·
·

°
0

'

·· ···

° ~.:

··

~

1(.

..

· · ·... . ·0.

.

'I..:...

e·

.

Co~

(8): FotigtJe Lood

Sh~

hi

(Dimension is in meter)

Figure 3.8 Live Loading Cases for Three-Lane Bridge

60

Case (1): ~d Leo:! "

I
.: .":
."

"',

~

I

.. ~'" .~'~.:~ ... .JIl 6..
0..'

Cme (3): Partial load

"

/.#'

o.!'1n: e<1!
'.'!'\

1.S:>

L ~J~ooJ .. -

1.8:>

,L

>-

l

I

I

r
~~

Cass (4): Par:ial

l.ooj

O.!> (1: £(II

1.SJ

.""

1601 1 riL
1: ·L

LBO

L

l

1·,

l6~1 ...

1.ao

~'"

l

I

p ..

(Dimension is in meter)

Figure 3.9 Live Loading Cases for Four-Lane Bridge (Continue)

61

ClEe (5}_ Full Loo~

-

,~

O.5f11

EoL
~-

I

~O

l

~;

7

~,

~,.

'~(1

i

lot

~h

....,

,.,',

nlD

i_

ltrol
r ",

' .ED

.:

I

[

Case (6): Fcr.iJI L..coj

1.eo

l -

Cq:;c (7):

Par.i~1 l.tQ~

fl

I I
J

..

~J

~

U3

:M

lO~~I

...

'",
1-8.')

.... .....

~!L

,,:~. ::''''~.:~''··': P:: .·:.~ ,.1 .:.,:.~:.:--.'i:·~ :'~~:

....

',': ......:: ,','}',.! ~.~ '-,:.. :'.': .......... :...:....... :.:.·
(Dimension is in meter)

to.

l I

0

Figure 3.9 Live Loading Cases for Four-Lane Bridge (Continue)

62

Cose (8): Portial

~

ellr.1 (9): FI.oiI lJ:q:I

...._ _..... lO~l. i I I _ t 81} 'e u4oo · , 8~ ..

r.

(Dimension is in meter)

Figure 3.9 Live Loading Cases for Four-Lane Bridge (Continue)

63

(Dimension is in meter)

Figure 3.9 Live Loading Cases for Four-Lane Bridge

64

1.8 1.6 1.4

'" ::l
~

1.2 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0

...

-

iij

>

u.,

E

0.650m 16m

0.800m 20m 1.05 1.14

0.960m 24m 1.05 1.12

1.040m 26m 1.04 1.11

1.200m 30m 1.04 1.09

1.280m 32m 1.02 1.06

- . - UlS AND SlS -FlS

1.07 1.21

Figure 4.1 Effect of Span Length on the Moment Distribution Factor for 2-Lanes Bridge of 7.396 m width

1.4 1.2 1 I

~

:

·

·

·

.alii
~c<S
u.,;::)

"'III
~

....

0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 0.650m 16m 0.800m 20m 1.07 1.18 0.960m 24m 1.06 1.15 1.040m 26m 1.06 1.13 1.200m 30m 1.05 1.280m 32m 1.03 1.08

E~

-.-UlSANDSlS
i - FLS

1.11 1.25

1.11

Figure 4.2 Effects of Span Length on the Moment Distribution Factor for 2-Lanes Bridge of 8.631 m Width

65

1.4 1.2 1
III

..

·

:

:

~

:s

<II

0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2

'*

E

a
0.650m 16m

a.800m
20m

0.960m 24m 1.08 1.21

1.040m 26m 1.08 1.15

1.200m 30m 1.06 1.12

1.280m 32m 1.04 1.09 -_....... __._...._-._-

-+-ULSANDSLS
._-- ----..

1

-FLS
-----------~-

Figure 4.3 Effects of Span Length on the Moment Distribution Factor for 2-Lanes Bridge of9.866 m Width

1.6 1.4 1.2
lit

....

:s ii

<II

1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0

---- -----0.800m 20m 1.05 1.38 O.960m 24m 1.05 1.3 1.040m 26m 1.04 1.24 1.200m 30m 1.04 1.19

...

>

'*

E

0.650m 16m

1.280m 32m 1.02 1.16

-+-ULSANDSLS

1.07 1.48

-FLS

Figure 4.4 Effects of Span Length on the Moment Distribution Factor for 3-Lanes Bridge 11.101 m Width

66

1.8 1.6 1.4 1.2

~

"'11\ <1.1...1 ..211\ 1Il~ >11\ E...I

1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0

·

-·

·

·

·

-

·

!.f..:;)

0.650m 16m
-+-ULSANDSLS -FLS

0.800m 20m 1.07

0.960m 24m 1.08 1.31

1.040m 26m 1.07 1.27

1.200m 30m 1.05 1.22

1.280m 32m 1.04 1.18

1.54

1.39

Figure 4.5 Effects of Span Length on the Moment Distribution Factor for 3-Lanes Bridge 12.336 m Width

1.8 1.6 1.4 1.2
ii
<II '" :::J

~

1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0

·

·

I

·

..
·

>

u..

E

0.650m 16m
-+-ULSANDSLS -FLS

0.800m 20m 1.1

0.960m 24m 1.09 1.32

1.040m 26m

1.200m 30m 1.07 1.23

1.280m 32m 1.04 1.19

1.13 1.55

Figure 4.6 Effects of Span Length on the Moment Distribution Factor for 3-Lanes Bridge 13.571 m Width

67

2 1.8 1.6 1.4
<1.1
VI

~

~

:::s

1.2 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0

·

e ....

-----· ----- .
0.960m 24m 1.05
---------_._-

·

·

·

0.650m 16m
-+-ULSANDSLS -FLS
---- ------------------------

0.800m 20m 1.15 1.57

1.040m 26m 1.05 1.40

1.200m 30m 1.04 1.32

1.280m 32m 1.04 1.27

1.14
-------

1.78

1.45

Figure 4.7 Effects of Span Length on the Moment Distribution Factor for 4-Lanes Bridge 14.806 m Width
2 1.8 1.6 1.4
:::s
<1.1
VI

"'-

~

""""'-

1.2 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0

...

~

~

e ....

----..
1.280m 32m 1.03 1.32

0.650m 16m
-+-ULSANDSLS -FLS

0.800m 20m 1.08 1.67

0.960m 24m 1.07 1.48

1.040m 26m 1.07 1.46

1.200m 30m 1 1.21

1.12 1.91

Figure 4.8 Effects of Span Length on the Moment Distribution Factor for 4-Lanes Bridge of 16.041 m Width

68

2 1.8 1.6 1.4
VI

.........
~

~

:::J

<V

1.2 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0

·

·

--- --·

...
·

·

·

E ....

0.650m 16m

0.800m 20m 1.12 1.67

0.960m 24m 1.08 1.53

1.040m 26m 1.08 1.47

1.200m 30m 1.06 1.37

1.280m 32m 1.04 1.32

- . - ULS AND SlS -FlS

1.15 1.9

Figure 4.9 Effects of Span Length on the Moment Distribution Factor for 4·Lanes Bridge of 17.276 m Width

"iii > > ....

<V :::J

VI

2.2 2 1.8 1.6 1.4 1.2 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0

_.

-

~
~

0.650m 16m

0.800m 20m 1.13 1.79

0.960m 24m 1.38 1.95

1.040m 26m 1.34 2.08

1.200m 30m 1.32 2.09

1.280m 32m 1.31 2.07

-.-UlSANDSlS -FlS

1.13 1.71

Figure 4.10 Effects of Span Length on the Shear Distribution Factor for 2-Lanes Bridge 0{7.396 m \Vidth

69

VI

-;;

:s >

«II

>

LI..

2.4 2.2 2 1.8 1.6 1.4 1.2 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0

..........,
~

I

~

·

·
I

, ./" "".

·

·

·

!

0.650m 16m
--..- U LS AN D SLS -FLS
!

0.800m 20m 1.36 1.99

0.960m 24m 1.66 2.03

1.040m 26m

1.200m 30m 1.61 2.36

1.280m 32m 1.6 2.35

1.35 1.82

-= 1.62
2.28

Figure 4.11 Effects of Span Length on the Shear Distribution Factor for 2-Lanes Bridge of8.631 m Width

2.8 2.4 2
VI

/~

1.6 1.2 0.8 0.4 0

~~

/

1.200m 30m 1.280m 32m 1.87 2.56

-;;

:s
>

«II

>

LI..

0.650m 16m
--..- ULS AND SLS -FLS

O.800m 20m 1.6 1.91

0.960m 24m 1.93 2.81

1.040m 26m 1.9 2.41

1.57 1.62

~

Figure 4.12 Effects of Span Length on the Shear Distribution Factor for 2-Lanes Bridge of 9.866 m Width

70

4 3.5 3 2.5
III

iii > > .....

::::I

Q.t

2 1.5 1 0.5 0 O.650m 16m O.800m 20m 1.56 3.21 O.960m 24m 1.87 3.74 1.040m 26m 1.200m 30m 1.91 3.52 1.280m 32m 1.92 3.51

-+-UlSANDSlS -FLS

Figure 4.13 Effects of Span Length on the Shear Distribution Factor for 3-Lanes Bridge of 11.101 m Width

4 3.5 3
III
I

".----

~

~

~

·

2.5 2 1.5 1 0.5 0 0.650m 16m O.800m 20m 1.75 3.08 O.960m 24m 2.11 3.18 1.040m 26m 2.09 3.57 1.200m 30m 2.19 3.73 1.280m 32m 2.17 3.73
,........-.

iii > > .....

::::I

Q.t

~ ....

·

·

·

.....-UlSANDSLS -FlS

1.59

2.77

Figure 4.14 Effects of Span Length on the Shear Distribution Factor for 3-Lanes Bridge of 12.336 m Width

71

4
3.5 3 2.5
VI

~

-~

-;

:::I

OJ

2 1.5 1 0.5

> :>
"'-

20m 1.91 2.86

~

~

a
-+-ULSANDSLS -FLS
----- --_.._-------_ ... _._-----------------

0.650m 16m 1.73 2.49

O.800m

O.960m 24m 2.31 2.91

1.040m 26m 2.33
.~

1.200m 30m 2.45

1.280m 32m 2.4
_.-

... ..
~

3.31
-~~-

....

~

.~_~.4_

3.59 .. __.·_··_
_~~

._.._---_ .._----

3.64

._-_.

Figure 4.15 Effects of Span Length on the Shear Distribution Factor for 3-Lanes Bridge of3.571 m Width

5 4.5

4
3.5
VI

~
......

~ :>
"'-

:::I

OJ

3
2.5 2 1.5 1 0.5

-----

.--O.650m 16m

---O.960m 24m 2.32 3.94 1.040m 26m 2.35 1.200m 30m 2.43 4.62 1.280m 32m 2.44 4.63

a
-+-UlSANDSLS -FlS

O.800m 20m

4.41

Figure 4.16 Effects of Span Length on the Shear Distribution Factor for 4-Lanes Bridge of 14.806 m Width

72

5.5 5
4.5 4 3.5 3

In

QI

.---.-

..... --.- / '

~

~

...

~

::::I

> .....

2.5
2 1.5 1 0.5 0

----0.800m 20m 2.07 4.14 0.960m 24m 2.51 3.85 1.040m 26m 2.54 4.83

...

--+

0.650m 16m
.....-UlSANDSlS -FlS

1.200m 30m 2.36 4.59

1.280m 32m 2.64 5.09

1.85 3.68

Figure 4.17 Effects of Span Length on the Shear Distribution Factor for 4-Lanes Bridge of 16.041 m Width

5 4.5 4
In

..........

~
./"""

----

---...

ii > > .....

::::I

QI

3.5 3 2.5 2 1.5 1 0.5 0

~
....

~

0.650m 16m

0.800m 20m 2.18 3.77

O.960m 24m 2.66 3.87

1.040m 26m 2.7 4.41

1.200m 30m 2.79 4.81

1.280m 32m 2.62 4.54

.....-UlSANDSlS -FlS

1.95 3.12

Figure 4.18 Effects of Span Length on the Shear Distribution Factor for 4-Lanes Bridge of 17.276 m Width

73

1.8 1.6 1.4 1.2 1

-

·

·

I

·

·

O.B
0.6 0.4 0.2 0 0.650m 16m 0.800m 20m 1.09 0.960m 24m 1.07 1.040m 26m 1.07 1.200m 30m 1.05 1.280m · 32m 1.04
I

I-FLS

1.14

Figure 4.19 Effects of Span Length on the Deflection Distribution Factor for 2-Lanes Bridge of 7.396 m Width

1.8 1.6 1.4 1.2
<II

"tij
"CJ

:::s

cu

1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 0.650m 16m 0.800m 20m 1.12 0.960m 24m 1.08 1.040m 26m 1.200m 30m 1.06 1.2BOm 32m 1.05

>

....

I-FLS

1.18

I

LOB

Figure 4.20 Effects of Span Length on the Deflection Distribution Factor for 2-Lanes Bridge of8.631 m Width

74

1.8 1.6 1.4
In

1.2 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0

"0

~
.....

::l

CII

·

·

·

·

·

·

0.650m 16m

0.800m 20m 1.13

0.960m 24m 1.13

1.040m 26m 1.09

1.200m 30m 1.07

1.280m 32m 1.06

I-FlS

1.16

Figure 4.21 Effects of Span Length on the Deflection Distribution Factor for 2-Lanes Bridge of 9.866 m Width

1.8 1.6 1.4
In

1.2 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 0.6S0m 16m

-------.

> "0

iii

::l

CII

.....

0.800m 20m 1.31

O.960m 24m 1.22

1.040m 26m

1.200m 30m 1.12

1.280m 32m

I-FLS

1.39

1.17

1.12

Figure 4.22 Effects of Span Length on the Deflection Distribution Factor For3-Lanes Bridge ofll.101 m Width

75

1.8 1.6 1.4 1.2
cv :;, iii
OIl

......

1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 O,650m 16m

----0.800m 20m 1.32 0.960m 24m 1.23 1.040m 26m 1.20 1.200m 30m 1.16 1.280m 32m 1.14

-a Lo.

>

I-FLS

1.46

Figure 4.23 Effects of Span Length on the Deflection Distribution Factor For 3-Lanes Bridge of 12.336 m Width

1.8 1.6 1.4
OIl

..

-a Lo.

~

:;,

cv

1.2

1
0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 0.650m 16m

----O,800m 20m 1.32 O,960m 24m 1.24 1.040m 26m 1.22 1.200m 30m 1.16
------

1.280m 32m 1.16
------

I-FLS

1.42

Figure 4.24 Effects of Span Length on the Deflection Distribution Factor For 3-Lanes Bridge of 13.571 m Width

76

1.8 1.6 1.4
\II

--

~

1.2 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 0.650m 16m 0.800m 20m 1.49 0.960m 24m 1.35 1.040m 26m 1.31 1.200m 30m 1.24 1.280m 32m 1.2

~

:::J

Ql

"0

"'-

I-FLS

1.65

Figure 4.25 Effects of Span Length on the Deflection Distribution Factor For 4-Lanes Bridge of 14.806 m Width

1.8 1.6 1.4 1.2
11\ Ql

~

~

n;

:::J

1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 0.650m 16m 0.800m 20m 1.55 O.960m 24m 1.38

"0 "'-

>

""
1.040m 26m 1.35 1.75

../II

~./

1.200m 30m
I

1.280m 32m 1.25

I-FLS

1

Fignre 4.26 Effects of Span Length on the Deflection Distribution Factor For 4-Lanes Bridge of 16.041 m Width

77

1.8 1.6 1.4 1.2 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0

~

"C

'" ~
C1I :::I

-----O.960m 24m 1.44 1.040m 26m 1.38 1.200m 30m
·

u.

O.650m 16m

0.800m 20m 1.57

1.280m 32m
I

I-~

1.29

1.27

Figure 4.27 Effects of Span Length on the Deflection Distribution Factor For 4-Lanes Bridge of 17.276 m Width

2.5

2
1.5
iii
u.
C1I '" :::I

>,
E

1 0.5

a
-+-ULSAN -ll-FLS

2 lanes
1.13 1.27

3 lanes 1.13 1.55

4 Lanes 1.15 1.91

Figure 4.28 Effect of Number of Lanes on the Moment Distribution Factor For a 16-m Span Bridge

78

1.8 1.6 1.4 1.2
:J
tV
VI

_ _ _ _ _ :::;;a

1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0

.
2 lanes

·

·

~

u..

E

3 lanes
1.1 1.4

4 lanes 1.15 1.57

-t-UlSANDSLS _FlS

1.09 1.19

Figure 4.29 Effect of Number of Lanes on the Moment Distribution Factor For a 20-m Span Bridge

1.8 1.6 1.4 1.2 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 -..-ULSANDSLS ___ FLS 2 lanes 1.08 1.21 3 Lanes 1.09 1.32 4 Lanes 1.08 1.53
!

....

~
u..

:J

tV

·

....

=:::::::a

·

·

E

Figure 4.30 Effect of Number of Lanes on the Moment Distribution Factor For a 24-m Span Bridge

79

1.6 1.4 1.2 1 0.8

t:

~
3 Lanes 1.08 1.28 4 Lanes 1.08 1.47

E .....

0.6 0.4 0.2 0 2 Lanes

-+-ULSANDSLS _FLS

1.08 1.15

Figure 4.31 Effect of Number of Lanes on the Moment Distribution Factor For a 26-m Span Bridge

1.6 1.4 1.2
U"
OIl Qj

-

-iii

1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 2 Lanes 3 Lanes 1.07 1.23 4 Lanes 1.06 1.37

::l

7ii

E .....

>

-+-ULSANDSLS _FLS

1.06 1.12

Figure 4.32 Effect of Number of Lanes on the Moment Distribution Factor For a 30-m Span Bridge

80

1.4 1.2 1

.-

~

ev :s

....

:
3 lanes 1.04 1.19

-:
4 lanes 1.04 1.32

0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 2 lanes

E .....

-.-UlSANDSLS -ll-FlS
~.

1.04 1.09

Figure 4.33 Effect of Number of Lanes on the Moment Distribution Factor For a 32-m Span Bridge

3.5 3 2.5

~

:s

.... ev

2 1.5 1 0.5 0

r-

~ ~

-4 lanes 1.95 3.12

> .....

2 lanes 1.57 1.82

3 lanes 1.73 2.49

-.-UlSANDSLS -ll-FlS

Figure 4.34 Eff~t of Number of Lanes on the Shear Distribution Factor For a 16-m Span Bridge

81

4 3.5 3 2.5
OIl

iii

:::l

G.I

2 1.5 1 0.5 0

III'"

~

~

~

~

...

>
>

..-

LI..

2 Lanes -+-ULSANDSLS _FLS
--

3 Lanes 1.91 2.86

4 Lanes 2.18 3.77
-----

1.6 1.91

Figure 4.35 Effect of Number of Lanes on the Shear Distribution Factor For a 20-m Span Bridge

4.5 4 3.5 3
OIl

2.5 2 1.5 1 0.5 0

G.I

-

~

~

~
>

:::l

....
3 Lanes 2.31 2.91

...
2.66 3.87

LI..

2 Lanes -+-ULSANDSLS _ _ FLS 1.93 2.81

4 Lanes

Figure 4.36 Effect of Number of Lanes on the Shear Distribution Factor For a 24-m Span Bridge

82

5 4.5 4 3.5 3
CII '" ::::I
~

~ ..
.
~

2.5 2 1.5

~

I.&.

>

.-

....

~
,

~

1

0.5 0
2 Lanes I-+-ULSANDSL:S i_FLS 1.9 2.41 3 Lanes 2.33 3.31 4 Lanes 2.7 4.41
I

i
i

Figure 4.37 Effect of Number of Lanes on tbe Shear Distribution Factor For a 26-m Span Bridge

6
5 4

'" ~
CII ::::I
I.&.

3 2

>

~ ----..
2 Lanes 1.88 2.55
!

~

~
..A

1

0
-+-ULSANDSLS

3 Lanes 2.45 3.59

4 Lanes 2.79 4.81

_FLS

Figure 4.38 Effect of Number of Lanes on the Shear Distribution Factor For a 30-m Span Bridge

83

5.00 4.50 4.00 3.50
::s iV
\II (1.1

I!'I

3.00 2.50 2.00 1.50 1.00 0.50 0.00

> >

~

~

~

~

u..

.--

---3 lanes 2.4 3.64

..
4 lanes 2.62 4.54

2 lanes ...... UlSANDSlS _FlS 1.87 2.56

Figure 4.39 Effect of Number of Lanes on the Shear Distribution Factor For a 32-m Span Bridge

1.8 1.6
1.4

1.2
::s
"CI
\II (1.1

1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2

~

u..

a
I_FlS

2 lanes 1.18

3 lanes 1.46

4 lanes 1.17

Figure 4.40 Effect of Number of Lanes on the Deflection Distribution Factor For a 16- m Span Bridge

84

1.8 1.6 1.4 1.2
lii

iii
"tI
loA.

:J

OJ

1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2

a-

-------

~

>

I ---.

qc:;

.. ...

Figure 4.41 Effect of Number of Lanes on the Deflection Distribution Factor For a 20-m Span Bridge

1.8 1.6 1.4 1.2
,...-----~

!II

iii

'" :J
OJ

1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0

·

a

>

"tI

u..

2 Lanes 1.13

3 Lanes 1.24

4 Lanes 1.44

I--FLS

Figure 4.42 Effect of Number of Lanes on the Deflection Distribution Factor For a 24-m Span Bridge

85

1.60 1.40 1.20 1.00

I II'"'

-

-

...
<II :::I

0.80

to 0.60
"0

>

u.. 0.40

I_~LS

Figure 4.43 Effect of Number of Lanes on the Deflection Distribution Factor For a 26-m Span Bridge

1.40 1.20 1.00 0.80
VI

a-

·

-

-II

> "0

to

<II :::I

0.60 0.40 0.20 0.00 2 Lanes 3 Lanes 1.16

101.

4 Lanes
1.29

l-11-FLS
-

1.07

Figure 4.44 Effect of Number of Lanes on the Deflection Distribution Factor For a 30-m Span Bridge

86

1.80 1.60 1.40 1.20 1.00
ell

..-

.JIIIII
"

'tJ
Lt..

~

III :::I

0.80 0.60 0.40 0.20 0.00 2 lanes 3 lanes 1.16 4 lanes 1.27

I_FlS

1.06

Figure 4.45 Effect of Number of Lanes on the Deflection Distribution Factor For a 32-m Span Bridge

1.8 1.6
III

1.4 1.2 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0

'tJ

~

III :::I

....

.....
>

E ...

16m 1.21 1.14

20m 1.14 1.09

24m 1.12 1.07

26m 1.11 1.07

30m 1.09 1.05

32m 1.06 1.04

-t-Fm Values
Y<.. , ....

es

Figure 4.46 Comparison ofFm and Fd Values for 2-lane Bridges of 7.396-m Width

87

1.8 1.6 1.4
III

C1I

>
"C

iV

:::I

1.2 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0

.-.

..... E .....

16m -+-Fm Values -FdValues 1.25 1.18

20m 1.18 1.12

24m 1.15 1.08

26m 1.13 1.08

30m 1.09 1.06

32m 1.09 1.05

Figure 4.47 Comparison of Fm and Fd Values 2-lane Bridges of 8.631 m Width

1.8 1.6 1.4
III

!--.

>
"C

iV

:::I

C1I

1.2 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 16m

~

..... E .....

20m 1.38 1.31

24m 1.3 1.22

26m 1.24 1.17

30m 1.19 1.12

32m 1.16 1.12

-+-Fm Values -FdValues

1.48 1.39

Figure 4.48 Comparison ofFm and Fd Values for 2-1ane Bridges of 9.866 m Width

88

1.8 1.6
11\

1.4 1.2 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0
I

::s iii :>
"'0 "'........

<II

~==

:

..

_.

:

a

"'-

E

16m -+-Fm Values -FdValues 1.48 1.39

20m 1.38

24m 1.3 1.22

26m 1.24 1.17

30m 1.19 1.12

32m 1.16 1.12

Figure 4.49 Comparison ofFm and Fd Values for 3-1ane Bridges of 11.101 m Width

1.8 1.6 1.4
VI

~

ILl

~

::s

1.2 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 16m 1.54

--..:::::::

"'........

"'0

E ....

20m 1.39 1.32

24m 1.31 1.23

26m 1.27 1.20

30m 1.22 1.16

32m 1.18 1.14

-+-FmValues I-FdValues

Figure 4.50 Comparison ofFm and Fd Values for 3-lane Bridges of 12.336 m Width

89

1.8 1.6 1.4
III

::-----....::

III

"0

~

::::J

1.2 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 16m 26m 1.28 1.22 30m 1.23 1.16 32m 1.18 1.16

....

E ....

-.-Fm Values -FdValues

1.55 1.42

-----------~.-----.---~

Figure 4.51 Comparison ofFm and Fd Values for 3-1ane Bridges
of 13.571 m Width

1.8 1.6
III

~

1.4 1.2 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 16m

~

.---~

III

>
"0 u..

7ii

::::J

u..

E

20m 1.57 1.49

24m 1.45 1.35

26m 1.4 1.31

30m 1.32 1.24

32m 1.27 1.2

-.-Fm Values -FdValues

1.78 1.65

Figure 4.52 Comparison ofFm and Fd Values for 4-lane Bridges
of 14.806 m Width

90

2 1.8 1.6 1.4 1.2 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0

...........

............... ~

IA
~

~
........................

ii

::s

-c "....... E
"-

>

,,~

----:::

16m -+-Fm Values -FdValues 1.91 1.75

20m 1.67 1.55

24m 1.48 1.38

26m 1.46 1.35

30m 1.21 1

32m 1.32

Figure 4.53 Comparison ofFm and Fd Values for 4-1ane Bridges of 16.041 m Width

IA

ii
"....... "-

::s

~

1.4 1.2 1 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 16m 20m 1.67 1.57

-24m 1.53 1.44 1.9 1.77

'- :

t

-c

>

E

26m 1.47 1.38

30m 1.37 1.29

32m 1.32 1.27

-+-FmValues -FdValues

Figure 4.54 Comparison ofFm and Fd Values for 4-Jane Bridges of 17.276 m Width

91

2

1.9

'" .§UJ

----------------------------~ ULS·r...1oment /
-------------------------~------

~
0'

//

1.7
1.5

e c
::::s

~1.6

-----------------7,L-----------------------~---------------

---------------------~---------

~1.4

----------~------~~:O~:;;~~~---

>1.3
~ u: 1.2

:= == = = z= = = = == = = = ~ 11~~ej~~~~I;n~~ = ~ .... 1/
-!~~--------------~£~~~~~~~~--./

1.1
1

~

. '"

1

1.1

1.2

1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 Fm Values from FEA

1.7

1.S

1.9

2

Figure 4.55 Comparison between the FEA results and those from the CHBDC Equations for solid slab bridges for ULS-Fm values

2

1.9 1.S

----------------------------------~ FlS-rvtoment "
------------------------~_________________ L _ _ II _ _ _ - L _ _ _ L ______ _

.2
",

...

... c:
:l

1.7
1.6

·

· ----------

... .... ...
'V

a[ 1.5 E 0
1.4

-----------~--.-.~.---------------

·

·

-------~~~-!--~--~---------------··· -. · /fl

1.3

iii

:l

> 1.2 E u.. 1.1
1

________ -:'7':' - - - - - -.- - - - - ~l~o_d~~ L~!. - - -.' . - - - - n-~- - - _.JI_ - - - - - - - - ,jIlhru..duiillbnn. - --

,/
1

- - r -/.. -~ ~- - -- - -- - ------ - _....IOlILde$l~~u_ - - 1.1

· -· ......
1.2 1.3

1.4

1.5

1.6

1.7

1.8

1.9

2

fm Valuu from fEA

Figure 4.56 Comparison between the FEA results aDd those from the CHBDC Equations for solid slab bridges for FLS-Fm values

92

2

1.9
V\

~---------------------------~
· Two desi~n lanes ./ · Three desitn lanes ./

.,8 ..,
::J ~

c

1.S

~-~~~~~~-----------------~----

1.7 ~---------------------r---------

... V\

1.6 ~---------------Z-~:!~~~~~l~~----E 0 1 .5
::J
<V

1.4

-;;; 1.3 ~---------~---------------~~---

~-----------~~-~----~----~~./..
~-----~--:-----------:---~~--
1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.S 1.9
Fv valuu from FEA

------------_ ______________

J: 1.2
1.1

>

.

~- - - -:;.-; - - - - -.- ; - ~.- - - - - -:.,- - -2

1 1

Figure 4.57 Comparison between the FEA results and those from the ClmDC Equations for solid slab bridges for ULS-Fv values

~ .. .rwod.~
V\

35

.

..,

o

c

3

-FLS-=Sn'.r- - -- ----.--- --- - - ... I,""

L
.
1

, . /

liJ

&2.5

~.T~et~;~~s--7-~-:-.-~------a

o -

E

...

2

~_--_---_--_-L_----_--_-~A-_-r--

Four deSign lanes

.

··

·

~-----~r-~-~------I-----------1

/
1.5

.~

.. / ..
·· t

/... · ~

·

.

..

""

1

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

5.5

fv Values from FEA

Figure 4.58 Comparison between the FEA results and those from the CHBDC Equations for solid slab bridges for FLS·Fv values

93

2

1.9
V\

1.8

.2 .... 1.7
."

c

-------------------------~----. /'

-n~5~~a~n--------------;--~

--------------:---~--~!-------

g.

1.6

L.IJ

-----------~----~~----------

o ... ,...
V\ Q.'

E 1.5
1.-1

;;
u..

:::%

1.3

-------~~.A~:/~-----------.' LL-;~.~----~~------~nw~nrimd~r-.... ---~;./.--.------ .. ThreeraneDi1dies-/

~ 1.2
1.1
/

1

.....
1.1

-~.-~~--~----------------.. 1/. · .. fourlane bridges

--2

-~---------------------------

1

1.2

1.3

1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 Fd values from fEA

1.8

1.9

Figure 4.59 Comparison between the FEA results and those from the CHBDC Equations for solid slab bridges for Fd values

94

APPENDIX (A) SUMMARY OF SENSITIVITY AND PARAMETRIC STUDIES

95

Table A.1: CASE SENSITIVITY STUDY FOR MODEL
2·LANES BRIDGE: 650mm THICK, 7.396m WIDTH, 16m LENGTH

COMPARISON OF SELF LOAD OF MODEL (115.37kN/m) BY SIMPLE BEAMFORMULA OPTION BRIDGE SOLID SLAB MODEL SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA MAX STRESSES 7201,35 KN/m2 7089.22 KN/m2 MAX DEFORMATION 21,10mm 20.70mm REACTION 907,28 KN 922,95 KN

COMPARISION OF UDL (10 KN/m2) ON MODEL BY SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA OPTION BRIDGE SOLID SLAB MODEL SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA MAX STRESSES 4615.01 KN/m2 4544.36 KN/m2 MAX DEFORMATION 13,50 mm 13.32 mm REACTION 581.76 KN 591.68 KN

COMPARISION OF POINT LOADS (100 KN) ON MODEL BY SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA OPTION BRIDGE SOLID SLAB MODEL SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA MAX STRESSES 9998,58 KN/m2 9216,53 KN/m2 MAX DEFORMATION 22.4 mm 21,6 mm REACTION 600.02 KN 600,00 KN

Table A.2: CASE SENSITIVITY STUDY FOR MODEL
2·LANES BRIDGE: 800mm THICK, 7.396m WIDTH, 20m LENGTH

COMPARISON OF SELF LOAD OF MODEL (142.0kN/m) BY SIMPLE BEAMFORMULA OPTION BRIDGE SOLID SLAB MODEL SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA MAX STRESSES 9098.22 KN/m2 8999,79 KN/m2 MAX DEFORMATION 33.90 mm 33,50mm REACTION 1395,84 KN 1420,00 KN

COMPARISION OF UDL (10 KN/m2) ON MODEL BY SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA OPTION BRIDGE SOLID SLAB MODEL SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA MAX STRESSES 4738.66 KN/m2 4687,50 KN/m2 MAX DEFORMATION 17,60 mm 17.40 mm REACTION 727,02 KN 739,60 KN

COMPARISION OF POINT LOADS (100 KN) ON MODEL BY SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA OPTION BRIDGE SOLID SLAB MODEL SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA MAX STRESSES 8150.45 KN/m2 7605.46 KN/m2 MAX DEFORMATION 23,30 mm 22,60 mm REACTION 599,98 KN 600,00 KN

96

Table A.3: CASE SENSITIVITY STUDY FOR MODEL
2-LANES BRIDGE: 960mmTH1CK, 7.396m WIDTH, 24m LENGTH

COMPARISON OF SELF LOAD OF MODEL (170.41 KN/m) BY SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA OPTION BRIDGE SOLID SLAB MODEL SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA MAX STRESSES 10884.9 KN/m2 10800.4 KN/m2 MAX DEFORMATION 48.60mm 48.22 mm REACTION 2010.0 KN 2044.9 KN

COMPARISON OF UDL (10 KN/m2) ON MODEL BY SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA OPTION BRIDGE SOLID SLAB MODEL SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA MAX STRESSES 4726.9 KN/m2 4687.5 KN/m2 MAX DEFORMATION 21.1 mm 20.9mm REACTION 872.4 KN 887.5 KN

COMPARISON OF POINT LOADS (100 KN) ON MODEL BY SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA OPTION BRIDGE SOLID SLAB MODEL SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA MAX STRESSES 6734.6 KN/m2 6337.8 KN/m2 MAX DEFORMATION 23.30 mm 22.63 mm REACTION 600.0 KN 600.0 KN

Table A.4: CASE SENSITIVITY STUDY FOR MODEL
2-LANES BRIDGE: 1040mm THICK, 7.396m WIDTH, 26m LENGTH

COMPARISON OF SELF LOAD OF MODEL (184.61kN/m) BY SIMPLE BEAMFORMULA OPTION BRIDGE SOLID SLAB MODEL SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA MAX STRESSES 11779.18 KN/m2 11700.37 KN/m2 MAX DEFORMATION 57.00 mm 56.60mm REACTION 2359.00 KN 2399.93 KN

COMPARISION OF UDL (10 KN/m2) ON MODEL BY SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA OPTION BRIDGE SOLID SLAB MODEL SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA MAX STRESSES 4719.22 KN/m2 4687.50 KN/m2 MAX DEFORMATION 22.80 mm 22.70mm REACTION 945.08 KN 961.48 KN

COMPARISION OF POINT LOADS (100 KN) ON MODEL BY SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA OPTION BRIDGE SOLID SLAB MODEL SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA MAX STRESSES 6195.53 KN/m2 5050.36 KN/m2 MAX DEFORMATION 23.20 mm 22.60 mm REACTION 600.00 KN 600.00 KN

97

Table A.5: CASE SENSITIVITY STUDY FOR MODEL
2~LANES

BRIDGE: 1200mm THICK, 7.396m WIDTH, 30m LENGTH

COMPARISON OF SELF LOAD OF MODEL (213.0kN/m) BY SIMPLE BEAMFORMULA OPTION BRIDGE SOLID SLAB MODEL SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA MAX STRESSES 13569.49 KN/m2 13499.69 KN/m2 MAX DEFORMATION 75.80 mm 75.30 mm REACTION 3140.66 KN 3195.00 KN

COMPARISION OF UDL (10 KN/m2) ON MODEL BY SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA OPTION BRIDGE SOLID SLAB MODEL SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA MAX STRESSES 4711.63 KN/m2 4687.50 KN/m2 MAX DEFORMATION 26.30 mm 26.20mm REACTION 1090.52 KN 1109.40 KN

COMPARISION OF POINT LOADS (100 KN) ON MODEL BY SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA OPTION BRIDGE SOLID SLAB MODEL SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA MAX STRESSES MAX DEFORMATION 23.20 mm 22.60 mm REACTION 600.00 KN 600.00 KN

5341.29 KN/m2
5070.31 KN/m2

Table A.6: CASE SENSITIVITY STUDY FOR MODEL
2~LANES

BRIDGE: 1280mm THICK, 7.396m WIDTH, 32m LENGTH

COMPARISON OF SELF LOAD OF MODEL (227.21kN/m) BY SIMPLE BEAMFORMULA OPTION BRIDGE SOLID SLAB MODEL SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA MAX STRESSES 14465.38 KN/m2 14400.31 KN/m2 MAX DEFORMATION 86.10 mm 85.70 mm REACTION 3573.38 KN 3635.36 KN

COMPARISION OF UDL (10 KN/m2) ON MODEL BY SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA OPTION BRIDGE SOLID SLAB MODEL SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA MAX STRESSES 4708.78 KN/m2 4687.50 KN/m2 MAX DEFORMATION 28.00 mm 27.90 mm REACTION 1163.20 KN 1183.36 KN

COMPARISION OF POINT LOADS{100 KN) ON MODEL BY SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA OPTION BRIDGE SOLID SLAB MODEL SIMPLE BEAM FORMULA MAX STRESSES 4996.74 KN/m2 4753.42 KN/m2 MAX DEFORMATION 23.20 mm 22.60mm REACTION 600.00 KN 600.00 KN

98

TABLE A.7: Fm VALUES FOR 2 LANES BRIDGE 16m LENGTH

2 LANE BRIDGE: 650mm Thick, 7.396m Width, 16m Length
Load Cases

n
2 2 2 2

RL
0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL'
1 0.9 0.9 1

B 7.396 7.396 7.396 7.396

MT 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2

I

1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

I 0.02288 0.02288 0.02288 0.02288

Y 0.325

Smax 2729.65 4719.11 4724.13 2648.62

Fm 0.68828 1.07093 1.07207 1.20213

0.325 0.325 0.325

2 LANE BRIDGE: 650mm Thick, 8.631m Width, 16m Length
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

~
2 2 2

RL
0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL'
1 0.9 0.9 1

B 8.631 8.631 8.631 8.631

MT 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2

I 0.02288 0.02288 0.02288 0.02288

Y 0.325 0.325 0.3"' ...
0.325

Smax 2509.04 4156.31 "'01.24 2365.33

Fm 0.73829 1.10071 1.11261 1.25281

2 LANE BRIDGE: 650mm Thick, 9.866m Width, 16m Length
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS B n RL RL' 2 O.9~9.866 9.866 2 0.9 2 0.9 0.9 9.866 9.866 1 2 0.9 MT 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2

I 0.02288 0.02288 0.02288
0.02288

Y 0.325 0.325 0.325
0.325

Smax 2365.24 3762.15 3674.92 2105.27

Fm 0.79557 1.13889 1.11248 1.27463

TABLE A.S: Fv VALUES FOR 2 LANES BRIDGE 16m LENGTH

2 LANE BRIDGE: 650mm Thick, 7.396m Width, 16m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

RL
0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL'
1 0.9 0.9 1

B 7.396 7.396 7.396 7.396

VT 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8

Vmax 90.1 96.8 93.18 75.86

Fv 1.1328363 1.0953684 1.0544053 1.7168316

99

2 LANE BRIDGE: 650mm Thick, a.631m Width, 16m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

RL 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL' 1 0.9 0.9 1

B
8.631 8.631 8.631 8.631

VT 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8

Vmax 92.2 98.5 81.43 69.1

Fv 1.3528121 1.3007244 1.0753096 1.8239194

2 LANE BRIDGE: 650mm Thick, 9.866m Width, 16m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n 2 2 2 2

RL 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL' 1 0.9 0.9 1

B
9.866 9.866 9.866 9.866

VT 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8

Vmax 93.7 98.7 60.3 53.87

Fv 1.5715426 1.4898626 0.91022 1.6263201

I

I

TABLE A.9: Fd VALUES FOR 2 LANES BRIDGE 16m LENGTH

2 LANE BRIDGE: 650mm Thick, 7.396m Width, 16m Length
Load Cases 4-FLS

!
Fd 1.145622 Fd 1.183568

n
2

RL
0.9

RL' 1

B
7.396

DT 43.9

Dmax 6.8

2 LANE BRIDGE :650mm Thick, a.631m Width, 16m Length
Load Cases 4-FLS

n 2

RL
0.9

RL' 1

B
8.631

DT 43.9

Dmax 6.02

2 LANE BRIDGE: 650mm Thick, 9.866m Width, 16m Length
Load Cases 4-FLS

n
2

RL 0.9

RL' 1

B 9.866

DT 43.9

Dmax 5.2

Fd 1.168638

100

TABLE A.10: Fm VALUES FOR 2 LANES BRIDGE 20m LENGTH

2 LANE BRIDGE: 800mm Thick, 7.396m Width, 20m Length
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

RL 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL' 1 0.9 0.9 1

8
7.396 7.396 7.396 7.396

MT 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9

I 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266

Y 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4

Smax 2410.09 4329.09 4332.29 2356.21

Fm 0.65278 1.05529 1.05607 1.14874

2 LANE BRIDGE: 800mm Thick, 8.631 m Width, 20m Length
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

RL 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL' 1 0.9 0.9 1

8
8.631 8.631 8.631 8.631

MT 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9

I 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266

Y

0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4

Smax 2177.23 3784.38 3750.83 2081.29

Fm 0.68818 1.07655 1.06701 1.18414

2 LANE BRIDGE: 800mm Thick, 9.866m Width, 20m Length
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

RL 2 0.9 2 0.9 12 0.9 2 0.9

n

RL' 1 0.9 0.9
1

8
9.866 9.866 9.866 9.866

MT 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9

I
0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266

Y 0.4 0.4

0.4 0.4

Smax 2018.18 3357.84 3290.87 1843.61

Fm 0.72918 1.09189 1.07012 1.199

TABLE A.11: Fv VALUES FOR 2 LANES BRIDGE 20m LENGTH

2 LANE BRIDGE: 800mm Thick, 7.396m Width, 20m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

RL 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL' 1 0.9 0.9 1

8
7.396 7.396 7.396 7.396

VT 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7

Vmax 96.7 107 104.48 85.04

Fv 1.1364362 1.1315013 1.1048528 1.7985583

101

2 LANE BRIDGE: BOOmm Thick, B.831m Width, 20m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n

RL
0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL'
1 0.9 0.9 1

B 8.631 8.631 8.631 8.631

2
2 2 2

Vr 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7

Vmax 99.88 110.17 91.1 80.8

Fv 1.3695299 1.3595614 1.1242266 1.9944842

2 LANE BRIDGE: BOOmm Thick, 9.B66m Width, 20m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

RL
0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL'
1 0.9 0.9 1

B
9.866 9.866 9.866 9.866

Vr 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7

Vmax 102.09 110.83 74.57 67.89

Fv 1.6001334 1.5634098 1.0519125 1.9153639

TABLE A.12: Fd VALUES FOR 2 LANES BRIDGE 20m LENGTH

2 LANE BRIDGE: BOOmm Thick, 7.396m Width, 20m Length
Load Cases 4-FLS

n
2

RL
0.9

RL'
1

B
7.396

DT 52.6

Dmax 7.8

Fd 1.096745

2 LANE BRIDGE :BOOmm Thick, B.631m Width, 20m Length
Load Cases 4-FLS

n 2

RL
0.9

RL'
1

B
8.631

Dr 52.6

Dmax 6.87

Fd 1.127281

2 LANE BRIDGE: BOOmm Thick, 9.B66m Width, 20m Length
Load Cases 4-FLS

n
2

RL
0.9

RL'
1

B
9.866

DT 52.6

Dmax 6.02

Fd 1.129151

102

TABLE A.13: Fm VALUES FOR 2 LANES BRIDGE 24m LENGTH

2 LANE BRIDGE: 960mm Thick, 7.396m Width, 24m Length
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

RL RL' 0.9 1 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 1

B
7.396 7.396 7.396 7.396

Mr 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9

I
0.07373 0.07373 0.07373

-Y
0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48

Smax 2129.02 3916.38 3918.63 2091.51

Fm 0.63566 1.05237 1.05298 1.12402

2113L 0.07373

2 LANE BRIDGE: 960mm Thick, 8.631m Width, 24m Length
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

RL 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL' 1 0.9 0.9 1

B
8.631 8.631 8.631 8.631

Mr 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9

I
0.07373 0.07373 0.07373 0.07373

y 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48

Smax 1901.4 3406.82 3382.17 1834.55

Fm 0.66249 1.06831 1.06058 1.15056

2 LANE BRIDGE: 960mm Thick, 9.866m Width, 24m Length
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS n 2 2 2 2

RL RL' 1 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 1 0.9

B
9.866 9.866 9.866 9.866

Mr 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9

t
0.07373 0.07373 0.07373 0.07373

y 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48

Smax 1741.99 3038.14 2989.06 1698.5

Fm 0.6938 1.08902 1.07143 1.21766

TABLE A.14: Fv VALUES FOR 2 LANES BRIDGE 24m LENGTH

2 LANE BRIDGE: 960mm Thick, 7.396m Width, 24m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

RL 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL' 1 0.9 0.9 1

B
7.396 7.396 7.396 7.396

Vr 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6

Vmax 133.0 145.76 136.82 104.51

Fv 1.3816087 1.3625391 1.2789696 1.9538826

103

"1
2 LANE BRIDGE: 960mm Thick, 8.631 m Width, 24m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

RL 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL' 1 0.9 0.9 1

B 8.631 8.631 8.631 8.631

VT 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6

Vmax 136.97 150.43 106.68 93.2

Fv 1.66019 1.6410027 1.163745 2.0340448

i

2 LANE BRIDGE: 960mm Thick, 9.866m Width, 24m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

RL 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL' 1 0.9 0.9 1

B 9.866 9.866 9.866 9.866

VT 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6

Vmax 139.82 152.74 87.95 112.94

Fv 1.9372319 1.9046168 1.0967072 2.8166482

TABLE A.15: Fd VALUES FOR 2 LANES BRIDGE 24m LENGTH

2 LANE BRIDGE: 960mm Thick, 7.396m Width, 24m Length
Load Cases 4-FLS

n
2

RL
0.9

RL' 1

B
7.396

DT 58.96

Dmax 8,6

Fd 1.078792

2 LANE BRIDGE :960mm Thick, 8.631 m Width,24m Length
Load Cases 4-FLS

n
2

RL
0.9

RL' 1

B
8.631

DT 58.96

Dmax 7.4

Fd 1.083267

2 LANE BRIDGE: 960mm Thick, 9.866m Width, 24m Length
Load Cases 4-FLS

n
2

RL
0.9

RL' 1

B
9.866

DT 58.96

Dmax 6.8

Fd 1.13787

104

TABLE A.16: Fm VALUES FOR 2 LANES BRIDGE 26m LENGTH

2 LANE BRIDGE: 1040mm Thick, 7.396m Width, 26m Length
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

RL RL' 0.9 1 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9
0.9 1

B
7.396 7.396 7.396 7.396

MT 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8

I
0.09374 0.09374 0.09374 0.09374

Y
0.52 0.52 0.52 0.52

Smax

"

Fm 0.6271 1.04841 1.04894 1.11113

2045.27 3799.29 3801.21 2013.29

2 LANE BRIDGE: 1040mm Thick, 8.631m Width, 26m Length
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

RL RL' 2 0.9 1 2 0.9 0.9 2 0.9 0.9 2 0.9 1

n

B
8.631 8.631 8.631 8.631

MT 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8

I 0.09374 0.09374 0.09374 0.09374

Y
0.52 0.52 0.52 0.52

Smax 1817.82 3298.23 3278.43 1760.79

Fm 0.65043 1.06212 1.05574 1.13404

2 LANE BRIDGE: 1040mm Thick, 9.866m Width, 26m Length
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS n 2 2 2 2

RL RL' 1 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 1

B 9.866 9.866 9.866 9.866

MT 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8

I
0.09374 0.09374 0.09374 0.09374

Y 0.52 0.52 0.52

Smax 1657.05 2934.18 2891.47 1570.35

Fm 0.67774 1.08009 1.06436 1.15611

0.52

TABLE A.17: Fv VALUES FOR 2 LANES BRIDGE 26m LENGTH

2 LANE BRIDGE: 1040mm Thick, 7.396m Width, 26m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS n 2 2 2 2

RL 0.9 0.9 0.9
0.9

RL' 1 0.9 0.9 1

B
7.396 7.396 7.396 7.396

VT 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3

Vmax 135.8 149.9 145.11 116.51

Fv 1.34968 1.3412296 1.2983711 2.0849455

105

2 LANE BRIDGE: 1040mm Thick, 8.631m Width, 26m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

RL 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL' 1 0.9 0.9 1

8 8.631 8.631 8.631 8.631

VT 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3

Vmax 140.26 155.36 122.45 109.5

Fv 1.6272603 1.622202 1.27857 2.285868

!

2 LANE BRIDGE: 1040mm Thick, 9.866m Width, 26m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

RL 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL' 1 0.9 0.9 1

8
9.866 9.866 9.866 9.866

VT 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3

Vmax 143.47 158.19 102.82 101.06

Fv 1.9026736 1.8880989 1.2272225 2.4124316

i

TABLE A.18: Fd VALUES FOR 2 LANES BRIDGE 26m LENGTH

2 LANE BRIDGE: 1040mm Thick, 7.396m Width, 26m Length
Load Cases 4-FLS

n
2

RL
0.9

RL'
1

B 7.396

OT 62.54

Omax 9.04

Fd 1.0690732

2 LANE BRIDGE :1040mm Thick, 8.631m Width,26m Length
Load Cases 4-FLS

n
2

RL
0.9

RL'
1

88.631

DT 62.54

Omax 7.8

Fd 1.0764599

2 LANE BRIDGE: 1040mm Thick, 9.866m Width, 26m Length
Load Cases 4-FLS

n
2

RL
0.9

RL'
1

B 9.866

OT 62.54

Omax 6.9

Fd 1.0885098

106

TABLE A.19: Fm VALUES FOR 2 LANES BRIDGE 30m LENGTH

2 LANE BRIDGE: 1200mm Thick, 7.396m Width, 30m Length
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

RL 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL' 1 0.9 0.9 1

B
7.396 7.396 7.396 7.396

MT 3025 3025 3025 3025

I 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144

Y 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6

Smax 1885.71 3552.56 3553.99 1861.67

Fm 0.61473 1.0423 1.04272 1.09241

2 LANE BRIDGE: 1200mm Thick, 8.631m Width, 30m Length
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

RL 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL' 1 0.9 0.9 1

B
8.631 8.631 8.631 8.631

MT 3025 3025 3025 3025

I 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144

Y
0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6

Smax 1664.15 3074.87 3059.73 1621.27

Fm 0.63309 1.05279 1.04761 1.1102

2 LANE BRIDGE: 1200mm Thick, 9.866m Width, 30m Length
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

RL 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL' 1 0.9 0.9 1

B 9.866 9.866 9.866 ' 9.866

MT 3025 3025 3025 3025

I
0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144

Y 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6

Smax 1505.56 2725.82 2693.12 1440.36

Fm 0.65472 1.06683 1.05403 1.12745

TABLE A.20: Fv VALUES FOR 2 LANES BRIDGE 30m LENGTH

2 LANE BRIDGE: 1200mm Thick, 7.396m Width, 30m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

RL 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL' 1 0.9 0.9 1

B
7.396 7.396 7.396
I

7.396

VT 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5

Vmax 141.2 158.51 154.98 125.22

Fv 1.3139138 1.3276783 1.2981111 2.0976832

107

2 LANE BRIDGE: 1200mm Thick, 8.631m Width, 30m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

RL 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL' 1 0.9 0.9 1

B 8.631 8.631 8.631 8.631

VT 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5

Vmax 146.53 165.03 137.02 120.9

Fv 1.5914187 1.6131075 1.3393201 2.3640925

2 LANE BRIDGE: 1200mm Thick, 9.866m Width, 30m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

RL 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL' 1 0.9 0.9 1

B
9.866 9.866 9.866 9.866

VT 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5

Vmax 150.36 168.75 120.61 114.37

Fv 1.8666815 1.8854898 1.3476084 2.5557745

I

TABLE A.21: Fd VALUES FOR 2 LANES BRIDGE 30m LENGTH

2 LANE BRIDGE: 1200mm Thick, 7.396m Width, 30m Length
Load Cases 4-FLS n 2

RL
0.9

RL' 1

B
7.396

DT 68.09

Dmax 9.7

Fd 1.0536231

2 LANE BRIDGE :1200mm Thick, 8.631m Width,30m Length
Load Cases 4-FLS

n
2

RL
0.9

RL' 1

B
8.631

DT 68.09

Dmax 8.4

Fd 1.0647731

2 LANE BRIDGE: 1200mm Thick, 9.866m Width, 30m Length
Load Cases 4-FLS

n
2

RL
0.9

RL' 1

B
9.866

DT 68.09

Dmax 7.4

Fd 1.0722338

108

TABLE A.22: Fm VALUES FOR 2 LANES BRIDGE 32m LENGTH

2 LANE BRIDGE: 12BOmm Thick, 7.396m Width, 32m Length
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n RL
2 2 2 2

RL' 0.9 1 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 1

B
7.396 7.396 7.396 7.396

Mr 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2

I
0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747

y
0.64 0.64 0.64 0.64

Smax 1811.66 3430.95 3432.21 1790.53

Fm 0.60078 1.02399 1.02436 1.06879

2 LANE BRIDGE: 12BOmm Thick, B.631m Width, 32m Length
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

RL 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL' 1 0.9 0.9 1

MT B 8.63L 3382.2 8.631 8.631 8.631 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2

I
0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747

Y
0.64 0.64 0.64 0.64

Smax 1594.53 2966.32 2952.96 1556.84

Fm 0.61707 1.03315 1.0285 1.08447

2 LANE BRIDGE: 12BOmm Thick, 9.B66m Width, 32m Length
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

RL RL' 2 0.9 1 2 0.9 0.9 2 0.9 0.9 2 0.9 1

n

B
9.866 9.866 9.866 9.866

Mr 3382.2 ·3382.2 3382.2 3382.2

I 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747

y
0.64 0.64 0.64 0.64

Smax 1438.43 2626.12 2597.26 1381.12

Fm 0.63631 1.04554 1.03405 1.09973

TABLE A.23: Fv VALUES FOR 2 LANES BRIDGE 32m LENGTH

2 LANE BRIDGE: 12BOmm Thick, 7.396m Width, 32m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

Rl 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL' 1 0.9 0.9 1

B 7.396 7.396 7.396 7.396

VT 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9

Vmax 142.3 160.81 157.52 127.04

Fv 1.2909115 1.313039 1.2861757 2.0746033

109

2 LANE BRIDGE: 1280mm Thick, 8.631 m Width, 32m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

RL
0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

RL'
1 0.9 0.9 1

B 8.631 8.631 8.631 8.631

VT 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9

Vmax 147.95 167.93 141.12 123.6

Fv 1.5663949 1.6001367 1.3446751 2.3556589

2 LANE BRIDGE: 1280mm Thick, 9.866m Width, 32m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-FLS

n
2 2 2 2

Rl
0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9

Rl'
1 0.9 0.9 1

B
9.866 9.866 9.866 9.866

VT 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9

Vmax 152.03 172.09 126.09 117.78

Fv 1.8399058 1.8744093 1.373376 2.5657264

TABLE A.24: Fd VALUES FOR 2 LANES BRIDGE 32m LENGTH

2 LANE BRIDGE: 1280mm Thick, 7.396m Width, 32m Length
Load Cases 4-FLS

n
2

RL
0.9

Rl'
1

B
7.396

DT 70.31

Dmax 9.9

Fd 1.041394

2 LANE BRIDGE :1280mm Thick, 8.631m Width,32m Length
Load Cases 4-FLS

n
2

Rl
0.9

Rl'
1

B
8.631

DT 70.31

Dmax 8.6

Fd 1.055705

2 LANE BRIDGE: 1280mm Thick, 9.866m Width, 32m Length
Load Cases 4-FLS

n
2

Rl
0.9

Rl'
1

B
9.866

DT 70.31

Dmax 7.6

Fd 1.066443

110

TABLE A.25: Fm VALUES FOR 3 LANES BRIDGE 16m LENGTH

3 LANE BRIDGE: 650mm Thick, 11.101 m Width, 16m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-FLS 7-FLS

n 3 3 3 3 3 3 3

Rl
0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

Rl'
1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101

MT
1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2

I 0.02288 0.02288 0.02288 0.02288 0.02288 0.02288 0.02288

Y
0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325

Smax 2269.68 3661.57 4720.37 3576.93 4711.86 2172.92 1814.33

Fm 0.64424 0.93539 1.07189 0.91377 1.06996 1.48026 1.23598

3 LANE BRIDGE: 650mm Thick, 12.336m Width, 16m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-FLS 7-FLS

n 3 3 3 3 3 3 3

Rl
0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

RL'
1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B
12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336

MT
1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2

I 0.02288 0.02288 0.02288 0.02288 0.02288 0.02288 0.02288

Y 0.325 0.325 0.325

0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325

Smax 2205.48 3478.08 4369.09 3317.88 4315.76 2041.65 1698.23

Fm 0.69566 0.98737 1.1025 0.94189 1.08904 1.54557 1.2856

3 LANE BRIDGE: 650mm Thick, 13.571m Width, 16m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-FLS 7-FLS

n
3 3 3 3 3 3 3

Rl
0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

RL'
1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B
13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571

MT
1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2

I 0.02288 0.02288 0.02288 0.02288 0.02288 0.02288 0.02288

Y 0.325 0.325

0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325

Sma x 2162.08 3328.81 4077.32 3115.88 3982.61 1871.62 1591.95

Fm 0.75025 1.0396 1.13188 0.9731 1.10558 1.5587 1.32579

111

TABLE A.26: Fv VALUES FOR 3 LANES BRIDGE 16m LENGTH

3 LANE BRIDGE: 650mm Thick, 11.101m Width, 16m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-FLS 7-FLS

n
3 3 3 3 3 3 3

RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8
0.8 0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8
1 1

B
11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101

Vr 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8

Vmax 94.8 133.1 105.59 99.81 92.31 81.57 37.36

Fv 1.3421917 1.6957219 1.1955881 1.2714093 1.0452196 2.7708341 1.2690739

3 LANE BRIDGE: 650mm Thick, 12.336m Width, 16m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-FLS 7-FLS

n
3 3 3 3 3 3 3

RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8
0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8

B 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336

Vr 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8

Vmax 95.7 113 105.31 89.43 81.73 73.4 36.74

Fv 1.5056677 1.5995655 1.3250756 1.2659216 1.0283775 2.7722027 1.3868563

I

I

1
1

3 LANE BRIDGE: 650mm Thick, 13.571 m Width, 16m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-FLS 7-FLS

n
3 3 3 3 3 3

RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8
0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1
1

B
13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571

VT 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8

Vmax 96.2 111.6 103.62 80.15 72.03 60.04 36.74

Fv 1.6640186 1.7385248 1.4343401 1.2481437 0.9970615 2.4932767 1.5256993

112

TABLE A.27: Fd VALUES FOR 3 LANES BRIDGE 16m LENGTH

3 LANE BRIDGE: 650mm Thick, 11.101m Width, 16m Length
Load Cases 6-FLS

n
3

RL 0.8

RL' 1

8
11.101

DT 43.9

Dmax 5.5

Fd 1.390786

3 LANE BRIDGE: 650mm Thick, 12.336m Width, 16m Length
Load Cases 6-FLS

n
3

RL 0.8

RL' 1

8
12.336

DT 43.9

Dmax 5.2

Fd 1.461212

3 LANE BRIDGE: 650mm Thick, 13.571 m Width, 16m Length
Load Cases 6-FLS

n
3

RL 0.8

RL' 1

8
13.571

DT 43.9

Dmax 4.6

Fd 1.422018

TABLE A.28: Fm VALUES FOR 3 LANES BRIDGE 20m LENGTH

3 LANE BRIDGE: 800mm Thick,·11.1 01 m Width, 20m Length
Load Cases 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

n
3 3 3 3 3 3 3

RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

8
11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101

MT
1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9

I
0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266

Y
0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4

Smax

Fm

1906.75 0.58137 3232.03 0.88691 4330.06 1.05619 3173.79 0.87092 4311.23 1.0516 1890.16 1596.14 1.38315 1.168

113

3 LANE BRIDGE: 800mm Thick, 12.336m Width, 20m Length
Load Cases 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

n
3 3 3 3 3 3 3

RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336

MT 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9

I 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266

Y
0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4

Smax Fm 1827.33 0.61914 3035.33 0.92559 3979.68 1.07872 2934.97 0.89499 3927.66 1.06462 1716.73 1477.48 1.396 1.20145

I
i

3 LANE BRIDGE: 800mm Thick, 13.571m Width, 20m Length
Load Cases 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 n 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1

1

B 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571

MT 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9

I 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266
0.04266

Y 0.4

0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 -0.4 0.4

Smax 1770.11 2877.49 3691.34 2728.34 3610.05 1572.26 1373.05

Fm 0.6598 0.96531 1.10074 0.91527 1.0765 1.40652 1.22831

TABLE A.29: Fv VALUES FOR 3 LANES BRIDGE 20m LENGTH

3 LANE BRIDGE: 800mm Thick, 11.101 m Width, 20m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-FLS 7-FLS

n
3 3 3 3 3 3 3

RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101

VT
349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7

Vmax 103.8 131.8 122.78 121.56 112.55 101.39 28.03

Fv 1.372282 1.568727 1.299191 1.447066 1.190942 3.21856 0.889794

114

3 LANE BRIDGE: 800mm Thick, 12.336m Width, 20m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-FLS 7-FLS n 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 . 12.336
12.336 12.336

VT 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7

Vmax Fv 105.7 1.553318 132.63 ." 1.754494 123.09 1.447372 115.11 1.522731 105.62 1.241949 87.6 25.69 3.089115 0.906239

3 LANE BRIDGE: 800mm Thick, 13.571 m Width, 20m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-FLS 7-FLS

n 3 3 3 3 3 3
3

RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571

VT 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7

Vmax 106.0 131.6 121.27 105.91 95.66 73.93 25.51

Fv 1.714 1.914716 1.568731 1.54129 1.237443 2.869042 0.989981

TABLE A.30: Fd VALUES FOR 3 LANES BRIDGE 20m LENGTH

3 LANE BRIDGE: 800mm Thick, 11.101 m Width, 20m Length
Load Cases 6-FLS

n
3

RL 0.8

RL' 1

B 11.101

DT 52.6

Dmax 6.2

Fd 1.308483

3 LANE BRIDGE: 800mm Thick, 12.336m Width, 20m Length
Load Cases 6-FLS

n
3

RL 0.8

RL' 1

B
12.336

DT 52.6

Dmax 5.6

Fd 1.313338

115

3 LANE BRIDGE: 800mm Thick, 13.571m Width, 20m Length
Load Cases 6-FLS

n
3

RL 0.8

RL'

1

B 13.571

DT 52.6

Dmax 5.1

Fd 1.315819

TABLE A.31: Fm VALUES FOR 3 LANES BRIDGE 24m LENGTH

3 LANE BRIDGE: 960mm Thick, 11.101m Width, 24m Length
Load Cases 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

n RL RL' 3 0.8 1 3 0.8 0.9 3 0.8 0.8 3 0.8 0.9 3 0.8 0.8 1 3 0.8
3 0.8 1

B
11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101

MT 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9

I 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737

I

Y 0.48 (t48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48
0.48

Smax 1627 2850.3 3913.9 2809.2 3896.4 1615.4 1408.6

Fm 0.5468 0.8622 1.0524 0.8498 1.0477 1.3031 1.1362

I

3 LANE BRIDGE: 960mm Thick, 12.336m Width, 24m Length
Load Cases 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

n 3 3 3 3 3
3 3

RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336
12.336

MT 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9

I 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737

Y 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48
0.48

Smax Fm 1542.4 0.5761 2654.5 0.8923 3631.6 1.0851 2583.3 0.8684 1.0706 3583 1465 1295.1 1.3132 1.1609

116

3 LANE BRIDGE: 960mm Thick, 13.571 m Width, 24m Length
Load Cases 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

n RL
3 3 3 3 3 3 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

8
13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571

MT 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 '2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9

3 0.8

I 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737

Y 0.48

Smax 1479.1 2497.5 3307.1 2391.2 3343.5 1340.2 1197.1

Fm 0.6078 0.9236 1.0871 0.8843 1.099 1.3216 1.1805

0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48

TABLE A.32: Fv VALUES FOR 3 LANES BRIDGE 24m LENGTH

3 LANE BRIDGE: 960mm Thick, 11.101 m Width, 24m Length
Load Cases
i

1·USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-FLS 7-FLS

n 3 3 3 3 3 3 3

RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

8
11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 '11.101

VT
395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6

Vmax 142.0 178.4 168.45 151.9 141.98 133.41 58.84

Fv 1.659818 1.876872 1.575635 1.598435 1.328042 3.743641 1.651119

3 LANE BRIDGE: 960mm Thick, 12.336m Width, 24m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-FLS 7-FLS n 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

8
12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336

VT
395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6

Vmax 143.6 180.98 183.55 139.02 142.09 102.3 58.49

Fv 1.865914 2.116313 1.907881 1.625648 1.476931 3.18971 1.823894

117

3 LANE BRIDGE: 13.571 m Width, 24m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-FLS 7-FLS

n
3 3 3 3 3 3 3

RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571

VT 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6
395.6

Vmax 145.0 180.2 168.42 127.02 115.26 84.76 57.42

Fv 2.072585 2.317636 1.925874 1.634026 1.317992 2.907679 1.969785

TABLE A.33: Fd VALUES FOR 3 LANES BRIDGE 24m LENGTH

3 LANE BRIDGE: 960mm Thick, 11.101m Width, 24m Length
Load Cases 6-FLS

n
3

RL 0.8

RL' 1

B
11.101

DT 58.96

Dmax 6.5

Fd 1.223821

3 LANE BRIDGE: 960mm Thick, 12.336m Width, 24m Length
Load Cases 6-FLS

n
3

RL 0.8

RL' 1

B
12.336

DT 58.96

Dmax 5.9

Fd 1.234437

3 LANE BRIDGE: 960mm Thick, 13.571 m Width, 24m Length
Load Cases 6-FLS

n
3

RL 0.8

RL' 1

B
13.571

DT 58.96

Dmax 5.4

Fd 1.242934

118

TABLE A.34: Fm VALUES FOR 3 LANES BRIDGE 26m LENGTH

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1040mm Thick, 11.101m Width, 26m Length
Load Cases 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 RL 3 0.8 3 0.8 3 0.8 3 0.8 3 0.8 3 3 0.8 0.8

n

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8

B
11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101

MT 2415.8 '2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8

I
0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937

Y
0.52 0.52 0.52 0.52 0.52 0.52 0.52

Smax

Fm

1539.8 0.5315 2735.8 0.8498 3795.1 1.0479 2700.5 0.8389 1.0435 3779 1501.2 1352.9 1.2435 1.1207

1 1

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1040rnm Thick, 12,336m Width, 26m Length
Load Cases 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

n 3 3 3 3 3 3
3

RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B
12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336

MT 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8

I
0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937

Y 0.52 0.52 0.52 0.52 0.52

Smax Fm 1452.5 0.5571 2538.6 0.8763 1.0758 3506 2477.4 0.8552 3462.5 1.0624 1386.5 1240.4 1.2763 1.1418

0.52 0.52

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1040mm Thick, 13.571 m Width, 26m Length
Load Cases 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

n 3 3 3 3 3 3
3

RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B
13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571

MT 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8

I
0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937

Y 0.52 0.52 0.52 0.52 0.52

Smax 1386.4 2380.3 3194.6 2288.8 3137.9 1267.6 1144.1

Fm 0.585 0.9039 1.0784 10.8692 1.0592 1.2836 1.1586

0.52 0.52

119

TABLE A.35: Fv VALUES FOR 3 LANES BRIDGE 26m LENGTH

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1040mm Thick, 11.101m Width, 26m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-FLS 7-FLS n 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B
11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101

VT
413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3

Vmax 145.9 187.2 176.31 170.32 159.41 129 45.13

Fv 1.632829

I 1.885834
1.578528 1.715511 1.42722 3.464866 1.212166

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1040mm Thick, 12.336m Width, 26m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-FLS 7-FLS

n
3 3 3 3 3 3 3

RL 0.8 0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336

VT
413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3

Vmax 147.8 186.78 192.84 161.76 164.83 119.8 44.65

Fv 1.838361 2.090598 1.918602 1.810553 1.639925 3.576037 1.332694

O.
0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1040mm Thick, 13.571m Width, 26m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-FLS 7-FLS

n
3 3 3 3 3 3 3

RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571

VT
413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3

Vmax 149.4 189.8 176.93 150.37 137.47 100.84 43.53

2.043749 2.337574 1.936541

~

1.851565 1.504642 3.311153 1.429339

120

TABLE A.36: Fd VALUES FOR 3 LANES BRIDGE 26m LENGTH

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1040mm Thick, 11.101 m Width, 26m Length
Load Cases

n

RL

RLt

B

DT

Dmax

Fd

7

3

0.8

1

11.101

62.54

6.6

1.171516

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1040mm Thick, 12.336m Width, 26m Length
Load Cases

n

RL

RLt

7

3

0.8

1

B 12.336

DT

Dmax

Fd

62.54

6.1

1.203224

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1040mm Thick, 13.571 m Width, 26m Length
Load Cases

n

RL

RLt

B

DT

Dmax

Fd

7

3

0.8

1

13.571

62.54

5.6

1.215184

TABLE A.37: Fm VALUES FOR 3 LANES BRIDGE 30m LENGTH

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1200mm Thick, 11.101m Width, 30m Length
Load Cases

n

RL

RLt

B

MT

1 2 3 4 5 6 7

3 3 3 3 3 3 3

0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101

3025 3025 3025 3025 3025 3025 3025

I 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144

0.144

'i 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6

Smax

Fm

1388.3 2518.5 3545.6 2491.8 3532.6 1359.2 1204.6

0.5095 0.8318 1.0409 0.823 1.0371 1.1971 1.0609

121

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1200mm Thick, 12.336m Width, 30m Length
Load Cases 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

n 3 3 3 3 3 3 3

RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B

MT
3025 3025 3025 3025 3025 3025

12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.3

12.336

1~~
B

I 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144
0.144

Y 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6

Smax 1299.5 2328.9 3230.8 2282.5 3202 1249.8 1139.2

Fm 0.5299 0.8547 1.054 0.8377 1.0446 1.2232 1.1149

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1200mm Thick,13.571m Width, 30m Length
Load Cases 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
n

3 3 3 3 3 3 3

RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

MT
3025 3025 3025 3025 3025 3025

13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571

3025~
0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6

I 0.144 0.144

Y 0.6 0.6

Smax 1231 2197 2979.5 2109.6 2937.6 1141.5 1047.5

Fm 0.5522 0.8871 1.0694 0.8518 1.0543 1.229 1.1278

TABLE A.3S: Fv VALUES FOR 3 LANES BRIDGE 30m LENGTH

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1200mm Thick, 11.101m Width, 30m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-FLS 7-FLS
n

3 3 3 3 3 3 3

RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B 11.101 11.101

VT 441.5 441.5

Vmax 153.3 203.5 191.36 190.44 178.31 140.22 47.63

Fv 1.605748 1.918788 1.603841 1.795646 1.494465 3.525668 1.197601

122

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1200mm Thick, 12.336m Width, 30m Length
Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-FLS 7-FLS

n
3 3 3 3 3 3 3

RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336

VT 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5

Vmax 155.6 209.05 195.05 187.02 173.03 133.5 44.3

Fv 1.811282 2.190408 1.816638 1.95958 1.61155 3.731256 1.237791

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1200mm Thick, 13.571m Width, 30m Length
I

Load Cases 1-USL 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-FLS 7-FLS

n
3 3 3 3 3 3 3

RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B
13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571

VT 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5

Vmax 157.5 213.0 198.48 180.85 166.37 117.04 39.24

Fv 2.016695 2.454768 2.033652 2.084639 1.704649 3.597621 1.206174

TABLE A.39: Fd VALUES FOR 3 LANES BRIDGE 30m LENGTH

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1200mm Thick, 11.101m Width, 30m Length
Load Cases 6-FLS n 3 RL 0.8 RL' 1

B
11.101

DT 68.09

Dmax 6.9

Fd 1.124936

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1200mm Thick, 12.336m Width, 30m Length
Load Cases 6-FLS

n
3

RL 0.8

RL' 1

B 12.336

DT 68.09

Dmax 6.4

Fd 1.159501

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1200mm Thick, 13.571 m Width, 30m Length
Load Cases 6-FLS

n
3

RL 0.8

RL' 1

B
13.571

DT 68.09

Dmax 5.8

Fd 1.155996

123

TABLE A.40: Fm VALUES FOR 3 LANES BRIDGE 32m LENGTH

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1280mm Thick, 11.101 m Width, 32m Length
Load Cases 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

n RL
3 3 3 3 3 3 3 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B
11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101

MT 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2

I 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747
0.1747

Y 0.64

Smax 1322.4 2418 3423 2394.6 3411.4 1296.9 1198.3

Fm 0.4937 0.8124 1.0223 0.8045 1.0188 1.1619 1.0736

r

0.64 0.64 0.64 0.64 0.64 0.64

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1280mm Thick, 12.336m Width, 32m Length
Load Cases 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

n RL
3 3 3 3 3 3 3 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B
12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336

MT 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2

I 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747
0.1747

Y 0.64

Smax 1234 2226.4 3140.2 2185.7 3109.5 1190.3 1093

Fm 0.5119 I 0.8312 1.0421 0.816 1.0319 1.1851 1.0882

0.64 0.64 0.64 0.64 0.64 0.64

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1280mm Thick, 13.571m Width, 32m Length
Load Cases 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

n
3 3 3 3 3 3 3

RL 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B
13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571

MT 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2

I 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747
0.1747

Y 0.64 0.64

Smax 1165.4 2072.1 2859.1 2011 2819.3 1086.7 1003.9

Fm 0.5319 0.8511 1.0439 0.826 1.0293 1.1903 1.0995

0.64 0.64 0.64 0.64 0.64

124

TABLE A.41: Fv VALUES FOR 3 LANES BRIDGE 32m LENGTH

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1280mm Thick, 11.101 m Width, 32m Length
I

load Cases 1-USl 2-UlS 3-UlS 4-UlS 5-UlS 6-FlS 7-FlS

n 3 3 3 3 3 3 3

Rl 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

Rl' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1
1

B 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101 11.101

VT 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9

Vmax 155.1 208,9 196.57 196.82 184.46 143.02 53.64

Fv 1.584325 1.920493 1.606038 1.80909 1.507095 3.505553 1.314766

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1280mm Thick, 12.336m Width, 32m Length
load Cases 1-USl 2-UlS 3-UlS 4-UlS 5-UlS 6-FlS 7-FlS
n 3 3 3 3 3 3 3

Rl 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

Rl' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B

12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336 12.336

VT 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9

Vmax 157.6 213.05 219.31 192.59 161.95 137.1 47.9

Fv 1.788616 2.17613 1.991174 1.967148 1.470387 3.73512 1.304691

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1280mm Thick, 13.571m Width, 32m Length
load Cases 1-USl 2-UlS 3-UlS 4-UlS 5-UlS 6-FlS 7-FlS
n

3 3 3 3 3 3 3

Rl 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8

Rl' 1 0.9 0.8 0.9 0.8 1 1

B 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571 13.571

VT 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9

Vmax 159.6 214.1 199.18 184.14 169.22 121.72 42.87

Fv 1.992651 2.406013 1.989454 2.069136 1.690207 3.6473 1.284585

125

TABLE A.42: Fd VALUES FOR 3 LANES BRIDGE 32m LENGTH

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1280mm Thick, 11.101m Width, 32m Length
Load Cases 6-FLS

n
3

RL 0.8

RL' 1

B
11.101

DT 70.31

Dmax 7.1

Fd 1.120994

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1280mm Thick, 12.336m Width, 32m Length
Load Cases 6-FLS

n
3

RL 0.8

RL' 1

B
12.336

DT 70.31

Dmax 6.5

Fd 1.140435

3 LANE BRIDGE: 1280mm Thick, 13.571m Width, 32m Length
Load Cases 6-FLS

n
3

RL 0.8

RL' 1

B
13.571

DT 70.31

Dmax 6

Fd 1.1581

TABLE A.43: Fm VALUES FOR 4 LANES BRIDGE 16m LENGTH

4 LANE BRIDGE 650 mm Th'ICk , 14806m W'dth I , 16m Leng'th
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS . 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS Rl 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7

n

Rl' 1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

B
14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806

MT
1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2

I 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229

Y
0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325

Smax

Fm

2132.7 0.692 3352.3 0.979 4169.6 1.0824 I 4750.6 1.0791 · 3499.8 1.0221 2741.1 0.8005 4327.7 1.1235 4957.3 1.1261 5021.8 1.1407 5053 1.1478 2703.1 0.7894 1963.2 1.7838 1572.7 1.4289

126

4 LANE BRIDGE 650 mm Th'ICk 16041 m W'dth I , 16 m Leng'th
1

Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

illE09
4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 .7 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 0.7 0.9

n 4

RL 0.7

RL' 1

~T
16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 1147.2 :1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2 1147.2

O .. O.
0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 0.7 1 0.7 1

I 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229

Y 0.325 0.3 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 5

Smax 2112.7 3264 5.3 8.3

3846.4 4431.6 4480.6 4453.3

Fm 0.7428 1.0328 1.1209 1.107 0.9832 0.822 1.0818 1.0906 1.1026 1.0959

2537.31 .8028 1941 13 1520.7 1.497

I . 16m Leng'th 4 LANE BRIDGE 650 mm Th'ICk 17276m W'dth
1 1

Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

n

RL

RL'

~9
4 4 14 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

0.8 .7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 1 1

MT B 17.276 . 1147.2 17.276 1147.2 17.276 1147.2 17.276 1147.2 17.276 1147.2 1147.2 17.276 17.276 1147.2 17.276 1147.2 1147.2 17.276 1147.2 17.276 1147.2 17.276 17.276 1147.2
17276l1147.2

I 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229 0.0229

O.

0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325 0.325

~

Fm

0.7683 3179.7 1.0835 3829.4 1.1599 4243.2 1.1246 2952.8 1.0062 2515.9 0.8573 3653.8 1.1068 4098.7 1.0863 4175.4 1.1066 4172.6 1.1059 2424 0.826 1797.7 1453.2 1.5407

-

127

TABLE A.44: Fv VALUES FOR 4 LANES BRIDGE 16m LENGTH

4 LANE BRIDGE
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

, 650 mm Th'ICk, 14806 m W'dth I , 16m Leng'th

n
4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

Rl
0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

Rl'
1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

B 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806

VT 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8

Vmax 96.82 119.28 118.84 109.0 110.52 57.96 110.1 98.94 95.28 96.55 55.22 74.72 37.18

Fv 1.566617 1.737032 1.538333 1.234362 1.609463 0.844051 1.424809 1.120644 1.079189 1.093574 0.804149 3.385264 1.684477

4 LANE BRIDGE
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

650 mm Th'ICk, 16041 m W'dth I , 16m Leng1th
n
4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

Rl
0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

Rlf
1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

B
16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041

VT 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8

Vmax 97.18 117.5 115.92 106.83 95.54 57.51 93.86 83.14 77.52 79.24 50.68 75.13 36.18

Fv 1.703602 1.853996 1.625697 1.310939 1.507367 0.907355 I 1.316321 1.020233 0.951269 0.972375 0.799596 3.687761 1.77590

128

4 LANE BRIDGE
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

"

650 mm Th"Iek, 17276 m W"dth 16m Leng'th I
I

n 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

RL 0.7 0,7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1
1

B
17,276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276

Vr 326.8 326,8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8 326.8

Vmax 97.45 114.93 112.62 104.44 83.62 57.47 81.29 71.03 62.33 65.9 49.4 58.95 36.27

Fv .1.839861 1.952896 1.701017 1.380283 1.420875 0.976533 1.227807 0.938735 0.823755 0.871465 0.839407 3.116341 1.917382

TABLE A.45: Fd VALUES FOR 4 LANES BRIDGE 16m LENGTH

4 LANE BRIDGE
Load Cases 12-FLS

16m Leng'th . m W'dth I 650 mm Th'Iek, 14806
I

n
4

RL
0.7

RL'
1

B 14.806

Dr 43.9

Dmax 4.9

Fd
1.652606

4 LANE BRIDGE
Load Cases 12-FLS

I , 16m Leng'th 650 mm Th'Iek, 16041 m W'dth

n 4

RL
0.7

RL'

B
16.041

Dr 43.9

Dmax 4.8

Fd 1.753913

1

4 LANE BRIDGE
Load Cases 12-FLS

.
"

16m Leng'th I 650 mm Th"Iek, 17276m W"dth
I

n 4

RL
0.7

RL'
1

B
17.276

Dr 43.9

Dmax 4.5

Fd 1.770888

129

TABLE A.4S: Fm VALUES FOR 4 LANES BRIDGE 20m LENGTH
, 4 LANE BRIDGE 800 mm Th'ICk 14806 m W'dth I , 20 m Len:J'th
I

I
y

I

Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

ti

RL 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 410.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

B 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806

MT
1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9

I
0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266

Smax 1728.56 2848.67 3690.74 4356.79 3222.14 2397.32 4066.15 4714.35 4678.22 4699.18 2373.22 1613.21 1335.76

Fm 0.60252 0.89366 1.02918 · 1.06305 1.01082 0.75207 1.13387 1.15029 1.14148 1.14659 0.74451 1.57448 1.30369

0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4

I

4 LANE BRIDGE . . 800 mm Th'ICk 16041 m W'd I th , 20 m Leng th
I

Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

n 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

RL 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

B RL' 1 I 16.041 0.9 16.041 0.8 16.041 0.7 16.041 O~ 16.041 16.041 0.9 0.8 16.041 0.7 16~ 0.7 16.041 0.7 16.041 0.9 16.041 1 16.041 16,041 1

MT
1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9

I
0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266

y
0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4

Smax 1628.29 2753.95 3513.52 4089.77 2642.41 2262.56 3412.31 4027.45 4061.16 4007.47 2205.38 1581.36 1278.96

Fm 0.61491 0.93601 1.06149 1.08113 0.8981 0.769 1.03091 1.06466 1.07357 1.05938 0.74956 1.67214 1.35238

130

4 LANE BRIDGE 800 mm ThOICk, 17276m W'dth I , 20 m Len glth Load Cases n RL RL' B MT Smax I Y
1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0,7 0.7 0.7 0.7 1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 . 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 1617.9 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.04266 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4

Fm 1676.18 0.68173 2669.2 0.97705 3356.61 1.09216 3905.35 1.11187 2507.11 0.91772 2154.28 0.78857 3209.07 1.04415 3894.08 1.10866 3942.49 1.12244 3809.13 1.08447 2098.05 0.76798 1468.11 1.6719 1213.95 1.38246

TABLE A.47: Fv VALUES FOR 4 LANES BRIDGE 20m LENGTH
I , 20 m Leng'th 4 LANE BRIDGE ° 800 mm ThOICk 14806m W'dth
I

Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

n
4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

RL 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

B
14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806

I

VT 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7

Vmax 106.86 142.28 145.21 130.8 147.34 44.89 150.3 133.72 128.39 131.09 43.86 89.73 30.68

Fv 1.615843 1.93629 1.756591 1.384278 2.005152 0.610909 1.817559 1.415398 1.358981 1.38756 0.596891 3.799092 1.298965

131

4 LANE BRIDGE . 800 mm Th'ICk, 16041 m W'dth , 20 m Leng'th I
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

n
4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

RL 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

B
16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041

VT 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7

Vmax 107.54 140.6 144.56 128.5 123.53 27.2 125.06 106.6 99.16 126.86 41.09 90.47 28.7

Fv 1.761764 2.072883 1.894593 1.473254 1.8213 0.401189 1.639027 1.222341 1.137136 1.454791 0.605838 4.149926 1.31557

!
i

i

4 LANE BRIDGE 800 mm Th'ICk , 17276m W'dth I , 20 m Leng'th
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

n
4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

RL 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

B
17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276

VT 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7 349.7

Vmax 108.14 137.76 137.9 128.26 112.57 43.84 112.57 98.29 90.3 94.0 39.86 76.51 23.26

Fv 1.907989 2.187536 1.94617 1.584086 1.787536 0.69615 I 1.588921 : 1.213939 i 1.114764 1.161202 0.63295 3.779773 1.149099

132

TABLE A.48: Fd VALUES FOR 4 LANES BRIDGE 20m LENGTH

4 LANE BRIDGE 800 mm ThOIek, 14 806 m W'dth I , 20 m Leng'th
Load Cases 12-FLS

n
4

RL
0.7

RL'
1

B
14.806

DT 52.6

Dmax 5.3

Fd 1.491859

4 LANE BRIDGE 800 mm Th'Iek, 16041 m W'dth I , 20 m Leng1th
Load Cases 12-FLS

n
.4

RL
0.7

Rl'
1

B
16.041

DT 52.6

Dmax 5.1

Fd 1.555306

4 LANE BRIDGE . 800 mm Th'Iek, 17276m W'dth I , 20 m Leng1th
Load Cases 12-FLS n 4

RL
0.7

RL'
1

B 17.276

DT 52.6

Dmax 4.8

Fd 1.576517

TABLE A.49: Fm VALUES FOR 4 LANES BRIDGE 24m LENGTH
I , 24 m Leng'th 4 LANE BRIDGE " 960 mm Th"Iek, 14806m W"dth
"

Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

n RL 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

B
14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806

MT
2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9

I 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737

Y 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48

0.0737

0.48

Smax 1431.4 2439.7 3251.7 3934.7 2392.2 2109.8 3208 3888.7 3902.6 3886.3 2093.5 1350.4 1151.4

Fm 0.55 0.8437 0.9995 1.0583 0.8272 0.7296 0.9861 1.0459 1.0497 1.0453 0.7239 1.4529 1.2388

133

24 m Leng'th 4 LANE BRIDGE · I · 960 mm Th"ICk 16041 m W"dth B y Load Cases n RL RL' Mr Smax I
! !

1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041

2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9

0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737

0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48

1395.1 2342.7 3080.2 3681.5 2251.2 1980.2 2998.2 3608.5 3631.3 3609.4 1949.2 1276.4 1094.6

Fm 0.5808 0.8777 1.0258 1.0728 0.8434 I 0.7419 : 0.9985 I 1.0515 . 1.0582 1.0518 0.7303 1.4878 1.2759

I . , 24 m Leng'th 4 LANE BRIDGE · 960 mm Th"ICk, 17276m W"dth .y Load Cases n RL RL' B Mr I Smax

1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7 4 0.7

1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276

2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9 2113.9

0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737 0.0737

0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48 0.48

1367.4 2258.3 2930.9 3464.1 2141.4 1876.8 2822.9 3360.1 3396.1 3378.3 1839 1220.2 1034.1

Fm I 0.613 0.9112 1.0512 1.0872 0.8641 0.7573 1.0125 1.0545 1.0658 1.0602 0.742 1.5318 1.2982

134

TABLE A.50: Fv VALUES FOR 4 LANES BRIDGE 24m LENGTH

4 LANE BRIDGE 960 mm Th'IC k 14.806 m W'dth I , 24 m Leng'th
I

Load Cases
!

n
4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

RL
0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

RL'
1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9

B 14.806 14.806 ' 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806

VT 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6

Vmax 146.15 193.36 200.56 182.1 167.47 81.65 174.7 153.24 147.92 150.88 78.05 105.31 60.27

Fv 1.95354 2.326122 2.144656 1.703944 2.014666 0.98225 1.867592 1.433817 1.384039 1.411735 0.938942 3.941405 2.255707

1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

I

I

1
1

4 LANE BRIDGE . 960 mm Th'ICk 16041 m W'dth I , 24 m Leng'th
I
I

Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

n
141 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

RL
0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

RL'
1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

B
16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041

VT 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6

Vmax 147.11 192.2 197.81 180.0 143.73 88.03 149.31 126.5 117.89 122.98 73.31 95.06 57.1

Fv 2.130391 2.505161 2.291687 1.824988 1.8733 1.147335 1.7298 1.281942 1.195067 1.246665 0.955483 3.854544 2.31329

135

, 24 m Leng'th I 4 LANE BRIDGE , 960 mm Th'Iek , 17276 m W'dth
I

Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

n
4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

RL
0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0,7 0.7 0.9 1
1

B
17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276

VT 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6 395.6

Vmax 147.91 189.67 193.58 176.83 137.27 80.53 141.18 118.47 106.8 112.7 71.62 88.64 56.34

Fv 2.306888 2.66238 2.415346 1.930558 1.926846 1.130392 1.761538 1.293407 1.165562 1.230522 1.005323 3.870942 2.460389

TABLE A.51: Fd VALUES FOR 4 LANES BRIDGE 24m LENGTH
, 960 mm Th' 4 LANE BRIDGE . Iek , 14 806 m W'dth I , 24 m Leng'th

Load Cases 12-FLS

n
4

RL
0.7

RL'
1

B 14.806

Dr
58.96

Dmax 5.4

Fd 1.356045

4 LANE BRIDGE 960 mm Th'Iek, 16041 m W'dth I , 24 m Leng'th
Load Cases 12-FLS

n
4

RL
0.7

RL'
1

B
16.041

Dr
58.96

Dmax 5.1

Fd 1.387536

, 4 LANE BRIDGE . 960 mm Th'Iek, 17276 I , 24 m Leng'th m W'dth

Load Cases 12-FLS

n
4

RL
0.7

RL' 1

B
17.276

Dr
58.96

Dmax 4.9

Fd 1.43576

136

TABLE A.52: Fm VALUES FOR 4 LANES BRIDGE 26m LENGTH

I

4 LANE BRIDGE . 1040mm Th·ICk, 14806 , 26 m Leng'th . m W'dth I y n Rl Rl' B Load Cases I Smax Mr
1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 2415.8 .2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 1335.8 2311.1 3118.3 3813.3 2270.2 2024.5 3080.5 3771.3 3783.2 3767 2010.7 1266.6 1094.9

Fm 0.5271 0.8207 0.9844 1.0533 0.8062 0.7189 0.9724 1.0417 1.045 1.0405 0.714 1.3994 1.2097

I , 26 m Leng1th 4 LANE BRIDGE 1040 mm Th'ICk, 16041 m W'dth

I

Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

n 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

Rl
0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

Rl'
1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

B 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 " 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041

MT
2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8

I
0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937

Y
0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520

Smax 1296.8 2212.1 2947 3596.2 2143 1895.8 2883 3579.1 3599.4 3517.8 1879.7 1226.4 1037.6

Fm 0.5544 0.8511 1.0079 1.0762 0.8245 0.7294 0.986 1.071 1.0771 1.0527 0.7232 1.4679 1.242

137

4 LANE BRIDGE , 1040mm Th'ICk, 17 276 m W'dth , 26 m Leng'th I
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

n 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

RL 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

B 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276

MT 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8 2415.8

I 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937 0.0937

'j

Smax 1266.4 2126.5 2798.6 3348.2 2025.4 1792 2704.7 3254.8 3258.7 3267 1760.4 1140.2 978.35

Fm 0.5831 0.8812 ' 1.0308 1.0791 · 0.8393 · 0.7425 0.9962 1.049 1.0502 1.0529 0.7294 1.4699 1.2612

0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520

TABLE A.53: Fv VALUES FOR 4 LANES BRIDGE 26m LENGTH

4 LANE BRIDGE , 1040mm Th'ICk, 14806 . m W'dth I , 26 m Leng'th
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

n
4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

RL 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

B 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806

VT 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3

Vmax 150.69 204.8 213.96 193.1 188.55 69.7 197.75 173.5 167.59 171.02 66.75 123.36 44.1

Fv 1.927963 2.357888 2.189964 1.729665 2.171118 0.802813 2.024048 1.553681 1.50093 1.531649 0.768614 4.419231 1.580549

138

4 LANE BRIDGE 1040 mm Th'Iek 16041 m W'dth I , 26 m Leng'th
!

Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

n
4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

Rl
0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

RL'
1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

B 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041

[

VT 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3

Vmax 151.79 203.7 211.28 199.1 176.58 70.3 184.13 166.1 156.6 162.46 61.61 124.65 46.4

Fv 2.104026 2.541465 2,342914 1.93177 2.2029 0.877512 2.041844 1.611183 1.519102 1.576349 0.768602 4.837916 1.80243

26 m Leng'th 4 LANE BRIDGE 1040mm ThOIe k, 17276m W"dth I
!

Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

n 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

RL
0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

Rl'
1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

B
17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276

VT 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3 413.3

Vmax 152.74 201.16 206.9 187.86 162.67 68.37 168.44 142.38 129.4 136.4 60.21 105.5 42.21

Fv 2.280198 2.702738 2.471344 1.963144 2.185595 0.918603 2.011662 1.487876 1.352339 1.42528 0.808967 4.409915 1.764384

\

139

TABLE A.54: Fd VALUES FOR 4 LANES BRIDGE 26m LENGTH

26 m Leng1 th 4 LANE BRIDGE 1040mm Th'IC k, 14806m W'dth I Load Cases B Dmax n RL DT RL'
I

Fd 1.302095

12-FLS

4

0.7

1

14.806

62.54

5.5

4 LANE BRIDGE 1040mm Th'ICk, 16041 m W'dth I , 26 rn Leng th
Load Cases 12-FLS

n 4

RL
0.7

RL'
1

B
16.041

DT 62.54

Dmax 5.3

Fd 1.359407

4 LANE BRIDGE 1040mm Th'ICk, 17276m W'dth I , 26 m Leng1th
Load Cases 12-FLS

n 4

RL
0.7

RL' 1

B
17.276

DT 62.54

Dmax 5

Fd 1.381196

TABLE A.55: Fm VALUES FOR 4 LANES BRIDGE 30m LENGTH

4 LANE BRIDGE: 1200rnm Thick, 14,806m Width, 30m Len th Load Cases B Mr
1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 ' 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 1177.5 2084.5 2864.7 3558.9 2053.4 1864.8 2835.8

Fm 0.494 0.7871 0.9615 1.0451 0.7753 0.7041 0.9518

4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806

140

4 LANE BRIDGE 1200mm
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

T~" IIC k,

n 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

RL 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

B 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041

16041 m W"dth 30 m Leng'th I y Smax Mr I
!

Fm 0.4563 0.7041 0.8367 0.8886 0.6829 0.6051 0.8191 0.8726 0.8775 0.8712 0.5986 1.2103 1.0294

3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025,0 3025.0

0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144

0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6

1003.9 1721.3 2300.9 2792.9 1669.3 1479.2 2252.7 2742.5 2757.9 2738.2 1463.2 950.97 808.87

. m W"dth I 4 LANE BRIDGE 1200 mm Th"ICk, 17276 , 30 m Leng'th Mr y Smax I n RL RL' B Load Cases
1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 3025.0 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.144 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 1101.7 1898.3 2552.7 3111.8 1821.3 1639.1 2480.4 3047 3060.4 3042.9 1615.9 1006.4 882.12

Fm 0.5393 0.8363 0.9997 1.0663 0.8024 0.7221 0.9714 1.0441 1.0487 1.0427 0.7119 1.3794 1.2091

141

TABLE A.56: Fv VALUES FOR 4 LANES BRIDGE 30m LENGTH

4 LANE BRIDGE · I , 30 m Leng1th · 1200mm Th'ICk, 14806 m W'dth
Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

n
4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

RL 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

B 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806

VT 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5

Vmax 159.1 225.6 239.02 214.2 213.51 73.2 226.91 198.0 197.71 195.32 79.95 137.96 59.7

Fv 1.904946 2.432031 2.290199 1.796087 2.301493 0.788508 2.174166 1.659597 1.657585 1.637547 0.861807 4.626582 2.001409

4 LANE BRIDGE · 1200mm Th'ICk 16041 m W'dth I , 30 m Leng th
!

Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

n 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

RL 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

B

VT 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5

16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041

Vmax 146.25 202.4 210.59 189.2 182.55 54.3 190.75 163.7 153.7 154.45 64.34 126.41 50.4

Fv 1.897748 2.363485 2.186102 1.718095 2.1319 0.634373 · 1.980146 1.486654 1.39573 1.402906 0.751391 4.592849 1.83191

142

4 LANE BRIDGE 1200mm Th'Iek, 17 276 m W'dth 30 m Leng!th I
!

Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

n 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

Rl
0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

RL'
1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

B 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276

VT 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5 441.5

Vmax 161.58 222.46 232.3 209.37 191.74 55.65 204.06 169.74 154.7 163.6 50.4 122.95 51.08

Fv 2.258094 2.798008 2.597465 2.048174 2.411625 0.699942 2.281405 1.660492 1.512873 1.600231 0.63391 4.811063 1.998773

4
4 4 4

TABLE A.57: Fd VALUES FOR 4 LANES BRIDGE 30m LENGTH

30 m Leng1th 4 LANE BRIDGE , 1200mm Th'Iek, 14806m W'dth I
Load Cases 12-FLS

n
4

Rl
0.7

Rl'
1

..

I

B 14.806

DT 68.09

Dmax 5.7

Fd 1.239451

I 4 LANE BRIDGE . 1200mm Th'Iek 16041 m W'dth , 30 m Leng th
I

Load Cases 12-FLS

n
4

Rl
0.7

Rl'
1

B 16.041

DT 68.09

Dmax 4.2

Fd 0.989458

I , 30 m Leng'th 4 LANE BRIDGE . 1200mm Th'Iek 17276m W'dth
I

Load Cases 12-FLS

n
4

Rl
0.7

RL'
1

B
17.276

DT 68.09

Dmax 5.1

Fd 1.293987

143

TABLE A.58: Fm VALUES FOR 4 LANES BRIDGE 32m LENGTH

32 m Leng'th 4 LANE BRIDGE 1280mm ThOICk 14806 m W'dth I
I I

Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7 -UL;::, 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

II

"L

RL'
1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

4 4 4 4

0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

=f1:f ~:~
4 4 4 4 4 4

B 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806

MT
3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2

0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

1 4.2 14.806 .2
14.806 14. 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 82.2 382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2

Fm 0.1747 0.640 1111.5 0.4743 0.1747 0.7626 0.1747 47.8 0.9381 0.1747 0.640 3473.9 1.0378 0.1747 0.640 1958 0.7521 0.1747 0.640 1791.2 0.688 0.1747 0.640 2722.3 0.9294 0.1747 0.640 3443.7 1.0288 0.1747 0.640 3447.7 1.0299 0.17~3438.1 1.0271 0.174 0 1728.2 0.6638 0.174 0.640 1065.6 1.2734

I

Y

Smax

~~4 o

0.1747

0.640

950.62

1.1359

4 LANE BRIDGE 1280mm Th'ICk 16041 m W'dth 32 m Leng'th I Load Cases n RL RL' B MT I Smax Y
I I

1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

4 4 4 4

8
4 4 4 4 4 4

1 0.9 0.8 0.7 9 .9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 0.7 1 0.7

0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041

3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2

0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747

0.640 0.640 0.640 0.640 0.640 0.640 0.640 0.640

1068.5 2 3194.9 1839.4 1667 2537.6 3147.1

1~0.7847

Fm 0.494

0.9547 1.034 0.7654 0.6937 0.9387 1.0186 0.640 13158.8 1.0224 0.64 1.0163 0.640 .3 0.688 0.640 1021.9 1.323 0.640 894.99 1.1587

144

4 LANE BRIDGE . 1280 mm Th'ICk, 17 276 m W'dth I , 32 m Length
i

i

Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

n
4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

RL 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.1 0.7 0.7 0.7

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

B
17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276 17.276

MT 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2 3382.2

I 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747 0.1747

Y 0.640 0.640 0.640

0.640 0.640 0.640 0.640 0.640 0.640 0.640 0.640 0.640 0.640

Smax 1034,1 1800.3 2441.3 2995.9 1732.4 1570.6 2377.3 2928.8 2947.5 2932.3 1550.3 950.26 840.44

Fm 0.5149 0.8069 0.9725 1.0443 0.7764 0.7039 0.9471 1.0209 1.0274 1.0221 0.6948 1.3249 1.1718

TABLE A.59: Fv VALUES FOR 4 LANES BRIDGE 32m LENGTH
I , 32 m Leng1th 4 LANE BRIDGE . 1280 mm Th'ICk, 14806m W'dth

Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

n
4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

RL 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

RL' 1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

B 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806 14.806

VT 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9

Vmax 158.9 233.1 248.55 247.6 222 80.2 237.49 231.9 224.86 229.46 75.59 141.93 64.7

Fv 1.854778 2.448994 2.321567 2.023198 2.332775 0.842636 2.218261 1.89521 1.837755 1.87535 0.794299 4.639911 2.114816

145

32 m Leng!th 4 LANE BRIDGE . I IC k 16041 m W"dth " 1280mm Th"
I I

Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

n
4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

RL
0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

RL'
1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

B
16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041

VT 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9

Vrnax 162.78 232.6 245.6 220.0 213.56 71.4 276.33 236.3 182.3 189.47 82.78 143.72 63.3

Fv 2.059075 2.648488 . 2.485158 1.94819 I 2.43127 0.81262 I 2.796334 2.092697 1.614283 1.677682 0.942408 5.090335 2.24128

4 LANE BRIDGE . 1280mm Th'ICk, 17.276 m W'dth 32 m Leng1th I
I

Load Cases 1-ULS 2-ULS 3-ULS 4-ULS 5-ULS 6-ULS 7-ULS 8-ULS 9-ULS 10-ULS 11-ULS 12-FLS 13-FLS

n 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

RL
0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7

RL'
1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1 1

B
16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041 16.041

VT 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9 452.9

Vrnax 164.06 230.41 242.4 217.96 202.04 62.53 214.03 179.81 164.6 173.8 78.3 128.21 56.09

Fv 2.075266 2.6231 2.452877 1.929949 2.300122 0.711872 2.165887 1.592146 1.457379 1.538842 0.891861 4.540995 1.986619

146

TABLE A.SO: Fd VALUES FOR 4 LANES BRIDGE 32m LENGTH

32 m Leng'th 4 LANE BRIDGE . 1280 mm Th"Iek 14806m W"dth I
I I

Load Cases 12-FLS

n
4

RL
0.7

RL'
1

B
15

DT 70.31

Dmax 5.7

Fd 1.200316

4 LANE BRIDGE 1280 mm Th"Iek 16041 m W'dth I , 32 m Leng'th
I

Load Cases 12-FLS

n
4

RL
0.7

RL'
1

B
16.041

DT 70.31

Dmax 5,5

Fd 1.254807

32 m Leng'th I 4 LANE BRIDGE 1280 mm Th"Iek, 17276m W'dth
I

Load Cases 12-FLS

n
4

RL
0.7

RL' 1

B
17.276

DT 70.31

Dmax 5.2

Fd 1.277702

147

2 LANE BRIDGE
BRIDGE SPAN
(m)

Fm-ULS

Fm-FLS FEA CHBDC

Fv-ULS FEA CHBDC

Fv-FLS FEA CHBDC

Fd-FLS FEA CHBDC

LANE

Thickness
(m)

Width
(m)

FEA

CHBDC

16 16 16

2 2 2

0.650 0.650 0.650

7.396 8.631 9.866

1.07 1.11 1.13

1.05 1.05 1.18

1.21 1.25 1.27

1.05 1.21 1.38

1.13 1.35 1.57

1.08 1.26 1.44

1.71 1.82 1.62

1.4 1.63 1.86

1.14 1.18 1.16

1.05
·

1.21 1.38

20 20 '20

2 2 2

0.800 0.800 0.800

7.396 8.631 9.866

1.05 1.07 1.09

1.05 1.05 1.17

1.14 1.18 1.19

1.05 1.19 1.37

1.13 1.36 1.6

1.05 1.21 1.37

1.79 1.99 1.91

1.27 1.48 1.7

1.09 1.12 1.13

1.05 1.19 1.37

i

I

I

24 24 24

2 2 2

0.960 0.960 0.960

7.396 8.631 9.866

1.05 1.06 1.08

1.05 1.05 1.17

1.12 1.15 1.21

1.05 1.19 1.36

1.38 1.66 1.93

1.05 1.16 1.32

1.95 2.03 2.81

1.17 1.36 1.56

1.07 1.08 1.13

1.05 1.19 1.36

26 26 26

2 2 2

1.040 1.040 1.040

7.396 8.631 9.866

1.04 1.06 1.08

1.05 1.05 1.17

1.11 1.13 1.15

1.05 1.19 1.36

1.34 1.62 1.9

1.05 1.14 1.31

2.08 2.28 2.41

1.12 1.31 1.49

1.07 1.08 1.09

1.05 1.19 1.36

30 30 30

2 2 2

1.200 1.200 1.200

7.396 8.631 9.866

1.04 1.05 1.06

1.05 1.05 1.17

1.09 1.11 1.12

1.05 1.18 1.36

1.32 1.61 1.88

1.05 1.1 1.26

2.09 2.36 2.55

1.05 1.21 1.38

1.05 1.06 1.07

1.05 1.18 1.36

32 32 32

2 2 2

1.280 1.280 1.280

7.396 8.631 9.866

1.02 1.03 1.04

1.05 1.05 1.17

1.06 1.08 1.09

1.05 1.18 1.35

1.31 1.6 1.87

1.05 1.08 1.24

2.07 2.35 2.56

1.05 1.17 1.34

1.04 1.05 1.06

1.05 1.18 1.35

TABLE A.61

148

3 LANE BRIDGE
3LANE Factors from FEA and CHBDC Code
BRIDGE SPAN (m) Fm-ULS Fm-FlS Fv-ULS Fv-FlS Fd-FLS

I ThickLANE· ness (m)

Width
(m)

FEA

I CHBDC
1.05 1.05 1.15

FEA

CHBDC

FEA

CHBDC

FEA

CHBDC

FEA

I CHBDC
1.29 1.44 1.58

16
i
I

3 3 3

0.650 0.650 0.650

11.101 12.336 13.571

1.07 1.11 1.13

1.48 1.54 1.55

1.29 1.44 1.58

1.69 1.59 1.73

1.13 1.33 1.46

2.77 2.77 2.49

1.92 2.14 2.35

1.39 1.46 1.42

16 16

I I I

20 20 20

3 3 3

0.800 0.800 0.800

11.101 12.336 13.571

1.05 1.07 1.1

1.05 1.05 1.14

1.38 1.39 1.4

1.22 1.36 1.49

1.56 1.75 1.91

1.07 1.26 1.39

3.21 3.08 2.86

1.73 1.93 2.12

1.31 1.32 1.32

1.22 1.36 1.49

2424 24

3 3 3

0.960 0.960 0.960

11.101 12.336 13.571

1.05 1.08 1.09

1.05 1.05 1.13

1.3 1.31 1.32

1.17 1.31 1.44

1.87 2.11 2.31

1.03 1.21 1.32

3.74 3.18 2.91

1.57 1.75 1.92

1.22 1.23 1.24

1.17 1.31 1.44

1
I

26 26 26

3 3 3

1.040 1.040 1.040

11.101 12.336 13.571

1.04 1.07 1.08

1.05 1.05 1.12

1.24 1.27 1.28

1.16 1.29 1.42

1.88 2.09 2.33

1.02 1.18 1.31

3.46 3.57 3.31

1.51 1.68 1.84

1.17 1.2 1.22

1.16 1.29 1.42

l

I

I I
I

1

30 30 30

3 3 3

1.200 1.200 1.200

11.101 12.336 13.571

1.04 1.05 1.07

1.05 1.05 1.12

1.19 1.22 1.23

1.14 1.26 1.39

1.91 2.19 2.45

0.978 1.14 1.26

3.52 3.73 3.59

1.38 1.54 1.69

1.12 1.16 1.16

1.14 1.26 1.39

,

I

1

1

32 32 32

3 3 3

1.280 1.280 1.280

11.101 12.336 13.571

1.02 1.04 1.04

1.05 1.05 1.12

1.16 1.18 1.19

1.12 1.25 1.37

1.92 2.17 2.4

0.962 1.12 1.23

3.51 3.73 3.64

1.33 1.48 1.63

1.12 1.14 1.16

1.12 1.25 1.37

1

1

TABLEA.S2

1

149

4 LANE BRIDGE
4LANE Factors from FEA and CHBDC Code
BRIDGE SPAN (m) LANE Fm-ULS Fm-FLS FEA CHBDC Fv-ULS FEA CHBDC Fv-FLS CHBDC Fd-FLS FEA CHBDC
I

Thickness
(m)

Width
(m)

FEA

CHBDC

FEA

16 16 16

4 4 4

0.650 0.650 0.650

14.806 16.041 17.276

1.14 1.12 1.15

1.05 1.05 1.14

1.78 1.91 1.9

1.61 1.74 1.87

1.73 1.85 1.95

1.21 1.31 1.41

3.38 3.68 3.12

2.54 2.74 2.95

1.65 1.75 1.77

1 £:1

1.87

20 20 20

4 4 4

0.800 0.800 0.800

14.806 16.041 17.276

1.15

1.05

1.57 1.67

1.48 1.61 1.73

2 2.07 2.18

1.14 1.23 1.33

3.79 4.14 3.77

2.31 2.51 2.69

1.49 1.55 1.57
1 fi1

~.~-

1.67

1.73

24 24 24

4 4 4

0.960 0.960 0.960

14.806 16.041 17.276

1.05 1.07 1.08

1.05 1.05 1.1

1.45 1.48 1.53

1.41 1.52 1.64

2.32 2.51 2.66

1.09 1.18 1.27

3.94
., O~

2.13
I

1.35 1.38 1.44

1.41 1.52 1.64

2.31

3.871 2.48

"",.
"",.

1.040

14.806 16.041 17.276

1.05 1.07 1.08

1.05 1.05 1.09

1.4 1.46 1.47

1.38 1.49 1.61

2.35 2.
L.I

.04 2.21 1.25 4.41 2.38

1.31 1.35 1.38

1.38 1.49 1.61

26

30 30 30

4 4 4

1.200 1.200 1.200

11.101 12.336 13.571

1.04 0.88 1.06

1.05 1.05 1.09

1.32 1.21 1.37

1.34 1.45 1.56

2.43 2.36 2.79

1.03 1.12 1.2

4.62 4.59 4.81

1.89 2.05 2.21

1.24 0.98 1.29

1.34 1.45 1.56

32 32 32

4 4 4

1.280 1.280 1.280

14.806 16.041 17.276

1.04 1.03 1.04

1.05

1.27 1.32 1.32

1.32 1.43 1.54

2.44

1.01

4.63 5.09 4.54

1.83 1.98 2.13

1.2 1.25 1.27

1.32 1.43 1.54

I

1.05

2.64 . 1.09 2.62 1.09

TABLE A.63

150

2 LANE BRIDGE
2LANE- Fadors from FEA and CHBDC Code
tsHIIJ<;;t:.
SPAN
I"m-ULS I"m-t-LS /"V-UL!:; /"V-I"LS I"d·I"LS

Thickn
LANE

(ml

e:ss
1m)

Width
em)

FEA

CHBDC
Exterior Interior

<.:HI:UJ<.:
FEA FEA

<':H tux.;

CHBOC
1.08 1.26 1.44

FEA
1.71 1.82 1.62

CHBDC
1.4 1.63
--

fEA
1.14 1.18 1.16

Exterior Interior

t::xtenor Interior

16 16 16

2 2 2

0.650 0.650 0.650

7.396 8.631 9.866

1.07 1.11 1.13

1.05 1.05 1.18

1.05 1.05 1.18

1.21 1.25 1.27

1.05 1.16 1.33

1.05 1.21 1.38

1.13 1.35 1.57

1.05 1.16 1.33

1.05 1.21 1.38

1.86

20 20 20

2 2 2

0.800 0.800 0.800

7.396 8.631 9.866

1.05 1.07 1.09

1.05 1.05 1.17

1.05 1.05 1.16

1.14 1.18 1.19

1.05 1.14 1.31

1.05 1.19 1.37

1.13 1.36 1.6

1.05 1.21 1.37

1.79 1.99 1.91

1.27 1.48 1.7

1.09 1.12 1.13

1.05 1.14 1.31

1.05 1.19 1.37

..... VI .....

o:J

~

24 24 24

2 2 2

0.950 0.960 0.960

7.396 8.631 9.866

1.05 1.06 1.08

1.05 1.05 1.17

1.05 1.05 1.16

1.12 1.15 1.21

1.05 1.13 1.29

1.05 1.19 1.36

1.38 1.66 1.93

1.05 1.15 1.32

1.95 2.03 2.81

1.17 1.36 1.56

1.07 1.08 1.13

1.05 1.13 1.29

1.05 1.19 1.36

m
l>

r-

en
~

-

26 26 26

2 2 2

1.040 1.040 1.040

7.396 8.631 9.866

1.04 1.06 1.08

1.05 1.05 1.17

1.05 1.05 1.16

1.11 1.13 1.15

1.05 1.13 1.28

1.05 1.19 1.36

1.34 1.62 1.9

1.05 1.14 1.31

2.08 2.28 2.41

1.12 1.31 1.49

1.07 1.08 1.09

1.05 1.13 1.28

1.05 1.19 1.36

30 30 30

2 2 2

1.200 1.200 1.200

7.396 8.631 9.866

1.04 1.05 1.06

1.05 1.05 1.17

1.05 1.05 1.15

1.09 1.11 1.12

1.05 1.12 1.27

1.05 1.18 1.36

1.32 1.61 1.88

1.05 1.1 1.26

2.09 2.36 2.55

1.05 1.21 1.38

1.05 1.06 1.07

1.05 1.12 1.27

1.05 1.18 1.36

32 32 32

2 2 2

1.280 1.280 1.280

7.396 8.631 9.866

1.02 1.03 1.04

1.05 1.05 1.17

1.05 1.05 1.15

1.06 1.08 1.09

1.05 1.11 1.27

1.05 1.18 1.35

1.31 1.6 1.87

1.05 1.08 1.24

2.07 2.35 2.56

1.05 1.17 1.34

1.04 1.05 1.06

1.05 1.11 1.27

1.05 1.18 1.35

3 LANE BRIDGE
3LANE Factors from FEA and CHBDC Code
BRIO:;E
SPAN (rr)

Fm-ULS
Widh (ml CHB:>C Exterior Interior

Fm-FLS
CHBO:

Fv-ULS FEA

Fv-FLS FEA FEA

Fd-FLS
CHBOC

L~NE

Thickn -ess (m)

FEA

FEA
Exterior Irterior

CHBOC

CHBOC

Exterior Interior

16 16 16 20 20 20

3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
3

0.650 0.650 0.650 0.800 0.800

11.1('1 12.326 13.571 11.1('1 13.571

1.07 1.1 1.13 1.05 1.07 1.1 1.05 1.08 1.()9

1.05 1.05 1.15 1.05 1.05 1.13 1.05 1.05 1.12 1.05 1.05 1.12 1.05 1.05 1.12 1.05 1.05 1.12

1.05 1.05 1.15 1.05 1.05 1.14 1.05 1.05 1.13 1.05 1.05 1.12 1.05 1.05 1.12 1.05 1.05 1.13

1.48 1.54 1.55 1.3& 1.39 1.4 1.3 1.31 1.32 1.24 1.27 1.28
1.1~

1.29

1.26 1.41 1.55 1.21 1.34 1.47 1.17 1.29 1.43 1.15 1.28 1.41 1.13 1.26 1.39 1.12 1.25 1.37

1.69 1.59 1.73 1.56 1.75 1.91 1.87 2.11 2.31 1.8& 2.09 2.33 1.92 2.19 2.45 1.92 2.17 2.4

1.13 1.33 1.46 1.07 1.26 1.39 1.03 1.21 1.32 1.02 1.18 1.31 0.918 1.141.26 0.962 1.12 1.23

1M
1.58 1.22 136

2.n 2.n
2.49 3.21 3.08 2.86 3.74 3.18 2.91 3.46 3.57 3.31 3.52 3.73 3.59 3.5 3.73 3.64

1.92 2.14 2.35 1.73 1.93 2.12 1.57 1.75 1.92 1.51 1.68 1.84 1.38 1.54 1.69 1.33 1.48 1.63

1.39 1.46 1.42 1.31 1.32 1.32 1.22 1.23 1.24 1.17 1.2 1.22 1.12 1.16 1.16 1.12 1.14 1.16

1.~9

1.26 1.41 1.55 1.21 1.34 1.47 1.17 1.29 1.43 1.15 1.28 1.41 1.13 1.26 1.39 1.12 1.25 1.37
~""-----

1.44
1..~8

1.u
1.36 1.49 1.17 1.:n 1.44 1.16
1.~9

0.800 12.336

1A9
1.17 131

....
U1

m
m
r-

;;!
'?' en

24 24 24 26 26 26

0.960 11.1()1 0.960 12.336 0.960 13.571 1.040 11.1()1 1.040 12.336 1.040 13.571 1.200 11.101 1.200 12.326 1.200 13.571 1.280 11.101

N

1M
1.16 1.29

<II

1.·)4
V)7

1:)8 1.·)4 1.05 1.'l7 1.02 1.04 1.04

1A2
1.14 1.26 1.27 1.12 1.25 1.37

1.42 1.14
1.~6

30
30 30 32 32 32

3
3 3 3 3 3

1.22 1.21 1.16 1.13 1.19

1.~7

1.12

1.280 12.326 1.280 13.571

1.a
1.37
---

4 LANE BRIDGE
4LANE Factors from FEA and CHBDC Code
BRIDGE

Fm-ULS
Width (ml

Fm-FLS FEA

Fv-ULS
FEA

Fv-FLS
FEA

Fd-FLS

SPAN (m)

Thickn
L.ANE
~ss

FEA
1.14 1.12 1.15 1.15 1.08 1.12
1.05

CHBDe
Exterior Interior

CHBDC
Exterior Interior

CHBDe
1.21 1.31 1.41 1.14 1.23 1.33 1.09 1.18

CHBDC
2.54 2.74 2.95 2.31 2.51 2.69 2.13 2.31

CHBDe
FEA xterior Interior

(m)

16 16 16 20 20 20

4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

0.650 14.8()6 0.650 16.041 0.650 17.276 0.800 14.8()6 0.800 16.041 0.800 17.276 0.960 14.806 0.960 16.041

1.05 1.05 1.14 1.05 1.05 1.11 1.05 1.05

1.05 1.05 1.11 1.05 1.05 1.09 1.05 1.05

1.78 1.91 1.9 1.57 1.61 1.61 1.45 1.48

1.6.1 1.74 1.87 1.48 1.61 1.73 1.41 1.52

1.5 1.63 1.75 1.41 1.52 1.M 1.35 1.46

1.73 1.85 1.95 2 2.07 2.18 2.32 2.51

3.38 3.68 3.12 3.19 4.14 3.71 3.94 3.85

1.65 1.75 1.77 1.49 1.55 1.57 1.35 1.38

1.61 1.74 1.87 1,48 1.61 1.13 1.41 1.52

1.5 1.63 1.75 1.41 1.52
1.64-

I-l'

>
rCD

24 24

1.35 1.461.S7 1.33 1.44 1.55 1.291.41 1.51 1.28 1.391.49

VI W

m
l>

1.07

en en

24
26 26 26 30 30 30

4
4 4 4 4

0.900 17.276
1.040 14.8()6 1.040 16.041 1.040 17.276

1.08
1.05 1.07 1.08 1.04 0.88 1.06

1.1
1.05 1.05 1.09 1.05 1.05 1.09

1.08
1.05 1.05 1.08 1.05 1.05 1.07 1.05 1.05 1.07

1.53
1.4 1.46 1.41 1.32 1.21 1.37 1.27 1.32 1.32

1.64
1.38 1.49 1.61 1.34 1.45 1.56

1.57
1.33 1.44 1.55

2.66
2.35 2.54 2.7 2.43 2.36 2.19

1.27
1.06 1.15 1.25 1.03 1.12 1.2 1.01 1.09 1.09

3.87
4.41 4.83 4.4 4.62 4.59 4.81 4.63 5.09 4.54

2.48
2.04 2.21 2.38 1.89 2.05 2.21 1.83 1.98 2.13

1.44
1.31 1.35 1.38 1.24 0..98 1.29 1.2 1.25 1.27

1.64
1.38 1.49 1.61

1.200 14.806 1.200 16.041 1.200 17.216 1.280 14.806 1.280 16.041

1.29 1.41 1.51 1.28 1.39 1.49

1.34 1.45 1.56

4
4 4 4

32 32 32

1.04 1.03

1.05 1.05 1.08

1.32 1.43 1.54

2.44 2.64 2.62

1.32 1.43 1.54

4

, 1.280 17.276 .. 1.04


