Running  head:  SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE                           Swipe-Technology's  Influence  in  Born  Digital  Culture:     Redesigning  Pedagogy  in  Early  Childhood  Education   Ashley  Tencer   Ryerson  University          

1  

  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE  

   2  

Table  of  Contents  
Abstract  .......................................................................................................................................  3   Chapter  1:  Establishing  the  Research  ...............................................................................  4  
1.1  Theoretical  Framework  ...............................................................................................................  4   1.2  Definitions  and  Terminology  .....................................................................................................  5   1.3  Methodology  ..................................................................................................................................  6   1.4  Limitations  of  the  Study  ..............................................................................................................  7  

Chapter  2:  Background  of  the  Study   ..................................................................................  8  
2.1  Establishing  Generational  Gaps  .................................................................................................  8   2.2  Technology's  Influence  on  Generations  ...................................................................................  9   2.3  Investigations  in  the  Digital  Age  ..............................................................................................   14   2.4  Swipe-Technologies  ...................................................................................................................   16  

Chapter  3:  Presentation  and  Analysis  of  the  Data  .....................................................  18  
3.1  Theories  of  Childhood  Development  ......................................................................................   18   3.2  Linking  Pre-Literate  Exposure  to  Literacy  ............................................................................   19   3.3  Redesigning  Pedagogy  in  Early  Childhood  Education  ........................................................   22  

Chapter  4:  Conclusion  .........................................................................................................  26  
4.1  Findings  ........................................................................................................................................   26   4.2  Evaluations  ...................................................................................................................................   27  

References  ................................................................................................................................  30           

  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE  

   3  

Abstract  
This  essay  examines  the  ways  in  which  technology  defines  and  divides   generations  and  considers  how  swipe-technology  (touch-screen  technologies)  shape   emerging  learning  styles.  Specifically,  it  focuses  on  the  research  currently  being   investigated  on  how  forms  of  digital  literacy  represent  a  radical  shift,  away  from   traditional  forms  of  literacy  (Prensky,  2001a,  b;  Frand,  2000;  Prensky,  2001b;   Tapscott,  1997;  Franco,  2013;  Plowman  &  McPake,  2013;  Infante,  2014;  Passey,   2014)  and  evaluates  various  claims  made  about  the  social  consequences  of  such   change.  This  paper  emphasizes  the  impact  that  swipe-technology  has  on  young   children  during  early  stages  of  their  development  and  seeks  to  answer  the  following   question:  what  are  the  consequences  of  digital  language  becoming  the  Born  Digital's   (Franco,  2013)  primary  form  of  expression?  The  paper  draws  on  some  traditional   theories  such  as  those  of  Mannheim  (Kecskemeti,  1952)  and  Vygotsky  (1929,  1962,   1978)  to  provide  a  broader  contextualization.  In  so  doing,  it  hopes  to  contribute  to   the  dialogue  about  how  educational  institutions  should  be  redesigned  to   accommodate  new  media  technologies.                     

  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE  

   4  

Chapter  1:  Establishing  the  Research  
1.1  Theoretical  Framework  
This  essay  builds  on  the  works  of  several  popular  voices  in  the  field  of  media   studies  including  author  Marc  Prensky,  who  introduced  the  term  `Digital  Natives'  to   the  discussion  about  society's  adaptation  to  new  technology,  and  business  executive   Don  Tapscott  whose  consulting  firm  has  conducted  extensive  research  into  the   impact  of  generational  differences  on  institutions  and  markets  as  a  result  of   technological  advancements.  It  contextualizes  their  claims  within  a  broader   sociological  context  that  includes  Mannheim's  theory  of  `generational  location',   Morrisett's  `digital  divide',  and  Cohen's  notion  of  moral  panic.     The  influence  of  modern-day  technology  has  a  direct  impact  on  children's   learning  and  preschool  education.  The  substance  of  this  essay  is  founded  on  the   theories  of  developmental  psychologist  Lev  Semenovich  Vygotsky.  His  zone  of   proximal  development  theory,  which  relates  to  children's  cognitive  development,  is   applied  to  modern  technologies  in  present  day.  Vygotsky's  schemes  are  some  of  the   key  roots  in  analyzing  the  data  relative  to  swipe-technology.     The  accumulated  data  from  diverse  fields  is  applied  to  early  childhood   experiences  with  swipe-technology  in  the  digital  age.  Some  preliminary  discussion   has  been  debated  on  this  matter  as  research  has  been  contradictory,  suggesting  that   early  exposure  to  swipe-technology  can  impact  toddlers  both  positively  and   negatively.  A  thorough  understanding  of  transformative  learning  styles  and  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE   cognitive  development  stimulation  in  young,  digitized  children,  can  help  identify   how  this  influences  early  childhood  education.    

   5  

1.2  Definitions  and  Terminology  
There  are  several  terms  used  in  this  essay  that  require  explanation.  The  word   `generation'  signifies  "all  people  born  around  the  same  time  period"  (Editors  of  The   American  Heritage  Dictionary,  2011).  To  discuss  the  generational  differences  (also   known  as  generation  gaps)  that  exist  between  children  and  their  caregivers,  some   specific  terminology  will  be  employed.  The  term  `Net  Generation'  shall  refer  to  the   generational  cohort  that  has  collectively  developed  within  a  computer-based   technological  environment  (Sandarsa  &  Morrisona,  2007).  A  `Digital  Native'  shall   refer  to  a  child  brought  up  within  a  complete  digitized  and  media-saturated  world,   while  a  `Digital  Immigrant'  shall  refer  to  those  who  have  a  foreign  relationship  with   technology  (Prensky,  2001a).  In  recent  years,  the  term  `Born  Digital'  has  been  used   to  refer  to  a  person  that  speaks  `digital'  as  a  first  language  (Franco,  2013).     Many  of  what  these  terms  indicate  pertain  to  diverse  learning  styles  existing   within  today's  educational  institutions.  It  is  important  to  differentiate  between  what   `learning'  and  the  `education  system'  signify.  The  Glossary  of  Education  Reform   defines  it  this  way,  "...an  education  system  comprises  everything  that  goes  into   educating  public-school  students  at  the  federal,  state,  or  community  levels"  (2013,   para.  2).  Contributing  elements  include  but  are  not  limited  to,  teaching  resources   and  learning  materials  (Glossary  of  Education  Reform,  2013).  The  act  of  learning   however,  extends  beyond  the  education  system  and  is  geographically  limitless  in   that  learning  can  be  absorbed  outside  of  a  formal  education  system.      

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE  

   6  

Lastly,  the  expression  of  `swipe-technology'  indicates  a  touch-screen  device,   which  may  include  multi-touch  options.  Touch-screen  is  defined  as  "a  touch- sensitive  display  screen  on  a  computer  or  other  electronic  device:  touching  different   portions  of  the  screen  with  a  finger  or  stylus  will  cause  the  device  to  take  actions   determined  by  a  computer  program"  (Dictionary.com  Unabridged,  2016).  Multi- touch  is  technology  that  enables  a  surface  to  identify  multiple  points  of  contact   (Computer  Desktop  Encyclopedia,  1981-2015).  Swipe-technology  and  touch-screen   technology  are  used  interchangeably  in  this  essay.    

1.3  Methodology  
A  majority  of  my  research  was  conducted  using  Ryerson  University  Library   and  Archives  online  database  to  explore  whether  the  traditional  language  will  be   superseded  by  digital  as  the  Born  Digitals'  primary  form  of  communication.  Content   types  include  scholarly  and  peer-reviewed  articles,  journals,  published  papers,   books,  and  eBooks.  The  search  engine  led  me  to  appropriate  sources  within  the   most  suitable  fields  of  study;  sociology,  literacy,  media  theory,  and  early  childhood   education.  Both  hard-copy  and  digital  resources  employed,  applied  qualitative  and   quantitative  research  methodologies  in  their  studies,  including  observations,  case   studies,  surveys,  and  scholarly  research.  The  information  collected  for  this  paper   draws  on  several  important  themes,  such  as,  generational  differences,  learning   styles,  and  theories  of  childhood  development.      

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE  

   7  

1.4  Limitations  of  the  Study  
The  criteria  for  the  children  examined  in  this  paper  are  restricted  to  ages  six   and  younger.  This  study  does  not  take  into  consideration  how  children  of  different   genders  may  be  affected  independently.  As  well,  it  does  not  address  the  role   socioeconomic  status  plays  in  generations  and  cultures  in  accordance  with  a   digitized  lifestyle.  Scholarly  data  demonstrates  that  swipe-technology's  patterns  and   usage  during  a  child's  maturation  varies  within  social  class  and  economic  status.   Racial  and  cultural  differences,  as  well  as  diverse  community  types  (i.e.  suburban,   rural  and  urban)  are  not  accounted  for  in  this  essay.  Research  is  limited  to  middle   and  upper-class  families,  based  on  the  presumption  that  technology  is  financially   accessible  and  granted.       

  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE  

   8  

Chapter  2:  Background  of  the  Study  
2.1  Establishing  Generational  Gaps  
Generational  gaps  occur  when  something  causes  younger  generations  (i.e.   children)  to  experience  a  conflict  of  interest  with  older  generations  (i.e.  parents).  In   Karl  Mannheim's  1923  essay  The  Problem  of  Generations,  he  suggests  that   generation  gaps  are  a  result  of  different  experiences  of  historical  events   (Kecskemeti,  1952).  Mannheim  introduced  the  concept  of  `generational  location',   the  shaping  of  individuals  through  collective  experiences,  in  which  he  connects  both   time  and  setting  to  that  of  one's  age  bracket.  For  instance,  World  War  One  shaped   many  individuals  who  experienced  the  war,  ultimately  differentiating  them  from   generations  who  did  not.  Generational  location  expands  the  gap  by  creating   contrasting  beliefs,  politics,  and  values  between  generations.  Mannheim's  pioneered   work  has  identified  this  key  phenomenon  and  led  to  subsequent  research  on   generational  differences.     The  generational  difference  in  question  has  been  called  the  `digital  divide',  a   term  coined  by  Lloyd  Morrisett  in  the  mid  to  late  1990s,  which  refers  to  a  separation   between  the  information-haves  and  have-nots  (Hoffman,  Novak,  &  Schlosser,  2001).   Earlier,  Stanley  Cohen  (1972)  identified  reasons  for  the  growing  generational  gap   resulting  from  the  introduction  of  technology.  He  applied  the  term  `moral  panic'  to   describe  a  threat  to  society's  morals  and  standards  that  arise  when  a  particular   group  gains  exposure  in  the  public  eye.  Although  Morrisett's  term  `digital  divide'   had  not  yet  been  established  in  the  1970's,  Cohen's  notion  of  moral  panic  parallels  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE   with  the  digital  divide  since  he  distinguishes  differences  between  generations  that   are  foreign  to  technology  and  the  digital  youth  at  the  time.     American  writer  and  speaker  Marc  Prensky  (2001a,  b),  studied  the  way   students  learn  within  formal  education  institutions.  He  suggested  that  people  born  

   9  

between  1980  and  1994  are  claimed  to  be  Digital  Natives,  owing  to  the  evolution  of   computers,  video  games,  and  the  Internet  during  this  time  period.  Digital   Immigrants  are  therefore  those  who  were  born  prior  to  1980.  Prensky's  notion  is   supported  by  Mannheim's  theory  in  that  the  Digital  Native  cohort  experienced  a   collective  technological  boom,  thereby  creating  a  greater  generational  gap.    

2.2  Technology's  Influence  on  Generations  
The  idea  of  Digital  Natives  and  Digital  Immigrants  was  initially  developed  by   Prensky  in  his  2001  article  Digital  Natives,  Digital  Immigrants,  in  which  he   concludes  that  American  educators  at  the  time  were  unable  to  successfully  fulfill   digitized  students'  learning  requirements.  Although,  Prensky's  research  provides  no   description  of  new  learning  requirements.  Prensky  argues  that  new  generations  of   learners  are  growing  up  in  an  environment  dominated  by  information  and   communication  technologies  [ICTs].  Children  who  grow  up  in  technology-rich   cultures  gain  new  and  stimulating  perspectives,  allowing  the  Digital  Natives  to  think   and  act  differently  than  the  Digital  Immigrants.  Prensky  makes  many  references  to   differentiate  between  traditional  and  digital  learning  methodologies.  For  example,   he  claims  that  a  traditional  style  of  learning  focuses  on  a  single-minded  approach,   whereas  a  digital  style  of  learning  adopts  a  multimodal  technique  in  which  Digital   Natives  simultaneously  interact  with  many  media  forms.  Prensky  (2001a)  further  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE  

   10  

supports  his  assertion  by  comparing  educators'  perspectives  with  that  of  a  Digital   Native's.  He  assumes  the  role  of  a  Digital  Native  when  he  says,  "They  wanted  a  slow   academic  pace,  we  wanted  speed  and  urgency...They  wanted  written  instructions;   we  wanted  computer  movies"  (p.  5).  Prensky's  argument  however,  is  not  entirely   persuasive  because  he  fails  to  identify  Digital  Natives'  learning  requirements  and  it   becomes  unclear  what  changes  need  to  be  put  into  action  (if  any)  to  meet   curriculum  objectives.     Modernized  students  are  active  experiential  learners  who  depend  heavily  on   ICTs  for  retrieving  data  and  interacting  with  others  through  various  digital   gateways  (Frand,  2000;  Prensky,  2001b;  Tapscott,  1997).  As  a  result,  the  Digital   Immigrants,  who  lack  familiarity  with  technology,  face  a  growing  gap  between  their   learning  styles  and  those  of  Digital  Natives  (Arafeh,  Levin,  Rainie,  &  Lenhart,  2002;   Prensky,  2005)   Of  central  importance  to  the  examination  of  this  generational  gap  is  the  effect   of  Internet  access.  David  Buckingham  applies  Morrisett's  term  `digital  divide'  to   describe  the  effect  that  new  technologies  (i.e.  Internet)  have  in  widening  the  gap   between  children's  digitally  enhanced  lives  outside  of  school  and  their  experiences   within  the  education  system  (Ito   et  al.,  2010).  In  the  book  The  Digital  Disconnect:   The  Widening  Gap  Between  Internet  Savvy  Students  and  Their  Schools,  the  Internet  is   particular  accused  of  widening  the  generational  gap  between  Internet-savvy   students  and  inexperienced  Digital  Immigrants,  ultimately  affecting  students'  ability   to  learn  from  their  instructors  (Arafeh  et  al.,  2002).    

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE   Socioeconomic  status  also  contributes  to  the  digital  divide  by  creating  

   11  

limitations  and  barriers  to  technology  for  households  in  the  lower  income  bracket   (Ito   et  al.,  2010).  Statistics  show  that  "70  percent  of  teens  living  in  households  with   an  income  of  less  than  $30,000  per  year  had  Internet  access  in  the  home,  whereas   99  percent  of  teens  living  in  households  with  earnings  of  $75,000  per  year  or  more   had  such  access"  (Ito   et  al.,  2010,  p.  34).  Although  the  youth  that  falls  into  the  lower   class  are  economically  restricted,  they  can  seek  alternative  resources  for  accessing   technology  by  utilizing  external  locations,  such  as  schools  and  libraries  (Ito   et  al.,   2010).   In  Don  Tapscott's  1997  book  Growing  up  Digital:  The  Rise  of  the  Net   Generation,  he  coins  the  term  `Net  Generation',  in  order  to  define  the  social  and   business  impacts  of  a  new  digital  generation.  He  emphasizes  a  significant   transformation  in  generations  that  are  surrounded  by  digital  media  (computers  and   the  Internet)  versus  those  that  are  not  (1997).  His  later  book,  Growing  up  Digital:   How  the  Net  Generation  Is  Changing  Your  World,  provides  a  date  range  for  the  Net   Generation,  in  which  he  expresses  that  the  Net  Generation  was  born  between  1977   and  1997  (2009).  Tapscott  (1997)  describes  this  generation  as  "exceptionally   curious,  self-reliant,  contrarian,  smart,  focused,  able  to  adapt,  high  in  self-esteem,   and  has  a  global  orientation"  (p.  2).  It  is  important  to  note  that  he  draws  upon  the   way  in  which  the  latest  generation  gathers,  accepts,  and  retains  information.   Tapscott  provides  validation  to  his  claim  by  demonstrating  children's  fundamental   preference  for  interactive  media  (such  as  the  Internet),  rather  than  broadcasting   media  (such  as  television).  He  examines  television  analytics  and  reveals  a  decline  in  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE  

   12  

television  viewers  due  to  its  restricted  top-down  hierarchical  distribution  system.   This  differs  from  the  more  preferred  interactive  media,  which  offers  its  users   greater  power  and  control.  Tapscott  (1997)  believes  that  these  unique   characteristics  differentiate  the  Net  Generations'  attitudes  and  learning  approaches   from  those  of  past  generations.  However,  Tapscott  fails  to  consider  generational   location  when  classifying  the  Net  Generation  date  range  (1977-1997),  which  would   have  helped  to  explain  the  Net  Generation  experience  and  a  widening  of  the   technological  generational  gap.  Furthermore,  Tapscott  does  not  account  for  the   public  release  of  the  Internet  in  1991.  Given  the  Internet's  revolutionary  impact,  it  is   plausible  that  those  born  at  the  beginning  of  his  grouping  would  experience  a  much   different  technological  upbringing  versus  those  born  at  the  end.  Tapscott  overlooks   these  differences  in  his  investigation.     Despite  differences  in  terminology,  theorists  Mannheim,  Cohen,  Prensky,  and   Tapscott,  all  argue  that  newer  generations  greatly  differ  from  their  predecessors.   Many  of  these  writers  identify  technology  to  be  the  leading  cause  for  widening  the   pre-existing  generational  gap  due  to  young  people's  immersion  within  available   networks  and  digital  technologies.  Analyzing  the  differences  and  similarities   between  traditional  and  modern  learning  styles  helps  identify  technology's   momentous  influences  on  child  maturation.   According  to  Prensky  (2001a,  b),  Digital  Immigrants  possess  `passive   learning  styles',  whereby  they  naturally  resort  back  to  traditional  practices,  such  as   oral  communication  and  written  text  in  any  given  situation.  This  limitation  is  a   result  of  technology  being  absent  in  their  early  stages  of  childhood  development.  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE   Prensky's  interpretation  of  a  passive  learning  style  minimizes  the  focus  of   interactive  technology.   Claims  have  been  made  that  a  digital  upbringing  influences  children's   learning  styles  (Arafeh  et  al.,  2002;  Cohen,  1972;  Franco,  2013;  Frand,  2000;  

   13  

Prensky,  2001a,  b;  Tapscott,  1997).  Prensky  concurs  with  this  idea  and  declares  that   the  new  generations  of  students  prefer  instantaneous  learning  methods,  reliance  on   communication  technologies,  and  utilize  techniques  such  as  multitasking  (2001a,  b).   In  contrast  to  a  Digital  Immigrant's  passive  learning  style,  Prensky  describes  Digital   Natives  to  be  active  experiential  learners  who  depend  on  ICTs.  He  makes  note  of   their  natural  capability  for  multi-tasking  and  preference  for  visuals  (rather  than   text)  and  instant  gratification  (Prensky,  2001a,  b).  He  believes  these  new  learning   methods  support  his  hypothesis  that  Digital  Natives'  brains  develop  differently.  He   states,  "Today's  students  are  no  longer  the  people  our  educational  system  was   designed  to  teach"  (Prensky,  2001a,  p.  1).  Prensky  (2001a)  believes  young  children   are  greatly  affected  by  the  vast  exposure  of  digital  space,  which  results  in  excessive   interference  with  historical  teaching  methods  in  a  classroom  setting.     In  Understanding  Digital  Natives'  Learning  Experiences,  Claudio  de  Paiva   Franco  (2013)  indicates  that  children's  exposure  to  information  and  communication   technologies  gives  the  digital  generation  a  completely  new  way  of  thinking  and   learning.  Franco  (2013)  emphasizes  the  generation's  innate  ability  to  interact  in  a   digital  environment  by  stating,  "...they  use  digital  tools  naturally,  without   contemplating  how  they  work.  Their  brains  switch  spontaneously  to  the  digital   world.  Digital  technology  comes  naturally  to  this  particular  generation"  (Digital  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE  

   14  

Native  section,  para.  4).  Consequently,  there  are  distinct  differences  with  respect  to   the  Digital  Immigrants'  generational  mindset  and  those  who  grew  up  surrounded  by   digital  technology.  Prensky  (2001b)  believes  this  transition  is  due  to  the  likelihood   that  Digital  Natives'  brains  are  "...physically  different  as  a  result  of  the  digital  input   they  received  growing  up  (p.  1).  Therefore,  the  Digital  Natives'  new  mentality   displays  a  cognitive  evolution  compared  to  previous  learning  habits  (Franco,  2013).     The  scholarly  literature  surveyed  all  claim  that  there  are  different   generational  relationships  with  technology  that  create  conflict  and  division  between   generations.  Jason  L  Frand  claims  that  young  people  do  not  consider  a  computer  to   be  classified  as  technology,  supporting  Prensky's  idea  that  children  are  fluent  in  the   digital  language  from  living  deep  within  a  technological  environment  (Frand,  2000).    

2.3  Investigations  in  the  Digital  Age  
Thus  far,  the  fundamental  elements  of  generational  conflict  have  been   identified  as  rooted  in  differences  of  experience  and  in  recent  years,  more   specifically,  in  the  technology  that  shapes  these  experiences.  Having  established   technology's  influence  in  widening  the  gap  between  generations,  and  the  disconnect   between  generations  in  terms  of  norms  and  mindsets,  one  becomes  aware  of   learning  styles  adopted  by  Digital  Natives  and  the  significant  transformation  when   compared  with  the  learning  preferences  of  Digital  Immigrants.  In  recent   generations,  increasingly  younger  cohorts  are  being  exposed  to  technology.  Given   this  trend,  it  is  important  to  better  understand  the  implications  of  children's   engagement  with  swipe-technology  because  Born  Digitals  are  directly  interacting   with  touch-screen  technologies  during  pre-linguistic  developmental  stages.    

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE   The  recent  technological  advancements  are  affecting  young  children  on  a   deeper  level  than  a  simplistic  adjustment  in  a  youth's  learning  style.  Born  Digitals   are  particularly  impacted  by  modern  technologies,  given  the  fact  that  major   cognitive  developmental  stages  occur  within  the  first  five  years.  This  causes  a   supreme  change  in  the  way  that  a  Born  Digital  develops  (Palfrey  &  Gasser,  2008;   Watson  &  Pecchioni,  2011).  Amalgamating  this  concept  with  the  exponential   progression  of  technology's  trend,  new  communication  methodologies  are  being  

   15  

consumed  in  situations  where  early  exposure  to  digital  technologies  is  experienced   during  or  prior  to  a  child's  early  cognitive  developing  stages.  This  subject  matter  has   been  increasingly  gaining  attention  in  recent  years  (Wilson,  2015)  due  to  the   consequential  impacts  it  has  on  children  and  even  its  influence  beyond  children.   Authority  figures,  such  as  parents  and  educators  express  concern  for  the  generation   developing  within  a  digital  era  and  how  this  will  impact  the  future.   Digital  communication  tools  have  become  intermingled  with  traditional   language,  thus  resulting  in  different  learning  styles  and  capabilities  between   modern  and  older  generations.  The  question  now  arises  as  to  whether  digital   language  will  soon  surpass  traditional  language  as  the  dominant  form  of   communication,  and  if  so,  how  this  shift  will  impact  a  child's  developmental  process   and  early  childhood  education  systems.  Educating  individuals  about  this  subject   matter  will  help  better  predict  future  tendencies.  Once  possible  impacts  and  effects   are  understood,  appropriate  measures  can  be  implemented  if  necessary  to  address   potential  issues.    

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE  

   16  

2.4  Swipe-Technologies      
Touch-screen  technology  began  to  grow  in  popularity  in  2007  as  a  result  of   the  release  of  the  first  generation  iPhone  (Honan,  2007).  The  release  by  Apple  Inc.   revolutionized  culture's  relationship  with  technology  through  its  innovative   features,  one  of  which  included  multi-touch  (Cohen,  2007).  In  the  subsequent  four   years,  touch-screen  technologies  became  extremely  popular  and  generated  high   demand,  dominating  a  total  of  80  percent  of  revenues  and  95  percent  of  units   shipped  in  2011  alone  (Walker,  2012).  Touch-screen  devices  are  currently  utilized   nationally  through  various  technologies,  such  as  mobile  tablets  and  smartphones.   Swipe-technology's  expansion  has  initiated  a  new  era  as  its  status  has   surpassed  `trendy'  and  become  `normalized'.  It  is  commonly  utilized  by  toddlers  due   to  its  simplistic  navigation  and  overall  pleasurable  experience.  A  vast  amount  of   research  is  necessary  in  order  to  determine  possible  implications  and  contributory   effects  on  young  children's  cognitive  development.     In  recent  years,  toddlers  have  been  exposed  to  immense  volumes  of  swipe- technology.  Some  theorists  discuss  moral  panic  and  express  concern  considering   young  children's  adaptation  in  a  digital  era.  Various  research  suggests  that  if   children  are  exposed  to  too  much  digital  technology  in  early  years  of  living  it  can   provoke  negative  impacts  in  that  the  expression  of  verbal  language  and  the   development  of  interpersonal  skills  may  be  encumbered  (Plowman,  Stevenson,   Stephen,  &  McPake,  2012).   According  to  Franco  (2013),  when  a  child  is  constantly  engaged  in  a  digital   experience,  they  often  receive  immediate  feedback  confirming  their  knowledge  and  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE   understanding  of  a  particular  subject  matter.  In  doing  so,  they  are  missing  out  on   important  information  that  would  be  received  outside  of  the  digital  environment   (Franco,  2013),  possibly  giving  broader  perspectives  on  a  given  subject  matter.  

   17  

Thus,  these  students  may  lack  the  ability  to  think  critically  since  they  are  focused  on   obtaining  access  to  information  and  assume  the  feedback  that  is  received  through   the  digital  experience  is  unquestionable  (Lorenzo  &  Dziuban,  2006).  Many  have   advised  for  minimal  exposure  between  technology  and  preschoolers  in  order  to   prevent  detrimental  consequences  (Plowman,  McPake,  &  Stephen  2010).    Young   children's  interactions  with  technologies  are  said  to  produce  both  short-term  and   long-term  risks  since  their  brains  are  not  yet  fully  developed  (American  Academy  of   Pediatrics,  2010).     All  concerns  discussed  above  pose  serious  risks  and  consequences  to  our   social  beings  and  other  forms  of  communication  unless  appropriate  actions  at  this   crucial  stage  are  made  to  mitigate  the  potential  downfalls.  It  is  important  to  manage   the  transition  to  digital  in  order  in  order  to  provide  the  opportunity  for  children  to   thrive  in  the  modern  age.        

  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE  

   18  

Chapter  3:  Presentation  and  Analysis  of  the  Data  
3.1  Theories  of  Childhood  Development    
Prensky's  work  (2001a,  b)  evidently  demonstrates  varying  learning  styles   between  a  Digital  Native  and  Digital  Immigrant;  however,  one's  attention  should   focus  on  the  impacts  of  these  changes  in  learning  styles  (derived  from  technological   advancements),  rather  than  merely  the  change  itself.  In  order  to  understand  how   these  impacts  effect  young  children,  it  is  essential  to  evaluate  past,  yet  relevant,   childhood  development  theories  in  relation  to  pre-linguistic  technological  exposure.     In  the  early  20th  century,  cognitive  psychologist,  Lev  Semenovich  Vygotsky   articulates  a  constructivist  outlook,  connecting  cognitive  development  with  early   childhood  education.  He  discusses  two  types  of  cognitive  developments;  natural   development  and  cultural  development  (Vygotsky,  1929).  Natural  developments   occur  through  an  individual's  maturation  resulting  from  simplistic  every-day   interactions,  whereas  cultural  developments  are  associated  with  more  competent   and  challenging  interactions  (such  as  linguistics)  that  occur  through  an  individual's   experience  within  a  culture.  Vygotsky  (1929)  expounds  how  cultural  tools  possess  a   key  element  in  his  cognitive  development  theory.  He  presumes  cultural  tools   "connect  children  to  their  physical  and  cultural  environment  and  help  them  achieve   intellectual  mastery  over  that  environment"  (Spodeka  &  Sarachob,  1999,  p.  10).   Therefore,  different  cultures  acquire  varying  comprehension  methods,  which   consequently  alter  the  way  individuals  think  (Miller,  1993).  Given  the  intense  power   and  influence  of  technology  in  today's  modern  culture  of  early  generations,  it  is  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE   understood  that  this  cohort  exclusively  obtains  unique  learning  requirements,   divergent  from  other  cultures  and  former  generations.  

   19  

Vygotsky  (1962)  introduces  the  zone  of  proximal  development  [ZPD]  in  his   theoretical  book,  Thought  and  Language,  an  expansion  on  Jean  Piaget's  development   theory  of  children  being  lone  learners.  Vygotsky's  ZPD  theory  is  an  area  of  learning   that  exists  when  higher  skillsets  are  offered  to  a  child  in  which  they  acquire  new   intellectual  competencies  through  a  mentor's  support  (Vygotsky,  1978).     Although  the  concept  of  ZPD  was  introduced  almost  a  century  ago,  this   notion  is  in  fact  applicable  in  today's  culture  and  can  be  paired  with  modern-day   experiences.  Challenging  young  children's  mode  of  thinking  in  early  developmental   stages  via  technology  gives  them  the  opportunity  to  successfully  expand  their   prevailing  capabilities  (such  as  language),  ultimately  enhancing  their  cognitive   development.    

  

3.2  Linking  Pre-Literate  Exposure  to  Literacy  

  

Whilst  communication  and  language  are  universally  fundamental  skills,  they   are  especially  crucial  during  the  first  five  years  of  a  child's  life,  as  this  is  the  time   when  brain  developments  are  most  rapid  (Wilson  &  Conyers,  2013).  The  role  of   language  influences  cognitive  studies,  which  Vygotsky  believes  is  the  most   prominent  aspect  of  cultural  tools  within  the  realm  of  child  development  (Spodeka   &  Sarachob,  1999).  Forms  of  expression  are  less  restrictive  given  the  various   methods  by  which  digital  language  can  be  communicated.  Recently,  early   interactions  with  swipe-technology  have  been  observed  to  affect  digital  literacy   (Plowman  &  McPake,  2013;  Infante,  2014;  Passey,  2014).    

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE   Given  pre-linguistic  children's  inability  to  communicate  verbally,  young   children  seek  alternative  methods  of  communication  beyond  verbalization.   Traditionally,  children  have  expressed  themselves  through  art,  music  and  

   20  

movement  (Alschuler  &  Hattwick,  1947).  Another  common  form  of  communication   utilized  by  young  children  is  the  act  of  gestures.  Gesture  developments  are  said  to  be   associated  with  the  emergence  of  language  in  a  given  child's  future  (Crais,  Watson,  &   Baranek,  2009).  The  development  through  communicative  forms  is  of  high   significance  given  the  value  of  obtaining  strong  language  skills.     In  more  recent  years,  young  children  have  additionally  adapted  to  modern   communication  tools,  such  as  swipe-technology.  A  recent  study  by  Plowman  and   McPake  (2013)  confirmed  that  a  Born  Digital  could  acquire  digital  literacy  while   simultaneously  being  traditionally  illiterate.  Collin,  age  three,  grasped  the   understanding  of  storing  and  retrieving  digital  photographs  that  can  be  shared  via   communication  tools.  Independently,  he  conversed  with  relatives  digitally  through   the  transferring  of  photographs,  emoticons,  and  video  interactivities.  By  observing   Collin's  online  interactions,  the  observer  of  the  study  discovers  that  the  young  boy   was  competent  in  conversing  through  a  digital  language  in  which  both  him  and  his   relatives  share  (Plowman  &  McPake,  2013).  Collin's  case  study  identifies  that  "With   the  right  support,  digital  technology  can  open  up  avenues  of  communication  over   time  and  distance  and  provide  new  and  intriguing  possibilities  for  the  development   of  young  children's  communicative  skills"  (Plowman  &  McPake,  2013,  p.  29).     This  case  study  shares  many  similarities  to  Vygotsky's  theories  discussed   above  even  though  his  studies  were  hypothesized  prior  to  the  existence  of  modern  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE   forms  of  technology.  Vygotsky's  research  remains  applicable  in  digitally  rich  

   21  

environments.  The  role  of  an  appropriate  mentor  is  underlined  in  both  the  theory  of   ZPD  and  in  the  latter  case  study.  Vygotsky's  zone  of  proximal  development  theory   requires  appropriate  mentor  support  in  order  to  enhance  a  child's  cognition,  whilst   Collin's  case  study  also  advocates  support  of  a  caregiver  for  swipe-technology  to  be   an  effective  communication  tool.  Additionally,  Vygotsky  suggests  that  "The   emphasis  on  tools  within  a  culture  depends  on  the  needs  and  values  of  that   particular  culture"  (Spodeka  &  Sarachob,  1999,  p.  10).  In  Collin's  scenario,  swipe- technology  acted  as  the  cultural  tool  in  which  he  effectively  developed  strong   communicative  proficiencies.  Therefore,  pre-literate  children  are  no  longer   restricted  to  traditional  forms  of  language  expression;  rather  they  can  also  utilize   digital,  cognitive-stimulating  methods  to  express  themselves.   Journalist,  Andre  Infante  (2014)  also  links  the  revolutionary  phenomenon  of   swipe-technology  with  the  development  of  linguistics  when  he  states  "Touch- screens  and  multi-touch  interfaces  are  now  a  permanent  part  of  the  fundamental   language  of  human-computer  interaction"  (para.  2).  As  pre-verbal  children   constantly  interact  with  touch-screen  and  multi-touch  technologies,  they  are  given   the  opportunity  to  explore  and  acquire  digital  languages  prior  to  traditional   languages  such  as,  written  and  oral.   A  child's  powerful  interaction  with  swipe-technology  can  be  viewed   positively  in  that  early  exposure  offers  enhanced  cognitive  development  in  young   children  and  provides  opportunities  for  stimulation  acceleration  (Passey,  2014).   Introducing  modern  technology  is  encouraged  at  an  extremely  young  age  because  it  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE   can  extend  communicative  tools  to  reach  greater  distances  and  allow  pre-verbal  

   22  

individuals  to  explore  various  gateways  of  expression.  However,  this  demonstrates   that  a  vast  amount  of  early  swipe-technology  exposure  can  lead  to  material   interference  with  the  acquisition  of  traditional  linguistic  skills.  Language  has   constantly  been  recognized  as  a  fundamental  requirement  (Department  of   Education  and  Science,  1999a;  Wood,  1998)  in  educational  curriculums.  A  change  in   language  tendencies  can  in  fact  cause  inharmonious  conflict  that  occurs  in   traditional  early  childhood  education  curriculums.    

3.3  Redesigning  Pedagogy  in  Early  Childhood  Education    
Prensky  (2001a,  b)  opines  on  the  drastic  transformation  in  generational- based  learning  styles,  as  educators  are  often  unsuccessful  in  satisfying  student's   needs.  It  is  critical  that  current  pedagogical  practices  in  early  childhood  learning  are   re-examined,  in  an  effort  to  better  understand  how  to  engage  the  new  generation  of   digitized  students.  Failing  to  acknowledge  this  necessary  transformation  can  cause   educational  institutions  to  become  obsolete  (Bennett,  Maton,  &  Kervin,  2008).   Whilst  the  digital  era  continuous  to  evolve,  the  ultimate  goal  of  an  educator   has  remained  unchanged  in  that  they  aim  to  promote  learning.  Building  a  practical   communication  skillset  is  one  area  in  which  educators  are  encouraged  to  develop,   especially  in  young  children  (Supon,  2009;  Porter  &  Eilts,  2011).  Older  methods  of   acquiring  communication  competencies  have  been  displaced  in  order  to  make  room   for  modern  tools,  which  serves  to  satisfy  the  same  learning  objectives.     Teaching  cursive  handwriting  is  an  example  of  one  method  previously   enforced  by  educators  in  the  classroom  to  develop  student's  practical  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE  

   23  

communication  skills.  Learning  cursive  script  provided  multiple  benefits  in  a  young   child's  life,  such  as  enhancing  children's  creative  imagination  and  enabling  fine- motor  skills  (Porter  &  Eilts,  2011).  Unfortunately,  the  standard  pedagogical  practice   also  caused  frustration  in  children  since  developing  the  skill  to  write  cursive  was   extremely  time-consuming  and  was  weighed  against  other  available  options  that   may  achieve  the  same  result.     New  digital  tools,  such  as  swipe-technology  have  enabled  innovative   gateways  in  developing  strong  communication  competencies.  E-books  can  be   accessed  through  touch-screen  tablets,  such  as  an  iPad  or  Android,  and  is  proven  to   support  language  and  literacy  skills  in  young  children  (Porter  &  Eilts,  2011).  Unlike   traditional  customary  text  (i.e.  cursive),  children  can  apply  more  senses  when   participating  in  e-book  engagements  by  interpreting  audio  and  visual  through   sounds  and  animations,  which  deepens  an  understanding  of  significant  story  events   through  interactive  experiences  (Porter  &  Eilts,  2011).  Since  e-books  operate   through  swipe-technologies,  this  signifies  that  modern  tools  provide  the   opportunity  to  expand  a  child's  comprehension  and  development.  Thus,  learning   cursive  writing  can  be  viewed  as  a  cursive  competence,  however,  it  is  distinct  from  a   linguistic  competence  in  that  it  is  not  necessarily  required  to  produce  coherent   communication.   Rather  than  imposing  cursive,  caregivers  now  have  a  wider  set  of  choices,   including  e-books  (emanating  from  swipe-technology  platforms)  in  developing  a   young  child's  literacy  and  communication  skills.  Learning  cursive  can  be  aggravating   for  many  children  and  the  excessive  time  spent  acquiring  the  script  could  have  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE   instead  been  contributed  in  learning  other  skills,  abilities  or  knowledge.  

   24  

Furthermore,  fine  motor  skills  that  are  gained  through  writing  cursive  can  also  be   obtained  via  touch-screen  technology  in  that  a  child's  finger  acts  as  the  stylus   (Porter  &  Eilts,  2011).  After  weighing  the  positives  and  negatives  of  teaching   cursive,  the  Board  of  Education  made  the  decision  to  remove  cursive  handwriting   from  the  curriculum  and  concluded  that:   Teaching  cursive  is  obsolete.  If  the  goal  of  writing  is  communication,  then  the   tool  that  is  used  to  communicate  should  not  be  the  focus.  The  act  of   communication  is  the  focus.  Whether  you  use  print,  cursive,  or  type  is  not   paramount.  As  educators  are  mandated  to  teach  more  and  more  information,   knowledge,  and  skills  in  a  21st  century  format,  some  older  skills  need  to  be   laid  to  rest.  Cursive  is  one  of  these  skills.  (Porter  &  Eilts,  2011,  para.  8)   Swipe-technology  will  not  only  help  acquire  the  same  skills  offered  from  learning   cursive,  yet  these  skills  can  now  be  introduced  earlier  in  a  child's  life.  According  to   older  curriculums,  educators  taught  children  cursive  in  second  or  third  grade   (Supon,  2009),  however,  a  Born  Digital's  innate  proficiency  in  digital  literacy  will   allow  the  skill  of  communication  to  be  developed  earlier  than  what  is  promoted  in   the  education  system's  curriculum,  relative  to  cursive  handwriting.  This  can   revolutionize  a  child's  development  since  more  competent  skills  can  be  obtained   during  the  most  crucial  stages  of  a  child's  growth.        This  section  demonstrates  that  different  learning  styles  are  implemented  by  

caregivers  to  achieve  a  given  learning  objective.  The  catalyst  for  the  shift  in  learning   styles  is  due  to  a  newer  practice  being  more  effective  whether  it  be  a  time  saver  or  a  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE  

   25  

more  stimulating  and  engaging  learning  experience.  The  advancement  of  technology   and  use  of  swipe-technology  in  early  childhood  education  is  a  prime  example  of  how   modern  learning  styles  are  impacted  in  the  classroom.  The  ministry  of  education  has   recognized  that  cursive  writing  should  be  phased  out  of  the  curriculum  and   substituted  with  other  technologically  modern  tools  to  achieve  the  same  purpose.   This  will  also  help  narrow  the  gap  within  the  digital  divide.       

  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE  

   26  

Chapter  4:  Conclusion  
4.1  Findings  
The  original  investigation  was  to  discover  if  the  digital  language  will  soon   surpass  traditional  language  as  the  dominant  form  of  communication,  while   considering  how  this  shift  will  impact  Born  Digitals.  As  a  result  of  the  conducted   research,  including  a  prime  focus  on  theories  of  early  childhood  development,  early   childhood  education,  and  formal  institutional  systems,  certain  findings  can  be   derived.  By  examining  these  findings,  it  allows  a  better  understanding  of  the  issues   at  hand  and  guidance  in  answering  the  research  question.     Through  the  works  of  Vygotsky's  cognitive  development  perspective,   positive  discoveries  are  found  by  utilizing  cultural  tools  under  his  theory  of  the  zone   of  proximal  development.  This  idea  can  be  directly  applied  to  media-saturated   environments  where  technology  acts  as  the  cultural  tool,  enabling  pre-verbal   cognitive  stimulation  in  young  children  with  the  proper  guidance.   Pre-literate  children's  exposure  to  swipe-technology  has  given  Born  Digitals   the  ability  to  express  themselves  in  new  and  innovative  ways  beyond  traditional   forms.  In  fact,  it  is  possible  for  this  cohort  to  develop  a  digital  form  of   communication  prior  to  acquiring  verbal  language  skills.  In  order  for  this   transformation  to  be  successful,  children  need  to  have  the  proper  support  from   caregivers,  which  will  help  facilitate  new  communication  skills.  While  it  is  true  that   the  digital  language  has  enabled  new  forms  of  communication,  it  is  also  being   argued  that  early  swipe-technology  exposure  inhibits  children's  ability  to  develop  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE   other  life  essential  skills,  such  as  social,  interpersonal  and  critical  thinking  skills,   that  flow  directly  from  early  verbal  language.   The  learning  objectives  of  teaching  specific  skillsets  have  remained   unchanged  in  the  education  system,  however,  the  practice  of  how  to  best  deliver   these  learning  objectives  is  often  debated.  This  practice  has  changed  the  way   educators  prepare  students  for  a  successful  future.  A  prime  example  is   demonstrated  by  digital  methodologies  of  communicating  usurping  cursive  

   27  

handwriting.  Swipe-technology  is  a  key  driver  that  has  accelerated  early  childhood   learning  skills  which  have  become  incongruent  with  the  educational  learning   process.  This  has  caused  the  educational  institutions  to  pause  and  evaluate  how  its   pedagogical  approaches  can  be  adapted  to  engage  children  or  otherwise  face  the   risk  of  enhancing  the  digital  divide  and  experience  educational  obsolescence.     Collectively,  the  findings  support  that  digital  language  is  surpassing   traditional  language  as  the  Born  Digital's  primary  form  of  communication.  Since  this   trend  is  not  showing  any  signs  of  slowing  down,  it  is  presumed  that  communicating   digitally  will  also  be  the  latest  generation's  most  dominant  form  of  expression,   causing  traditional  language  to  become  less  significant.    

4.2  Evaluations  
A  Born  Digital's  primary  literacy  is  historically  different  than  preceding   generations,  thus  causing  a  shift  in  learning  styles  between  the  Born  Digitals  and   Digital  Immigrants.  Therefore,  pedagogical  methods  must  change  to  accommodate   the  new  generation's  preferred  learning  style.  Currently,  the  education  system  is   organized  in  a  rather  hierarchical  structure  where  the  process  for  delivering  the  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE   learning  experience  comes  from  the  top-down.  Governments  set  the  objectives,   ministries  determine  the  curriculum,  and  teachers  meet  the  curriculum  by  

   28  

advocating  a  particular  learning  style.  The  modes  of  a  classroom  must  change  given   the  new  learning  styles  of  young  digitized  students.  Their  growing  knowledge  in  the   digital  realm  undermines  teachers'  positions.  In  order  to  maximize  student's   engagement,  the  education  system  needs  to  permit  a  bottom-up  approach  where   Born  Digitals  can  promote  advanced  learning  styles  due  to  the  rapid  pace  of   technological  advancements.  Authority  figures  hold  the  power  to  create  a  better   learning  environment  and  experience  for  students,  ultimately  minimizing  the  pre- existing  digital  divide  between  the  Digital  Immigrant  educators  and  the  Born  Digital   students.     It  is  understood  that  the  importance  of  proper  mentorship  and  support  is   necessary  in  order  to  maximize  the  positive  effects  in  a  Born  Digital's  maturation   process.  This  key  finding  gives  clear  direction  on  what  must  be  investigated  in   expanding  research  on  this  topic.  It  could  be  valuable  to  further  explore  swipe- technology  utilization  in  the  home  and  school  environment  in  accordance  with  the   caregiver's  role.  Based  on  this,  it  can  be  identified  if  the  role  of  the  caregiver  should   change  and  if  so,  how  it  can  be  shaped  in  a  way  that  promotes  all  the  positive  effects   of  swipe-technology,  yet  mitigates  the  risks  previously  identified  in  section  2.4   Swipe-Technologies.   Expanding  the  scope  of  research  to  include  a  wider  range  of  demographics   may  also  be  beneficial  to  further  this  study.  Core  demographic  qualities  can  include   age,  race,  gender,  marital  status,  and  income  level.  Inquiring  a  larger  sum  of  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE   demography  can  help  create  a  less  bias  approach  in  the  current  discoveries.  New   findings  may  arise  about  swipe-technology  based  on  different  societal  norms  and   responsibilities.       

   29  

  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE   References  

   30  

Alschuler,  R.,  &  Hattwick,  L.  (1947).  Painting  and  personality.  Chicago:  University  of   Chicago  Press.   American  Academy  of  Pediatrics.  (2010,  September  27).  Policy  statement:  Media   education.  Pediatrics.  doi:10.1542/peds.2010-  1636   Arafeh,  S.,  Levin,  D.,  Rainie,  L.,  &  Lenhart,  A.  (2002,  August).  The  Digital  Disconnect:   The  Widening  Gap  Between  Internet-Savvy  Students  and  Their  Schools.  Pew   Research  Center:  Internet,  Science  &  Tech,  1-5.     Bennett,  S.,  Maton,  K.,  &  Kervin,  L.  (2008).  The  `digital  natives'  debate:  A  critical   review  of  the  evidence.  British  Journal  of  Educational  Technology,  39(5),  775 786.     Crais,  E.  R.,  Watson,  L.  R.,  &  Baranek,  G.  T.  (2009).  Use  of  gesture  development  in   profiling  children's  prelinguistic  communication  skills.  American  Journal  of   Speech-Language  Pathology,  18(1),  95-108.  doi:10.1044/1058- 0360(2008/07-0041)   Cohen,  P.  (2007,  January  9).  Macworld  expo  keynote  live  update.  Macworld.   Retrieved  from   http://www.macworld.com/article/1054764/liveupdate.html   Cohen,  S.  (1972).  Folk  devils  and  moral  panics:  The  creation  of  the  mods  and  rockers.   London:  MacGibbon  &  Kee  Ltd.     Department  of  Education  and  Science.  (1999a).  Ready  to  learn:  White  paper  on  early   childhood  education.  Dublin,  Ireland:  The  Stationary  Office.  

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE  

   31  

Education  System  Defined.  (2013).  The  Glossary  of  Education  Reform.  Retrieved  from   http://edglossary.org/education-system/   Franco,  C.  P.  (2013).  Understanding  Digital  Natives'  Learning  Experiences.  Revista   Brasileira  De  Lingustica  Aplicada,  13(2),  643-658.     Frand,  J.  L.  (2000).  The  Information-Age  Mindset:  Changes  in  Students  and   Implications  for  Higher  Education.  EDUCAUSE  Review,  35,  (5),  14-24.     Generation.  (2011).  American  Heritage  Dictionary  of  the  English  Language,  Fifth   Edition.  Retrieved  from   https://www.ahdictionary.com/word/search.html?q=generation   Hoffman,  D.  L.,  Novak,  T.  P.,  &  Schlosser,  A.  E.  (2001).  The  Evolution  of  the  digital   divide:  Examining  the  relationship  to  Internet  access  and  usage  over  time.  In   B.  M.  Compaime,  The  digital  divide:  Facing  a  digital  crisis  or  creating  a  myth?   (pp.  47-94).  Cambridge,  MA:  The  MIT  Press.   Honan,  M.  (2007,  January  9).  "Apple  unveils  iPhone".  Macworld.  Retrieved  from   http://www.macworld.com/article/1054769/smartphones/iphone.html   Infante,  A.  (2014,  July  31).  The  evolution  of  touchscreen  technology.  Make  use  of.   Retrieved  from  http://www.makeuseof.com/tag/evolution-touchscreen- technology/     Ito ,  M.,  Baumer,  S.,  Bittanti,  M.,  boyd.  d.,  Cody,  R.,  Herr-Stephenson,  B.,...Tripp,  L..   (2010).  Hanging  out,  messing  around,  and  geeking  out:  Kids  living  and   learning  with  new  media.  Cambridge,  MA:  The  MIT  Press.     Lorenzo,  G.,  &  Dziuban  C.  (2006).  Ensuring  the  net  generation  is  net  savvy.   EDUCAUSE  Learning  Initiative,  1-16.    

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE  

   32  

Mannheim,  Karl  (1952).  "The  problem  of  generations".  In  Kecskemeti,  Paul.  Essays   on  the  Sociology  of  Knowledge:  Collected  Works,  Volume  5.  New  York:   Routledge.  p.  276-322.   Miller,  P.H.  (1993).  Theories  of  Developmental  Psychology  (3rd  ed.).  New  York:   Freeman   Multi-touch.  (1981-2015)  Computer  desktop  encyclopedia.  Retrieved  from   http://encyclopedia2.thefreedictionary.com/Multi-touch   Palfrey,  J.  G.,  &  Gasser,  U.  (2008).  Born  digital:  Understanding  the  first  generation  of   digital  natives.  New  York:  Basic  Books.   Passey,  D.  (2014).  Inclusive  technology  enhanced  learning:  Overcoming  cognitive,   physical,  emotional,  and  geographic  challenges.  Routledge.     Plowman  L  &  McPake  J  (2013)  Seven  myths  about  young  children  and  technology.   Childhood  Education  89  (1)  27-33.   Plowman,  L.,  McPake,  J.,  &  Stephen,  C.  (2010).  The  technologisation  of  childhood?   Young  children  and  technology  in  the  home.  Children  and  Society,  24(1),  63 74.   Plowman,  L.,  Stevenson,  O.,  Stephen,  C.,  &  McPake,  J.  (2012).  Preschool  children's   learning  with  technology  at  home.  Computers  &  Education,  59(1),  30-37.   Porter,  L.  A.,  &  Eilts,  S.  (2011).  Is  cursive  writing  worth  teaching?  Learning  &  Leading   with  Technology,  39(2),  6.   Prensky,  M.  (2001a).  Digital  natives,  digital  immigrants  part  1.  On  the  Horizon:  The   Strategic  Planning  Resource  For  Education  Professionals,  9  (5),  2-6.    

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE  

   33  

Prensky,  M.  (2001b).  Digital  natives,  digital  immigrants  part  II:  Do  they  really  think   differently?  On  the  Horizon:  The  strategic  planning  resource  for  education   professionals,  9  (6),  1-7.     Prensky,  M.  (2005).  Listen  to  the  Natives.  EBSCOhost,  63  (4)  8-13.     Sandarsa,  J.  &  Morrisona,  C.  (2007).  What  is  the  net  generation?  The  challenge  for   future  medical  education.  Taylor  &  Francis  Online,  29  (2-3),  85-88.   Spodeka,  B.  &  Sarachob,  O.  N.  (1999).  The  relationship  between  theories  of  child   development  and  the  early  childhood  curriculum.  Taylor  and  Francis  Online,   152  (1),  2-16.   Supon,  V.  (2009).  Cursive  writing:  Are  its  last  days  approaching?  Journal  of   Instructional  Psychology,  36(4),  357.   Tapscott,  D.  (1997).  Growing  up  Digital:  The  Rise  of  the  Net  Generation.  New  York.     Tapscott,  D.  (2009).  Growing  up  Digital:  How  the  Net  Generation  Is  Changing  Your   World.  New  York.     Touch  screen.  (2016).  Dictionary.com  Unabridged.   Vygotski,  L.  S.  (1929).  The  problem  of  the  cultural  development  of  child.  The   Pedagogical  Seminary  and  Journal  of  Genetic  Psychology,  36  (3),  415-432.   Vygotsky,  L.  S.  (1962).  Thought  and  language.  Cambridge,  MA:  MIT  Press.   Vygotsky,  L.  S.  (1978).  Interaction  between  learning  and  development.  From:  Mind   in  society  (79-91).  Cambridge,  MA:  Harvard  University  Press.   Walker,  Geoff  (2012,  August).  "A  review  of  technologies  for  sensing  contact  location   on  the  surface  of  a  display".  Journal  of  the  Society  for  Information  Display,   20(8):  413440.  doi:10.1002/jsid.100.    

SWIPE-TECHNOLOGY'S  INFLUENCE  IN  BORN  DIGITAL  CULTURE   Watson,  J.  A.,  &  Pecchioni,  L.  L.  (2011).  Digital  natives  and  digital  media  in  the   college  classroom:  Assignment  design  and  impacts  on  student  learning.   Educational  Media  International,  48(4),  307.   doi:10.1080/09523987.2011.632278   Wilson,  D.,  &  Conyers,  M.  (2013).  Flourishing  in  the  first  five  years:  Connecting  

   34  

implications  from  mind,  brain,  and  education  research  to  the  development  of   young  children.  Rowman  &  Littlefield  Education.   Wilson,  S.  (2015).  Digital  technologies,  children  and  young  people's  relationships   and  self-care.  Children's  Geographies,  DOI:  10.1080/14733285.2015.1040726   Wood,  D.  (1998).  How  children  think  and  learn  (2nd  ed.).  Great  Britain:  Blackwell   Press.     

