sustainability
Article

Using Microsimulation to Evaluate Safety and Operational Implications of Newer Roundabout Layouts for European Road Networks
Tullio Giuffrè 1, *
1 2
ID

, Salvatore Trubia 1

ID

, Antonino Canale 1 and Bhagwant Persaud 2

*

Faculty of Engineering and Architecture, University of Enna Kore, Viale delle Olimpiadi, 94100 Enna, Italy; salvatore.trubia@unikore.it (S.T.); antonino.canale@unikore.it (A.C.) Department of Civil Engineering, Ryerson University, 350 Victoria Street, Toronto, ON M5B2K3, Canada; bpersaud@ryerson.ca Correspondence: tullio.giuffre@unikore.it; Tel.: +39-0935-536356

Received: 8 September 2017; Accepted: 3 November 2017; Published: 13 November 2017

Abstract: "Standard" roundabouts, for example those designed in some European countries, can often be characterized by low levels of safety or capacity and a high degree of sustainability. Given the proliferation of newer layouts, it is of interest to explore whether design practices could be improved by capitalizing on the experience gained internationally. Operational aspects of some of these designs have been explored previously, but there is a need to compare both the operational and safety performance of new designs to that of standard roundabouts. The objective of this paper is to evaluate the safety and operational implications of various potential alternatives to the standard roundabouts that proliferate in Europe and elsewhere. Microsimulation is used to simulate traffic operations at roundabout layout alternatives at the same levels of volume to capacity (V/C) ratio and also with the same traffic flow. Operational performance measures include the common level of service parameters, while measures of safety are based initially on time to collision (TTC) values. Threshold values of TTC were then applied in defining conflicts that are used for crash-based safety evaluation by applying crash-conflict models estimated in published research. Interesting insights were revealed, suggesting that the newer layouts should be considered where warranted by cost-benefit considerations. Keywords: road safety; traffic simulation; roundabout design; sustainable-transport indicators

1. Introduction In the last decade, new roundabout types of great practical interest from a sustainability perspective have been designed or proposed to overcome some of the problems related to average speed, level of service, conflict points, and crashes that arise with standard roundabouts. The alternatives of interest for this paper are turbo roundabouts, flower roundabouts, and target roundabouts. Such intersections offer potential safety benefits and, under certain traffic conditions, have been shown to provide higher capacity and better operation than equivalent standard roundabouts. The objective of this paper is to evaluate the safety and operational implications of various potential alternatives to standard roundabout layouts that proliferate in Italy and elsewhere. Building on previous research where the issue of alternative roundabouts was investigated [1,2], microsimulation is used to simulate traffic operations at roundabouts with standard and newer layouts at various levels of traffic volume. Performance measures include emissions and level of service, as well as measures of safety, including conflicts and speeds, both estimated from trajectories generated in the microsimulation. Microscopic traffic simulation has the potential to provide a safe and flexible test environment for the a priori estimation of traffic safety and performance effects brought about
Sustainability 2017, 9, 2084; doi:10.3390/su9112084 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

Sustainability 2017, 9, 2084

2 of 13

Sustainability 2017, 9, 2084

2 of 12

by new and alternative designs and other safety-influencing factors that areother related to the roadway, performance effects brought about by new and alternative designs and safety-influencing road-users, and vehicles. factors that are related to the roadway, road-users, and vehicles. Description Descriptionof ofStandard Standardand andAlternative AlternativeRoundabouts RoundaboutsEvaluated Evaluated The Thestandard standardmultilane multilaneroundabout roundabout(Figure (Figure1a) 1a)is isan anefficient efficientsolution solutionto tocope copewith withvariable variabletraffic traffic demand. Additional entry and circulatory lanes increase capacity, but they also increase safety demand. Additional entry and circulatory lanes increase capacity, but they also increase safety problems problemsthat thatare aremainly mainlyrelated relatedto toimproper improperdriver driverbehavior behaviorat atthe theentrance, entrance, circulatory, circulatory,and andexit exit zones, and to the consequent weaving maneuvers within the circle. Previous studies on two-lane zones, and to the consequent weaving maneuvers within the circle. Previous studies on two-lane roundabouts such improper behavior as being common practice, resulting in conflicts and roundaboutsconfirmed confirmed such improper behavior as being common practice, resulting in conflicts increased likelihood of crashes [3]. The first standard roundabout was built in Europe during the 20th and increased likelihood of crashes [3]. The first standard roundabout was built in Europe during century. that, this typology of roundabout, thanks thanks to the increase in the in level service and the 20th After century. After that, this typology of roundabout, to the increase the of level of service safety, has spread very quickly around the world. and safety, has spread very quickly around the world.

Figure 1. Typical layouts of roundabouts evaluated (a) Standard; (b) Turbo; (c) Flower; (d) Target. Figure 1. Typical layouts of roundabouts evaluated (a) Standard; (b) Turbo; (c) Flower; (d) Target.

A turbo roundabout is an innovative and potentially more sustainable arrangement of a two-lane A turbo roundabout is an innovative and potentially more sustainable arrangement of a two-lane roundabout, where certain directional flows are separated or run alongside physically separated roundabout, where certain directional flows are separated or run alongside physically separated lanes lanes (Figure 1b). These roundabouts aim to overcome such problems as two-lane roundabouts (Figure 1b). These roundabouts aim to overcome such problems as two-lane roundabouts being too being too small and the inner circulatory lanes not being comfortable for younger and senior drivers small and the inner circulatory lanes not being comfortable for younger and senior drivers because because they feel insecure when changing lanes on a circulatory carriageway [2]. In a turbo they feel insecure when changing lanes on a circulatory carriageway [2]. In a turbo roundabout, roundabout, the traffic flows in separate paths even before actual entry into the roundabout, then the traffic flows in separate paths even before actual entry into the roundabout, then occupies separate occupies separate lanes throughout the roundabout, and also separate paths when exiting the lanes throughout the roundabout, and also separate paths when exiting the roundabout. The physical roundabout. The physical separation of traffic lanes is only interrupted at places of entry into the separation of traffic lanes is only interrupted at places of entry into the inner circulatory carriageway. inner circulatory carriageway. Since weaving on the roundabout is no longer possible, drivers Since weaving on the roundabout is no longer possible, drivers should be assisted by clear signposting should be assisted by clear signposting and lane marking. A special form of arrow-marking has been and lane marking. A special form of arrow-marking has been developed for turbo roundabouts, which developed for turbo roundabouts, which ensures clearer lane selection. The first turbo roundabouts ensures clearer lane selection. The first turbo roundabouts were installed in 2000 in the Netherlands. were installed in 2000 in the Netherlands. Since then, countries such as Poland, Germany, Finland, Since then, countries such as Poland, Germany, Finland, Norway, Slovenia, Denmark, Lithuania, Norway, Slovenia, Denmark, Lithuania, and Czech Republic have adopted this solution. and Czech Republic have adopted this solution. The roundabout with "depressed" lanes for right-hand turners--known as the flower The roundabout with "depressed" lanes for right-hand turners--known as the flower roundabout--has roundabout--has been proposed as a solution for achieving a higher level of traffic safety than been proposed as a solution for achieving a higher level of traffic safety than existing two-lane existing two-lane roundabouts. One of the basic characteristics of the flower roundabout is the same roundabouts. One of the basic characteristics of the flower roundabout is the same as for the turbo as for the turbo roundabout--physically separated traffic lanes within the circulatory carriageway roundabout--physically separated traffic lanes within the circulatory carriageway [4]. The other main [4]. The other main characteristic of the flower roundabout is that all right-hand turners have their characteristic of the flower roundabout is that all right-hand turners have that their the owninner separated lanes, own separated lanes, known as bypasses (Figure 1c). This means circulatory known as bypasses (Figure 1c). This means that the inner circulatory carriageway is only used carriageway is only used by vehicles that drive straight  through the roundabout at 180° and turn by for  ), vehicles that drive straight through the roundabout at 180 and turn for three quarters of a circle (270 three quarters of a circle (270°), or turn in a full circle (360°). By physically separating the right-hand  or turn in a fullflow, circlea(360 ). Byroundabout physically separating the right-hand turning traffic flow, a one-lane turning traffic one-lane is obtained, whereby (unlike the turbo roundabout) there roundabout is obtained, whereby (unlike the turbo roundabout) there are no crossing conflict spots; are no crossing conflict spots; however, unlike the case at the "standard" two-lane roundabout, there however, unlike the case at the "standard" two-lane roundabout, there are also no weaving conflict are also no weaving conflict spots. One vehicle transfers from the circulatory carriageway (within spots. One vehicle transfers from the circulatory carriageway (within the curve) to road the curve) to the road section before the roundabout (usually a straight line), the which is section a safer before the roundabout (usually a straight line), which is a safer solution from the traffic safety point of solution from the traffic safety point of view. In effect, driving through a flower roundabout is not view. In like effect, driving a flowertwo-lane roundabout is not unlikebut likethis doing so at "standard" unlike doing so through at "standard" roundabouts, roundabout type two-lane "forgives errors", that is, if a driver mistakenly stays in the left lane at the entrance, it still allows them to turn

Sustainability 2017, 9, 2084

3 of 13

roundabouts, but this roundabout type "forgives errors", that is, if a driver mistakenly stays in the left lane at the entrance, it still allows them to turn right at the next exit [2]. Finally, perhaps the best characteristic of the flower roundabout is that it can be implemented within the existing "standard" two-lane roundabout, as evidenced in Figure 1. A target roundabout is a dual one-lane roundabout on two levels with right-turn bypasses [5,6] and is designed as a dual one-lane roundabout with different outer diameters, located on two levels (Figure 1d), with all right-hand turners on both roundabouts having their own separate right-turn bypass lanes. The dual one-lane roundabout on two levels allows driving from all directions to all directions, and it "forgives errors", i.e., a driver who mistakenly stays at the entrance to the left-hand lane can turn right at the next exit (as opposed to the case for a turbo roundabout). By physically separating the right-turn traffic flow, dual one-lane roundabouts are characterized by no crossing conflict spots (unlike standard two-lane or turbo roundabouts), and no weaving conflict spots (unlike standard two-lane roundabouts). As for the turbo and flower roundabouts, when moving from the circulatory carriageway on to the road section, any possible weaving conflict spots are in front of a roundabout, which can improve traffic safety. The target unconventional roundabout has had few, if any implementations anywhere in the world to our knowledge; therefore, it is only possible to evaluate it with a microsimulation model at the moment, a process that, admittedly, is not without limitations. 2. Methodology and Evaluation Approach The evaluation was based on the simulation of traffic operating at roundabouts with alternative design layouts. A major advantage related to the use of simulation is the possibility to `tailor' a model to meet the specific criteria of an existing real-world traffic situation and to incorporate those factors that have been identified as having a direct or indirect influence on traffic safety in estimating the influence on proximal indicators. These factors, which are especially relevant to the current study, include the exact geometric layout of the traffic site and the precise representation of traffic flows, including turning movements, through origin-destination matrices. In short, simulation modeling allows the effects of various safety and operations-influencing measures to be preliminarily tested in a safe off-line environment in the early stages of research, development, and design [7]. That advantage is of especial relevance to this study, in which many different geometrical layouts for the same kind of intersection--a roundabout--are addressed in terms of safety and operational measures. More specifically, some geometrical layouts (flower and target roundabouts) are very recent or just theoretic, and it is not possible to perform an observational evaluation by collecting crash and operational data. The microsimulation software tool VISSIM (Version 5.30) [8] was used to simulate operations at the roundabouts. This software can be used to generate all types of outputs simultaneously (safety, traffic performance, and capacity, allowing a more complete and comprehensive picture of the combined effects in making comparisons of various roundabout design scenarios. The VISSIM output included vehicle trajectory files that were then imported into the Surrogate Safety Assessment Model--SSAM [9], a software application designed to perform analyses of vehicle trajectory data output from microscopic traffic simulation models to derive proximal measures such as conflicts, based on thresholds for either time to collision (TTC) or post encroachment time (PET). The estimated conflicts were then applied in crash-conflict models for roundabouts developed in other research to compare the roundabout designs on the basis of expected crashes. The approach of using proximal safety indicators such as conflicts has been suggested as an alternative to the use of crash data, especially where the facility being evaluated does not exist, and thus does not have a crash record. For example, Sayed and Zein [10] used traffic conflict safety indicator measures from unsignalized intersections to establish conflict frequency and severity measures in the form of an Intersection Conflict Index that could be used to compare the relative safety of different unsignalized intersections. Another key advantage (and prerequisite) of such proximal

Sustainability 2017, 9, 2084

4 of 13

safety indicators is that they occur considerably more frequently than crashes, an advantage that is especially applicable to roundabouts. This suggests the possibility of using significantly shorter study Sustainability 2017, 9, 2084 4 of 12 periods to establish statistically reliable results.

2.1. 2.1. Microsimulation Microsimulation Inputs Inputs The maximum The maximum entry entry capacity capacity for for each each roundabout roundabout scheme scheme was was defined defined as as the the entry entry flow flow corresponding to a volume to capacity (V/C) ratio of 0.8 to study the performance in an unsaturated corresponding to a volume to capacity (V/C) ratio of 0.8 to study the performance in an unsaturated traffic traffic condition. condition. The The outputs outputs were were then then normalized normalized (per (per 1000 1000 entering entering vehicles) vehicles) for for comparative comparative evaluation. This comparison is problematic for safety performance, given the non-linear evaluation. This comparison is problematic for safety performance, given the non-linear relationship relationship between between safety safety outcomes outcomes and and traffic traffic flow flow that that is is well well established established in in the the literature. literature. To To resolve resolve this this issue, safety performance of the roundabouts (as well as other measures for completeness) was also issue, safety performance of the roundabouts (as well as other measures for completeness) was also compared at a common entry flow of 2200 vph, representing approximately 80% of the lowest of the compared at a common entry flow of 2200 vph, representing approximately 80% of the lowest of the four effective entry capacities. These capacities are linked to the geometric layouts, specifically, four effective entry capacities. These capacities are linked to the geometric layouts, specifically, number number of lanes and outer diameter. The geometric parameters and capacities assumed for the of lanes and outer diameter. The geometric parameters and capacities assumed for the evaluation are evaluation are summarized in Table 1. A large number of traffic simulations were run by summarized in Table 1. A large number of traffic simulations were run by considering a balanced considering a balanced traffic distribution matrix , as depicted in Figure 2, which also depicts the traffic distribution matrix , as depicted in Figure 2, which also depicts the assumed geometric layouts. assumed geometric layouts.
Table 1. Geometric parameters and capacities of roundabouts evaluated. Table 1. Geometric parameters and capacities of roundabouts evaluated. Roundabout Type Roundabout Type Double lane Double lane Turbo Turbo Flower Flower Target N of Lanes N° of Lanes 2 2 2 2 Capacity (veh/h) Capacity (veh/h) Range Range 200­4000 200­4000 200­4600 200­4600 200­5500 200­5500 280­6500 31603160 29802980 3680 3680 4400 Outer Diameter (m) (m) Outer Diameter Effective Effective 66 66 56 56 55 55 72 40­70 40­70 40­70 40­70 4­70 4­70 >70

Effective Effective Range Range

Target

2 2 2 2

280­6500

4400

>70

72

Figure 2. Matrix () of traffic distribution and assumed roundabout layouts: (a) double-lane Figure 2. Matrix () of traffic distribution and assumed roundabout layouts: (a) double-lane roundabout; (b) turbo roundabout; (c) flower roundabout; (d) target roundabout. roundabout; (b) turbo roundabout; (c) flower roundabout; (d) target roundabout.

The simulations were run on a standard four-arm double-lane roundabout with a ring external diameter of 66 m, internal diameter of 46 m, and a ring lane width of 5 m for each lane (Figure 2a). Each arm of the intersection has four lanes (two for each direction). Its capacity is taken as 3950 veh/h (Table 1), with the simulations run at entry flows of 3160 veh/h, representing 80% of its capacity. The four-arm turbo roundabout (Figure 2b) has four lanes (two for each direction) in the main

Sustainability 2017, 9, 2084

5 of 13

The simulations were run on a standard four-arm double-lane roundabout with a ring external diameter of 66 m, internal diameter of 46 m, and a ring lane width of 5 m for each lane (Figure 2a). Each arm of the intersection has four lanes (two for each direction). Its capacity is taken as 3950 veh/h (Table 1), with the simulations run at entry flows of 3160 veh/h, representing 80% of its capacity. The four-arm turbo roundabout (Figure 2b) has four lanes (two for each direction) in the main direction (A­C) and two lanes (one for each direction) in the other direction, and has not just one radius, but eight radii. The simulated roundabout has an average external diameter of the ring of 56 m, and an internal average diameter of 36 m, and each ring's lane width is 5 m (Figure 2b). The turbo roundabout capacity is taken as 3725 veh/h (Table 1), with the initial simulations run with 2980 veh/h, representing 80% of its capacity. It is useful to remember that the choice of the turbo roundabout also depends on the predominant direction of the main traffic flow. In effect, the predominant direction of the main traffic flow is a criterion for the choice of the turbo roundabout [1]. The simulated flower roundabout is composed of a four-arm one-lane roundabout with a ring external diameter of 35 m, a ring internal diameter of 25 m, and a ring lane width of 5 m (Figure 2c), as well as four bypasses for right turn maneuvers. Each arm of the intersection has four lanes (two for each direction). Its capacity is taken as 4600 veh/h (See Table 1), with the initial simulations run at 3680 veh/h, representing 80% of its capacity. The simulated target roundabout is composed of two four-arm one-lane roundabouts. The upper roundabout, the larger of the two, has a ring external diameter of 72 m, a ring internal diameter of 62 m, and a ring lane width of 5 m; the lower roundabout has a ring external diameter of 48 m, a ring internal diameter of 38 m, and a ring lane width of 5 m. There are also two bypasses for right turn maneuvers from both directions A to D and C to B (Figure 2d). Each arm has five lanes in the main direction (A­C) and four lanes in the other direction (B­D). Its capacity is taken as 5500 veh/h (Table 1), with the initial simulations run at 4400 veh/h, representing 80% of its capacity. 2.2. Calibration Several studies have emphasized the importance of the calibration and validation process that allows microsimulation tools to provide reliable output. Thus, estimated traffic flow data for the analyzed intersections were used to calibrate microsimulation model parameters to try to reach reliable and realistic outputs, in terms of functional and safety performance measures. Through this approach, the simulation data can reflect the values estimated by meta-analytical models in the literature. To this end, it was decided to calibrate the Wiedemann 74 car-following model [11] used by PTV VISSIM software (version 6) in order to reliably and realistically simulate vehicle traffic within unconventional roundabouts. The meta-analytic model used was able to estimate the instantaneous circulating traffic flow entering from the entry arm (e.g., west), depending on the conflicting traffic flow entering from upstream arm (e.g., north), as shown in Figure 3. That model is the general one created by Hagring [12,13], which uses Equation (1) to determine the capacity of the arm to vary with the conflicting flow, Qc . Specifically, the parameters Tc = critical headway (s), Tf = follow-up headway (s), and  = the minimum headway of major traffic flow (s) used in Equation (1) were estimated by Giuffrè et al. [14]: Qc  × Qc e[- 3600 ×(Tc -)] veh Ce = Qc × 1 - × = (1) Qc 3600 h 1 - e[- 3600 ×Tf ]

simulation i, as follows: GEH = where M is the hourly Sustainability 2017 ,9 , 2084 ; GEH =


(2)
6 of 13

traffic volume from the traffic model and C is the hourly traffic count. Table 2 provides some interpretations of these values with respect to the calibration.

Figure 3. 3. Calibration Calibration curve curve for for double double lane lane roundabout: roundabout: VISSIM VISSIM vs vs Hagring Hagring model. model. Figure

In order to calibrate the VISSIM car-following model, an origin/destination (O/D)matrix was GEHwhereby i Interpretation selected thereGEH are two traffic flows for the directions west-east and north-south. The west-east GEHflow i < 5 is fixed in GEH > 85% Acceptable value while the north-south traffic such a way that the arm is always at its maximum capacity, 5 < GEH i < 10 85% < from GEH a <Q 70% Probable error model or wrong traffic flow is varied veh/h to a Qcin equal todevelopment 1400 veh/h with stepsdata of about c equal to 0 GEH i > 10 GEH < 70% High probability of error in pattern development or wrong data 200 veh/h. Starting the simulation with the VISSIM software, the dashed curve in the Figure 3 was obtained, calibration taskto was approached by changing the VISSIM set for "Driving from The which it is possible extrapolate the black curve obtained fromparameter the application of the Equation (1). Behavior Parameter Set\Following". the optimal combination obtained by the The car-following model was consideredSpecifically, to be satisfactorily calibrated when the two curves overlap. calibration processthe is: model's validity, the Geoffrey E. Havers (GEH) statistic index (2) was used as To further explore the for accepting the template. This index is aof global indicator widely used for m; the validation - criterion Look ahead distance: maximum of 105 m instead the default value equal to 250 of traffic simulation models, especially when only aggregate values such as traffic flow counts in - Look back distance: set to 30 m longer than the default value equal to 250 m; time-based detection stations and input capacity are available [15]. The GEH index value is the average - Temporary lack of attention: duration 1 s; probability 8%; over n --it was considered equal to 8--simulations of the index for each simulation i, as follows: - Flagging smooth close-up behavior;

Table 2. Interpretation of GEHi (Geoffrey E. Havers) and GEH values.

-

Average standstill distance: set value equal to 5.00 instead of the default value equal to 2.00; 2 C)2 to 3.6 instead (M -equal n GEH i Additive part of safety distance: set value ; GEH = i=1 of the default value equal to 2.00; GEHi = (2) M+C n default value equal to 3.00. ) 2.00 instead of the Multiple of safety distance: set value ( equal to

where M is the Wiedemann hourly traffic74 volume from the trafficcalibrated model and C isthe theabove hourly traffic count. Using car-following model with parameters, the values Table 2 provides some of GEH reported in Table 3 interpretations were obtained. of these values with respect to the calibration.
Table 2. Interpretation of results GEHi (Geoffrey Havers) and GEH values. Table 3. GEH obtained E. from simulation. GEHi GEH Type Roundabout GEH > 85% Double lane 85% < GEH < 70% Turbo GEH < 70%

Right Lane Left Lane Acceptable value 2 87.5 100 Probable error in model development or wrong data 2 87.5 87.5 or wrong data High probability of error in pattern development Flower 2 87.5 87.5 Target 2 87.5 87.5 The calibration task was approached by changing the VISSIM parameter set for the "Driving Behavior Parameter Set\Following". Specifically, the optimal combination obtained by the calibration process is:
GEHi < 5 5 < GEHi < 10 GEHi > 10

N° of Lanes

GEH (%) Interpretation

-

Look ahead distance: maximum of 105 m instead of the default value equal to 250 m; Look back distance: set to 30 m longer than the default value equal to 250 m; Temporary lack of attention: duration 1 s; probability 8%; Flagging smooth close-up behavior;

Sustainability 2017, 9, 2084

7 of 13

-

Average standstill distance: set value equal to 5.00 instead of the default value equal to 2.00; Additive part of safety distance: set value equal to 3.6 instead of the default value equal to 2.00; Multiple of safety distance: set value equal to 2.00 instead of the default value equal to 3.00.

Using the Wiedemann 74 car-following model calibrated with the above parameters, the values of GEH reported in Table 3 were obtained.
Table 3. GEH results obtained from simulation. GEH (%) Right Lane 87.5 87.5 87.5 87.5 Left Lane 100 87.5 87.5 87.5

Roundabout Type Double lane Turbo Flower Sustainability 2017, 9, 2084 Target

N of Lanes 2 2 2 2

7 of 12

Finally, the calibration parameters for "Lane change" and "Lateral" were taken from the Finally, the calibration parameters for "Lane change" and "Lateral" were taken from the research research conducted by Shahdah et al. [16]. conducted by Shahdah et al. [16]. 3. Results 3. Results 3.1. Operational Operational Performance Performance Measures Measures 3.1. Figure 4 4 shows shows the thecomparison comparison of ofabsolute absoluteand andnormalized normalized operational operational performance performance measures measures Figure for different roundabout layouts for entry flows at 80% of capacity. It can be seen that the target for different roundabout layouts for entry flows at 80% of capacity. It can be seen that the target roundabout has the highest absolute and normalized values (per 1000 entering vehicles). roundabout has the highest absolute and normalized values (per 1000 entering vehicles).
Average queue length [m] 200 150 100 50 0 Average queue delay [s] 80 60 40 20 0 14000 12000 10000 8000 6000 4000 2000 0 Number of stops

Results for V/C = 0.8

Figure Figure 4. 4. Comparison Comparison of of absolute absolute and and normalized normalized operational operational performance performance measures measures for for different different roundabout layouts for entry flows of 0.8 of capacity (V/C = 0.8). roundabout layouts for entry flows of 0.8 of capacity (V/C =0.8).

Figure 4 4 shows shows also also that that the the turbo turbo roundabout roundabout has has the the largest largest values values of of average average queue queue delay delay Figure and number number of of stops stops for for both both 80% 80% of of the the capacity capacity and and 1000 1000 vehicle vehicle entry entry flow flow levels. levels. On balance, balance, and considering the three performance measures as a whole, the double lane roundabout seems best for for considering the three performance measures as a whole, the double lane roundabout seems best both 80% of the capacity and 1000 vehicle entry flow levels. These results seem reasonable because both 80% of the capacity and 1000 vehicle entry flow levels. These results seem reasonable because the choice choice to to upgrade upgrade the the roundabout roundabout design design from fromthe the traditional traditionalto to the the unconventional unconventional ones ones is is often often the linked to high traffic flow observed for the actual (traditional) design solution. linked to high traffic flow observed for the actual (traditional) design solution. Figure 5 5 shows shows the the comparison comparison of of absolute absolute performance performance measures measures for for different different roundabout roundabout Figure layoutsfor for entry flows of 2200 veh/h. In terms of length queueand length and queue delay, the turbo layouts entry flows of 2200 veh/h. In terms of queue queue delay, the turbo roundabout roundabout and flower roundabout do not perform as well as the double-lane roundabout. Of and flower roundabout do not perform as well as the double-lane roundabout. Of course, this may be course, this be O/D a result of selected. the specific O/D matrix At the same time, the a result of the may specific matrix At the same time, selected. from the comparison shown in from Figure 5, comparison shown in Figure 5, the target roundabout performs the best for all measures, contrary to the target roundabout performs the best for all measures, contrary to the results for flows of 80% of the results for flows of 80% of capacity. This is because the target roundabout would be an overdesign for this traffic demand and therefore unlikely be a cost-effective design compared to the traditional one.
Average queue length [m] Average queue delay [s] Number of stops

Figure 5 shows the comparison of absolute performance measures for different roundabout layouts for entry flows of 2200 veh/h. In terms of queue length and queue delay, the turbo roundabout and flower roundabout do not perform as well as the double-lane roundabout. Of course, this may be a result of the specific O/D matrix selected. At the same time, from the Sustainability 2017 , 9, 2084 8 of 13 comparison shown in Figure 5, the target roundabout performs the best for all measures, contrary to the results for flows of 80% of capacity. This is because the target roundabout would be an overdesign for this traffic demand and therefore unlikely be a cost-effective design compared to the capacity. This is because the target roundabout would be an overdesign for this traffic demand and traditional one. therefore unlikely be a cost-effective design compared to the traditional one.
Average queue length [m] 100 80 60 40 20 0 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 Average queue delay [s] 8000 6000 4000 2000 0 Results for 2200 Veh/h Number of stops

Double

Figure ofof operational performance measures for different roundabout layouts for entry Figure5. 5.Comparison Comparison operational performance measures for different roundabout layouts for flows 2200 veh/h. entry of flows of 2200 veh/h.

3.2. Safety Performance Measures As mentioned earlier, these measures were derived using SSAM with the vehicle trajectory files from the VISSIM microsimulation. The time to collision (TTC) is a safety indicator based on an objective measure of speed and distance for conflicting road users in relation to a common conflict point [17]. The post encroachment time (PET) is a safety indicator that represents a measure [18] of the elapsed time between the departure of an encroaching vehicle and the actual arrival of a trailing vehicle at the same location. TTC and PET are both indicators of collision propensity, with smaller minimum values during a conflict event indicating a higher probability of, or nearness to a collision [19]. For TTC, the analysis was conducted with conflicts specified as both 0.1 s < TTC <1.5 s. For the PET indicator, conflicts were specified as 0.5 s < PET < 2.5 s. Among the data associated with each conflict is a MinTTC variable, which is the simulation time where the minimum TTC value for that conflict was observed [20]. That variable was used to filter out all conflicts that occurred during the simulation time. Three comparative safety evaluations were conducted based on different measures: The First V and Second V MinTTC value, i.e., the speed of the first and second vehicles at MinTTC, for entry flows of 0.8 V/C (absolute and normalized per 1000 vehicles) and for 2200 veh/h; The estimated conflicts from SSAM. This is done for entry flows of 0.8 V/C (absolute and normalized per 1000 vehicles) and for 2200 veh/h; Estimated crashes based on applying estimated conflicts (for entry flows of 0.8 V/C and for 2200 veh/h) in crash-conflict models;

Figure 6 shows that the First V MinTTC value, i.e., the speed of the first vehicle at MinTTC, is almost the same for the double lane, the turbo, and the target roundabouts, but is lower in the flower roundabout. A similar trend was obtained for Second V MinTTC (Figure 6), i.e., the speed of the second vehicle at MinTTC, for which the flower roundabout again has the lowest average value. Figure 7 shows a comparison of the estimated conflicts for entry flows of 0.8 V/C and entering flows of 2200. The best performance is achieved by the turbo roundabout layout when the entering flow is equal to 0.8 V/C. The flower roundabout and the target roundabout have essentially the same level of potential conflicts when the entering flow is equal to 0.8 V/C, likely a result of the higher traffic volume at these layouts (3680 veh/h for the flower and 4400 veh/h for the target roundabouts). On the other hand, for the same entering flow of 2200 veh/h, the turbo roundabout is the best solution among the three at-grade layouts, while the target roundabout's apparent superiority is likely due to the considerable overdesign for this traffic volume level, as noted earlier.

Flower

Target

Turbo

veh/h) in crash-conflict models; Figure 6 shows that the First V MinTTC value, i.e., the speed of the first vehicle at MinTTC, is almost the same for the double lane, the turbo, and the target roundabouts, but is lower in the flower roundabout. A similar trend was obtained for Second V MinTTC (Figure 6), i.e., the speed of the Sustainability 2017, 9, 2084 9 of 13 second vehicle at MinTTC, for which the flower roundabout again has the lowest average value.
FirstVMinTTC for 0.1<TTC<1.5 and 0.5<PET<2.5 FirstVMinTTC for 0.5<TTC<1.5 and 0.5<PET<2.5 6 4 2 0 8 6 4 2 0 SecondVMinTTC for 0.1<TTC<1.5 and 0.5<PET<2.5 8 6 4 2 0 Results for V/C = 0.8 Results for 1000 vehicles SecondVMinTTC for 0.5<TTC<1.5 and 0.5<PET<2.5

6 4 2 0

FirstVMinTTC for 0.1<TTC<1.5 and 0.5<PET<2.5 6 Sustainability 2017, 9, 2084 4 2 6 4

FirstVMinTTC for 0.5<TTC<1.5 and 0.5<PET<2.5

SecondVMinTTC for 0.1<TTC<1.5 and 0.5<PET<2.5 15 10

SecondVMinTTC for 0.5<TTC<1.5 and 0.5<PET<2.5

15 10 9 of 12 Results for

5 conflicts for entry flows 2 5 Figure 7 shows a comparison of the estimated of 0.8 V/C and entering 2200 Veh/h flows of 2200. The best performance is achieved by the turbo roundabout layout when the entering 0 0 0 0 flow is equal to 0.8 V/C. The flower roundabout and the target roundabout have essentially the same level of potential conflicts when the entering flow is equal to 0.8 V/C, likely a result of the higher traffic volume at these layouts (3680 veh/h for the flower and 4400 veh/h for the target roundabouts). Figure 6. and Second different roundabout layouts for flows On the other hand, for of the same flow of for 2200 veh/h, the turbo roundabout is the best Figure 6. Comparison Comparison of First First andentering Second V V MinTTC MinTTC for different roundabout layouts for entry entry flows of 0.8 V/C, for 1000 veh/h and for 2200 veh/h. solution among the three at-grade layouts, while the target roundabout's apparent superiority is of 0.8 V/C, for 1000 veh/h and for 2200 veh/h. likely due to the considerable overdesign for this traffic volume level, as noted earlier.

Figure 7. 7. Predicted Predicted conflicts conflicts by by Surrogate Surrogate Safety Safety Assessment Assessment Model Model (SSAM) (SSAM) for for each each roundabout roundabout at at Figure C = 2200 veh/h and Q = 0.8 V/C. C = 2200 veh/h and Q = 0.8 V/C.

In Figure 8, it is possible to see that the pattern in the conflict path or density is quite different In Figure 8, it is possible to see that the pattern in the conflict path or density is quite different among the roundabout designs evaluated for the given traffic (2200 veh/h). The double-lane among the roundabout designs evaluated for the given traffic (2200 veh/h). The double-lane roundabout concentrates the conflicts along the ring; the flower roundabout concentrates the roundabout concentrates the conflicts along the ring; the flower roundabout concentrates the conflicts conflicts both along the arms and the ring; the turbo roundabout shows the most conflicts along the both along the arms and the ring; the turbo roundabout shows the most conflicts along the arm. Finally, arm. Finally, the target roundabout shows very few conflict events. the target roundabout shows very few conflict events.

In Figure 8, it is possible to see that the pattern in the conflict path or density is quite different among the roundabout designs evaluated for the given traffic (2200 veh/h). The double-lane roundabout concentrates the conflicts along the ring; the flower roundabout concentrates the Sustainability 2017along , 9, 2084the arms and the ring; the turbo roundabout shows the most conflicts along 10 of 13 conflicts both the arm. Finally, the target roundabout shows very few conflict events.

Figure 8. Conflict maps for each roundabout design at C = 2200 veh/h: (+) Crossing; () Lane change; (O) Rear end. (a) Double-lane roundabout; (b) Turbo-roundabout; (c) Flower roundabout; (d) Target roundabout.

For the comparison of estimated crashes, the crash-conflict models developed by Saulino et al. [21] for roundabouts were used. These models were as follows: PHCAAS = e × PHV1
1 CRA = e × PHC AAS × YEARS

(3) (4)

The conflict prediction models, which are reproduced in Table 4, contain the peak hour volume (PHV), and considers the peak hour conflicts simulated (PHCAAS ) in Equation (3) before estimating crashes (CRA) with Equation (4), whose parameters are also shown in Table 4.
Table 4. Conflict prediction and expected prediction models used for the comparison. Parameter  1 2 AIC (Akaike information criterion) MPB (Mean prediction bias) MAD (Mean absolute deviation) MSE (mean squared error) Equation (3) Estimate p-Value <0.0001 <0.0001 191.8 0.303 6.53 156.7 Equation (4) Estimate p-Value 0.0378 0.0003 165.5 -0.026 1.26 3.62

-6.287 1.3577 -

-0.7824 0.6828 -

The results of the comparison are depicted in Figure 9, which reflects the results based on conflicts, showing that the turbo roundabout had the best safety performance for the at-grade roundabouts, and the flower roundabout had the worst.

MAD (Mean absolute deviation) MSE (mean squared error)

6.53 156.7

1.26 3.62

conflicts, showing that Sustainability 2017, 9, 2084

The results of the comparison are depicted in Figure 9, which reflects the results based on the turbo roundabout had the best safety performance for the at-grade 11 of 13 roundabouts, and the flower roundabout had the worst.

Figure9. 9.Estimated Estimatedcrashes crashesfor foreach eachroundabout roundaboutdesign design starting starting from from Surrogate Surrogate Safety Safety Assessment Assessment Figure Model (SSAM) simulation considering 0.1 < TTC < 1.5. Model (SSAM) simulation considering 0.1 < TTC < 1.5. At first glance, it would seem counterintuitive that the flower roundabout, with separated right At first glance, it would seem counterintuitive that the flower roundabout, with separated right turns, has the worst safety results based on conflicts. However, the flower roundabout performance turns, has the worst safety results based on conflicts. However, the flower roundabout performance in terms of safety could depend on the O/D matrix selected as well as the traffic flow considered. For in terms of safety could depend on the O/D matrix selected as well as the traffic flow considered. example, the matrix considered was not focused on right-turn maneuvers, so just 33% of the For example, the matrix considered was not focused on right-turn maneuvers, so just 33% of the movements were right turns, in contrast to the 66% of movements that were either left turn or movements were right turns, in contrast to the 66% of movements that were either left turn or through. In addition, for the hourly traffic flow considered, it is possible that some types of conflicts such as rear-end could proliferate. Thus, for the O/D matrix considered when the simulated traffic flow was equal to 80% of capacity, the flower roundabout was the worse layout, but the relative safety performance improved for a traffic flow of 2200 veh/h, in that the flower roundabout had a larger improvement in safety performance (in terms of percent reduction in conflicts) than the double lane or turbo roundabouts.
4. Summary and Further Research For this research, microsimulation was used to simulate traffic operations at roundabouts with standard and newer layouts at various levels of traffic volume. Performance measures were obtained, including measures of safety that were based on conflicts estimated from trajectories generated in the microsimulation. Regarding operational performance measures, the target roundabout has the largest queue length when traffic volume is 80% of its capacity. On the other hand, normalized for 1000 vehicles entering, the target and the turbo roundabout values have similar queue lengths. The maximum value of average queue delay was obtained in the turbo roundabout, which also has the highest number of stops for both 80% of the capacity and 1000 vehicle entry flow levels. The comparison of the roundabouts at the same entry flow level (2200 veh/h) produces different results. In that case, for the O/D matrix considered, the flower roundabout has the largest queue length as well as queue delay. The target roundabout seems best at this demand level, unlike the case for operation at 80% of capacity, but this benefit must be considered in the light of the cost of construction, since the target roundabout is likely overdesigned and therefore not cost-beneficial for lower traffic demands. On balance, considering the three performance measures as a whole, the double lane roundabout seems best for both 80% of the capacity and 1000 vehicle entry flow levels. Regarding safety performance measures, for both predicted conflicts and expected crashes, the highest values pertained to the flower roundabout and the lowest values for the target roundabout

Sustainability 2017, 9, 2084

12 of 13

when the entering traffic is equal to 2200 veh/h. As was the case for the operational benefits, this advantage of the target roundabout is unlikely to be cost-beneficial, since it is overdesigned for this lower traffic demand. Considering the less expensive at-grade roundabouts--double lane, flower, and turbo--the best safety performance is attained by the turbo roundabout both for entry flows of 0.8 V/C and 2200 veh/h. The research is on-going. In the near future, the layouts would be evaluated at different traffic volume levels given the promise of the comparative evaluation approach presented in this paper. In addition, the designs will be evaluated in the presence of automated vehicles at various penetration levels by applying behavioral parameters in VISSIM that have been proposed in recent and on-going research by others.
Author Contributions: Tullio Giuffrè provided the framework for the research program and the methodological approach. He defined the operational inputs for simulations, developed the simulation parameter calibration approach and, finally, reviewed the study findings. Salvatore Trubia and Antonino Canale performed the traffic simulations by Vissim and then the conflict analysis by SSAM. Bhagwant Persaud provided oversight for the crash prediction evaluation and high level editorial review of the paper. Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1. 2. Tollazzi, T. Alternative Types of Roundabouts; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2015. Tollazzi, T.; Mauro, R.; Guerrieri, M.; Ren celj, M. Comparative Analysis of Four New Alternative Types of Roundabouts: "Turbo", "Flower", "Target" and "Four-Flyover" Roundabout. Period. Polytech. Civ. Eng. 2016, 60, 51­60. [CrossRef] Higle, J.L.; Witowski, J.M. Bayesian Identification of Hazardous Locations Transportation Research Record; TRB; National Research Council: Washington, DC, USA, 1988; pp. 24­31. Giuffre, O.; Grana, A.; Giuffre, T.; Marino, S.; Marino, R. Flower roundabouts and double-lane roundabouts: A comparative performance analysis. Arch. Civ. Eng. 2014, 60, 349­365. [CrossRef] Tollazzi, T.; Jovanovic, G.; Rencelj, M. New type of roundabout: Dual one-lane roundabouts on two levels with right-hand turning bypasses--"Target roundabout". Promet-Traffic Transp. 2013, 25, 475­481. [CrossRef] Tollazzi, T.; Tesoriere, G.; Guerrieri, M.; Campisi, T. Environmental, functional and economic criteria for comparing "target roundabouts" with one or two-level roundabout intersections. Transp. Res. Part D 2015, 34, 330­344. [CrossRef] Archer, J.; Kosonen, I. The Potential of Micro-Simulation Modelling in Relation to Traffic Safety Assessment. In Proceedings of the ESS Conference 2000, Hamburg, Germany, 28­30 September 2000. VISSIM 5.30 User Manual--PTV Planug Transport Verkehr AG; Manufacture: Karlsruhe, Germany, 2011. Available online: https://www.et.byu.edu/msaito/CE662MS/Labs/VISSIM_530_e.pdf (assessed on 12 November 2017). Gettman, D.; Pu, L.; Sayed, T.; Shelby, S. Surrogate Safety Assessment Model and Validation: Final Report; Report No. FHWA-HRT-08-051; Turner-Fairbank Highway Research Center: McLean, VA, USA; Federal Highway Administration: Washington, DC, USA, June 2008. Sayed, T.; Zein, S. Traffic conflict standards for intersections. Transp. Plan. Technol. 1999, 22, 309­323. [CrossRef] Erfan, A. Investigation of Automated Vehicle e Ects on Driver's Behavior and Tra c Performance; Linköpings Universitet: Linköping, Sweden, March 2016. Hagring, O. A further generalization of tanner's formula. Transp. Res. Part B Methodol. 1998, 32, 423­429. [CrossRef] Hagring, O. Derivation of Capacity Equation for Roundabout Entry with Mixed Circulating and Exiting Flows. Transp. Res. Rec. J. Transp. Res. Board 2000, 1, 91­99. [CrossRef] Giuffrè, O.; Granà, A.; Tumminello, M.L. Exploring the uncertainty in capacity estimation at roundabouts. Eur. Transp. Res. Rev. 2017, 9, 18. [CrossRef] Feldman, O. The GEH measure and quality of the highway assignment models. In Proceedings of the European Transport Conference, Glasgow, UK, 8­10 October 2012.

3. 4. 5. 6.

7. 8.

9.

10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15.

Sustainability 2017, 9, 2084

13 of 13

16. 17.

18. 19. 20. 21.

Shahdah, U.E. Integrating Observational and Microscopic Simulation Model for Traffic Safety Analysis. Master's Thesis, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, 2014. Hyden, C. The Development of a Method for Traffic Safety Evaluation: The Swedish Traffic Conflicts Technique; University of Lund, Lund Institute of Technology Department of Traffic Planning and Engineering: Scania, Sweden, 1987. Shelby, S.G. Delta-V as a Measure of Traffic Conflict Severity. In Proceedings of the 90th Annual Meeting of the Transportation Research Board Compendium of Papers, Washington, DC, USA, 23­27 January 2011. Chin, H.C.; Quek, S.T. Measurement of Traffic Conflicts. Saf. Sci. 1997, 26, 169­185. [CrossRef] Souleyrette, R.; Hochstein, J. Development of a Conflict Analysis Methodology Using SSAM; Final Report; Center for Transportation Research and Education, Iowa State University: Ames, IA, USA, August 2012. Saulino, G.; Persaud, B.; Bassani, M. Calibration and application of crash prediction models for safety assessment of roundabouts based on simulated conflicts. In Proceedings of the 94th Transportation Research Board (TRB) Annual Meeting, Washington, DC, USA, 11­15 January 2015. © 2017 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).


