b

rJollf.:213.:f
L6;··~
<t

l~

ENERGY ANALYSIS USING CARRIER HAP PROGRAl\1 AND DEEP LAKE WATER COOLING (DL\VC) FEASIBILITY ANALYSIS FOR RYERSON UNIVERSITY

uS R~ If-

by

Md. Ziaur Rahman
Bachelor of Engineering (Mechanical) Rajshahi University of Engineering and Technology Rajshahi, Bangladesh, 1997

A project

presented to Ryerson University

In partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Engineering in the Program of Mechanical Engineering

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2010

© Md. Ziaur Rahman, 2010

PROPERTY OF

RYERSON .IlN.IVERSITY LIBRARY

Abstract
The objective of this project is to detennine the total annual energy summary in tenns of cost and Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emission of 16 buildings at Ryerson University (RU). In addition, the Deep Lake Water Cooling (DLWC) feasibility analysis ofRU is another objective of this project in tenns of total energy consumption and amount of gas emission reduction. The total audit area of RU was 86% of the total campus area. Building energy simulation program, Carrier HAP (Hourly Analysis Program), has been used to make an integrated evaluation of building energy consumption. An energy simulation involves hour-by-hour calculations for all 8,760 hours in a year.

In this project, an energy audit was conducted for the 16 existing buildings to establish the base case model, "Ryerson University", to detennine its annual energy consumption across all usage. There are two sources of energy used at RU. Electricity uses for lighting, plug load, miscellaneous and cooling, and remote steam is used for cooling and heating. For the base case model, total energy consumption was 251 TJ. To reduce the total energy consumption of the base case model, HV AC systems were investigated to analyze their energy-based perfonnance and impact on the GHG emission. There is no Heat Recovery Ventilation (HRV) system coming from the investigation of HVAC system. The sensitivity analysis was conducted using HRV system with air system. By using HRV system with air system, total of 5.6% energy would be saved for cooling and 76% energy would be saved for heating of RU. The energy intensity was detennined to be 1.04 GJ/m2 only for 16 buildings of RU and comparatively it is lower than other universities in Canada which have a range of 1.64 GJ/m2 to 2.26 GJ/m2 ·

In the DL WC system, cool lake water at 4°C was used for building air conditioning. To reduce the cooling energy costs, DLWC system was considered as an alternative chilled water source. The Rogers Business Building (RBB) already has DL WC system. For DL WC system, chilled water was served by Enwave to the RBB. According to base case analysis of the RBB with conventional chillers, the electricity consumption was 924594 kWh for RBB due to chillers. With the implementation of DL WC system for the rest of the 15 buildings, total energy saving due to cooling would be 89.2% and GHG emission reduction would be 89% for CO2, 70% for NO x and 70.4% for SOx due to elimination of chillers.

Acknowledgements

Firstly, I am especially grateful to my respectful advisor Dr. Alan S. Fung for his assistance, encouragement and critical acumen that helped me to complete my M. Eng. project. He also helped me to provide valuable information, solve critical problems and answer questions during this project. Without his counselling and feedback it would be difficult for me to deal with such a big project. Secondly, I also thank Dr. Shudong Yu, Chair of this committee and Dr. Wey Leong, member of this committee for their participation. Thirdly, I would like to thank all of the Campus Planning staff who supplied necessary documents and provided key information required to complete this project. Finally, I want to thank my wife and family for encouraging me to complete this project.

11

-------

.. ~~-

Table of Contents
Abstract Acknowledgements Table of Contents List of Figures List of Tables List of Abbreviations 1. Introduction
1.1. 1.2. 1.3. Energy Management Building Energy Simulation Overview Building Energy Analysis Energy Analysis Simulation Software Deep Lake Water Cooling (DLWC) System Overview of Ryerson University Campus Energy Consumption Methodology used for modeling of All Ryerson University (RU) buildings The Objective of the Study
11
111

VI
V III

XI

1
3

4
5

104.
1.5. 1.6. 1.7. 1.8.

7
11
12 16 18

2. Deep Lake Water Cooling (DLWC) System
2.1. 2.2. 2.3. Background on the Deep Lake Water Cooling (DL WC) Concept Importance of DLWC System Example of Deep Water Cooling (DWC) System Working Procedure of Enwave DL WC system

19
19
21 22 25

204.

3. Carrier HAP Energy Simulation Program
3.1. 3.2. 3.3. Carrier HAP Overview Introduction to "Carrier HAP" Program Different Calculation Engines Carrier HAP Strength and Limitation Carrier HAP Weather Data
111

28
28

29
30 31 32

304.
3.5.

3.6. 3.7.

Space Usage and Interior Environment Heat Balance Method 3.7.1. 3.7.2. Building Energy Analysis Method Transfer Function Method

35 36 37 37 38 40 42

3.8. 3.9. 3.lO.

Fundamental Terminologies of HAP Using HAP to Design Systems and Plants Using HAP to Estimate Energy Use and Cost

4. Energy Audit of Ryerson University Campus
4.1. 4.2. 4.3. 4.4. 4.5. Overview of Energy Assessment / Audit History of Ryerson University Site Visit of Ryerson University Weather Data Specification Building Data 4.5.1. 4.5.2. 4.6. Building Envelope Specification Building Operation

45
45 48 49 51 52 52 54 55 55 56 62 63 64

HV AC System Data 4.6.1. Air Distribution System 4.6.1.1. Type of Air Distribution System 4.6.2. Economizer

4.7. 4.8.

Lighting System Data Energy Price and Operation Cost (Flat Rate and TOU)

5. Base Case Model Energy Simulation with Carrier HAP
5.l. Creating Input Data File (IDF) for HAP Simulation 5.1.I. 5.1.2. 5.1.3. Location and Design Climate Space Data Input Zoning of the building

65
65 65 66 68 69 71 76

5.1.4. Building Use Information 5.1.5. 5.2. HV AC Equipment Data

Simulation Results
IV

5.2.1. 5.2.2. 5.2.3. 5.2.4. 5.3. 5.4.

Cooling Load Simulation Space Heating Calculation by Carrier HAP Comparison of Electricity Consumption Steam Consumption

77 80 82 87
95 99

Sensitivity Analysis for Cooling and Heating Load Energy Intensity

6. Feasibility Study ofDLWC System in Ryerson University
6.1. DLWC System of RBB 6.1.1. 6.2. 6.3. Potential Benefit ofDLCW for RBB

104
104 105 107 109 109
112

Proposed DLWC System of Ryerson University Campus Comparison between existing Conventional Chiller and DL WC System 6.3.1. 6.3.2. Potential Benefit for DLWC ofRU Buildings GHGs Emission ofRU Buildings

7. Conclusion
8. Recommendations 9. References

117 118 119

Appendix
Appendix-A Appendix-B Appendix-C Appendix-D Appendix-E Appendix-F

121 121 123 128
135 138

141

v

I

List of the Figures
1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 2.1 2.2 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4
GHG Emissions by Energy Source in (Mt of CO2) Typical Energy Management Program Basic Models of a Simulation System All Ryerson University Buildings Cooling Served by the different Cooling Systems Different Heating Systems of Ryerson Campus Flow Chart of Modelling the All Ryerson University (RU) Buildings Temperature of Lake Ontario at Different Depths Throughout the Year Basic Elements of Enwave Deep Lake Water Cooling System Weather Properties Screen Simulation Modeling of the Thermal Environment Design Procedure of Systems and Plants using HAP Energy Analysis Procedure Flowchart for Building Simulation Model using Carrier HAP Program Energy Study Approach Ryerson University Campus Map Weather Data Screen Typical Air Distribution System Arrangement of a VA V System Typical Arrangement of an ABU on Economizer Mode Carrier HAP Space Properties Screen of IMA Building Space (Zone) Input Data Fornl of Scenario Actual Fiscal Year Electricity Consumption of Ryerson University Buildings Actual Fiscal Year Steam Consumption of Ryerson University Buildings

2 3 6 14 15 17 26 27 33 34 41 42 44 48 49 51 56 58 62 67 69 83 87

VI

5.5 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9

Actual Fiscal Year Steam Consumption ofRBB Building C02 Produce by HV AC and Non-HV AC Components for the Base Case N 20 Produce by HV AC and Non-HV AC Components for the Base Case Annual Component Energy Demand of 16 RU Buildings from Carrier HAP Annual Electricity Consumption for Air System Fans (GJ), Pumps (GJ), Lights (GJ), Equipment (GJ) and Miscellaneous Electric (GJ) of Ryerson Buildings Annual Energy Demand for Cooling (GJ) and Heating (GJ) of Ryerson Buildings Comparison of Cooling Load Between Base Case and with Heat Recovery System Comparison of Heating Load Between Base Case and with Heat Recovery System Energy Intensity GJ/m2 for 16 Buildings and Chillers of Ryerson University Energy Intensity (including chiller energy consumption) GJ/m2 for 16 Buildings ofRU

88 91 91 92 93

.

5.10 5.11 5.12 5.13 5.14 5.15 5.16 6.1 6.2 6.3 6.4 6.5 6.6 6.7

94 97 99 101 102 103 103 105 108 110 112 113 116 116

Comparison of Energy Intensity of Regional Universities, 2003 with RU Energy Consumption GJ/m2 vs. Ryerson Buildings Gross Area (m2) Actual Chilled Water Consumption (MWh) in Year 2007 for RBB Proposed DL WC System for Entire Ryerson University Campus Annual Energy Consumption for Conventional Chiller and DL WC System Annual Energy Cost due to Conventional Chiller and DLWC System Percentage of GHG Emissions by Energy Source for Universities Percentage of Gas Emission Reduction due to DLWC System Percentage of C02 and NO x Emission by Energy Source for Ryerson University due to Chillers

Vll

List of the Tables
1.1 1.2
)

Floor area of All Ryerson University Buildings Floor area of All Ryerson University Buildings for Heating Annual Emissions Reductions due to LSC List of Ryerson Buildings for Energy Audit and Base Case Simulation School ofImage Art (IMA) Building Wall Construction School ofImage Art (IMA) Building Roof Construction School of Image Art (IMA) Building Window Construction School ofImage Art (IMA) Building Door Assembly List of Conditioned Floor area for Ryerson Buildings HVAC Air Distribution System Properties of Ryerson Buildings Air Handling Unit (AHU) Specification for IMA Building Exhaust Fan Schedule of IMA Building Motorized Heaters Schedule of IMA Building Heating and Plumbing Pumps Schedule of IMA Building Steam Injection Humidifier Schedule of IMA Building Lighting Specification of Ryerson University Buildings Hydro Price (¢/kWh) for Toronto Area according to Time of Use and Flat Rate Annual Solar Heat Gain for Toronto Percentage of Exposure area of Ryerson Buildings Ryerson University Operating Schedules

13 15 25 50 53 53 53 54 55 59 60 60 61 61 61 63 64 66 68 70

2.1 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 4.10 4.11 4.12 4.13 4.14 5.1 5.2 5.3

viii

5.4

List of Central Chiller Plants in the Library and the RCC building of Ryerson University Double Effect Absorption Water Chiller Configuration Carrier Electric Chiller Configuration York Electric Chiller Configuration Trane Electric Chiller Configuration Cooling Tower Configuration Peak Cooling Load for Individual Building ofRU Maximum Cooling Plant Load for Selected Buildings of RU Chilled Water Demand of Ryerson University Peak Heating Load for Individual Building of RU Maximum Plant Heating Load for 16 Buildings ofRU Actual Electricity Consumption of Ryerson University Buildings Per Square Meter Electricity Comparison for Three Fiscal Years Annual Chillers Electricity Consumption The Comparison of Electricity Consumption for 16 Ryerson Buildings Per Square Meter Electricity Comparison for Gross and Conditional Area Actual Remote Steam Consumption of Ryerson University Buildings (Meter-l & 2) Simulation of Steam Consumption ofRU Comparison of Base Case Annual Steam Consumption with Carrier HAP simulation CO2 and N 2 0 by HV AC and Non-HV AC Components for the Base Case

71

5.5 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9 5.10 5.11 5.12 5.13 5.14 5.15 5.16 5.17 5.18 5.19 5.20 5.21 5.22 5.23

72 73 74 75 76 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 84 85 86 87 89 90 90

IX

5.24 5.25 5.26 5.27 5.28 5.29 6.1 6.2 6.3 6.4 6.5 6.6 6.7 6.8 6.9 6.10 6.11

Annual Electricity Demand for HV AC and Non-HV AC System from HAP Annual Energy Consumption per Unit Gross Area (GJ/m2) Comparison of Annual Cooling Load with Heat Recovery Ventilation (HRV) system for 16 buildings of Ryerson University Comparison of Annual Heating Load with Heat Recovery Ventilation (HRV) for 16 Buildings of Ryerson University Without Chillers Energy Intensity GJ/m2 for 16 Ryerson University Buildings Total Energy Intensity for each Building with and without Chillers Chilled Water Consumption for the Year of 2007 of RBB Chilled Water Consumption difference of RBB Electricity Consumption for Model Chiller Plant of RBB Hourly Electricity and GHGs production for Base Case Hourly Electricity and GHGs production for DLWC system Annual Electricity Savings and Emissions Reductions due to DLWCforRBB Energy Consumption due to Conventional Chiller and DL WC System Annual Energy Cost due to Conventional Chiller and DLWC System GHG Emissions (thousands oftonnes) by Energy Source for Universities Natural Gas and Steam Conversion Table GHGs Emission due to Conventional Chiller and DLWC System

92 95 96 98 100 101 104 105 106 106 107 107 110 111
113

'I
.;

114 115

x

NOMENCLATURE I NOTATION

AlC
ACH ARI ASHRAE

AIR CONDITIONING AIR CHANGE PER HOUR AIR CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION INSTITUTE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF HEATING, REFRIGERATING AND AIRCONDITIONING ENGINEERS

AS ME AST B.H.P BLAST BTU CAD CAV CBIP CFM C-factor CL CLTD CO2 COP CSA CTF CWEC DB DDW DHW DLWC DOE DWG DX System

AMERICAN SOCIETY OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERS APPARENT SOLAR TIME BRAKE HORSE POWER BUILDING LOAD ANALYSIS AND SYSTEM THERMODYNAMICS BRITISH THERMAL UNIT COMPUTER - AIDED DESIGN CONSTANT AIR VOLUME COMMERCIAL BUILDING INCENTIVE PROGRAM CUBIC FEET PER MINUTE Thermal Conductance (Btulh-ft2_0F) CLOSED LOOP COOLING LOAD TEMPERATURE DIFFERENCE METHOD Carbon Dioxide COEFFICIENT OF PERFORMANCE CANADIAN STANDARD ASSOCIATION CONDUCTION TRANSFER METHOD CANADIAN WEATHER FOR ENERGY CALCULATIONS DRY BULB DESIGN DEVELOPMENT WIZARD DOMESTIC HOT WATER DEEP LAKE WATER COOLING DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY USA CAD DRAWINGS DIRECT EXPANSION HVAC SYSTEM xi

ECWT EEMW EER ESP-R EWT

ENTERING CHILLED OR COOLING WATER TEMPERATURE ENERGY EFFICIENCY MEASURE WIZARD ENERGY EFFICIENCY RATING ENVIRONMENTAL SYSTEM PERFORMANCE ENTERING WATER TEMPERATURE GREEN HOUSE GAS GROUND LOOP HEAT EXCHANGER GALLON PER MINUTE GROUND SOURCE HEAT PUMP HOURL Y ANALYSIS PROGRAMS HEAT PUMP HEAT RECOVERY VENTILATION HEATING SEASONAL PERFORMANCE FACTOR HEATING VENTILATION AND AIR CONDITIONING KILOWATT HOUR LEAVING CHILLED WATER TEMPERATURE LEADERSHIP IN ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGN LAKESHORE WATER TREATMENT PLANT THOUSANDS BTU PER HOUR MODEL NATIONAL ENERGY CODE OF CANADA FOR BUILDINGS MODEL NATIONAL ENERGY CODE OF CANADA FOR HOUSES NOT AVAILABLE U.S. NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL NATURAL RESOURCES CANADA OUTSIDE AIR FLOW RATE ONTARIO BUILDING CODE PASCAL (PRESSURE UNIT N/M2) THERMAL RESISTANCE OF THE INSULATION (h.ft2_oF/BTU) INTERNATIONAL CLEAN ENERGY PROJECT ANALYSIS SOFTWARE RELATIVE HUMIDITY
Xll

,,
.t'

GHG GLHE GPM GSHP HAP HP HRV HSPF HVAC KWH LCHWT LEED LWTP MBH MNECB MNECH

N/A
NBSLD NRC NRCan OA OBC Pa R-VALUES RETScreen

RH

RU SD SHGC SEER SKYCALC TFM THR
TMY/TRY

RYERSON UNIVERSITY SYSTEMATIC DESIGN SOLAR HEAT GAIN COEFFICIENT SEASONAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY RATIO SKY CALCULA nON TRANSFER FUNCTION METHOD TON-HOUR TYPICAL METEOROLOGICAL YEAR TRANSIENT SYSTEMS SIMULAnON TEMPERATURE ENTROPY DIAGRAM THERMAL TRANSMITTANCE OVERALL HEAT TRANSFER COEFFICIENT (BTUI h.ft2.oF) V ARIABLE AIR VOLUME DUCT DESIGN PROGRAM WEIGHTING FACTORS WATER SOURCE HEAT PUMP

TRNSYS T·S diagram U·factor U VALUE VAV VENT WF WSHP

xiii

CHAPTER-l

1.
\

Introduction
The building sector, one of the fastest growing in tenns of energy consumption, accounts

,

for over 40% of final energy, study in Spain (Rey et aI., 2007). In recent years, there has been quite an interest in the areas of Rational Use of Energy and Energy Saving. With increasing energy demands all over the world, energy management and conservation has become a key focus in the global arena. Countries all over the world continue to become more industrialized which naturally increases the demand for energy resources. In the last few years, manufacturing and service industries, as well as government organizations have all been under enonnous economic and environmental pressures.

Although many people realize the importance of investing in energy efficient solutions, high capital investment and lack of payback have been a deterrent for many companies and organizations. Furthennore, commercial buildings are usually built with a low first cost as priority. The building'S long-tenn operational costs, which are usually paid by the tenant(s) rather than the owner, are not important to the owner.

Saving money on energy bills is encouraging to organizations and individuals alike. This is especially true for educational institutions due to their long operating hours which mean that their energy bills represent a substantial portion of their operating costs. Therefore, they have a strong incentive to initiate and continue an ongoing energy cost control program. "No cost or very low cost operational changes can often save a customer or an industry 10-20% on utility bills; capital cost programs with payback times of two years or less can often save an additional 20-30%" (Turner, 2001). In many cases these energy cost control programs will also result in a reduction of energy consumption, as well as emissions of environmental pollutants.

1

Due to economic and environmental reasons, organizations around the world are constantly come under pressure to reduce energy consumption. As energy cost is one of the main cost drivers for business, reduction in energy consumption leads to reduction in operating costs, and thereby helps to improve the profitability of organizations. One of the main environmental concerns relating to energy consumption is the emission of carbon dioxide (C02), which is a "greenhouse gas" that contributes to global warming. Due to the release of CO 2 during burning of fossil fuels, CO2 emissions can be closely correlated to energy use. Reduction in energy consumption can be achieved through energy efficiency and energy conservation programs. Such programs involve the promotion of efficient or effective use of energy, which helps to save energy and results in reduced environmental pollution and operating costs (Jayamaha, 2007). In 200S, the commercial/institutional sector in Canada produced 36.84 Mt of CO2 in GHG emissions excluding electricity (NRCan, 2007) and, when production of electricity was added, the GHG emissions went up to 6S.28 Mt of CO2 (an increase of approximately 77%). Of this 6S.28 Mt of CO 2 produced, 4S% is contributed by the production of electricity, with 38% of it being produced by natural gas sources. A graphical representation of the contribution among the various resources is shown in Figure 1.1.
Light Fuel Oil and Kerosene Heavy fule Oil ,..--.--... 9% 6% Steam 0% Other

/~
f.N N. atural Gas
\ 38%

2%

Figure 1.1: GHG Emissions by Energy Source in (Mt of CO2) (NRCan, 2007)

2

1.1. Energy Management

Energy management is a procedure for containing and reducing the overall energy consumption and energy costs of an organization. Some typical objectives of energy management, which depend on the needs of each individual organization, include lowering operating cost, increasing profitability, reducing environmental pollution and improving working conditions. For an energy management program to be successful, it needs the commitment and support of the organization's management and should be in system with the organization's objectives. Energy management requires a systematic approach from the formation of a suitable team, to achieving and maintaining energy savings. A typical process is outlined in Figure 1.2. Establish team Set goals and objectives

Gather historic database Perform energy audits Report findings Prioritize and implement

Measure and verify performance Maintain measures Figure 1.2: Typical Energy Management Program (Jayamaha, 2007)

3

The most important part of an energy management program is an energy audit to identify potential energy savings measures. Chapter 4 covers the energy auditing procedure ofRU.

1.2. Building Energy Simulation Overview
It is hard to estimate the annual energy costs associated with operating a building while it

is still under design. The answer depends on numerous factors, including the construction details and orientation of walls and windows, occupancy patterns, local climate, operating schedules, the efficiency of lighting and HVAC systems, and the characteristics of other equipment loads within the building. Accounting for all these variables, as well as their interactions, is a daunting task, especially because some change by the hour. Given this complexity, rigorous calculations of annual building energy costs were rarely performed before personal computers became common place. Software packages for building energy performance simulation carry out the numerous and complex equations that, when combined, describe how buildings use energy. The most sophisticated of these programs is the ones which are capable of calculating building energy consumption hour by hour for an entire year. To understand the simulation approach, it is useful to visualise such a system as an electrical network of time dependent resistances and capacitances subjected to time dependent potential differences. The currents to result in each branch of the network are then equivalent to the heat flows between the building'S parts. Constructional elements, room contents, glazing systems, plant components, renewable energy devices, etc, may be treated as network 'nodes' and characterised by capacitance, with the inter-node connections characterised by conductance (Clarke, 2001). From a mathematical viewpoint, several complex equation types must be solved to accurately represent such a system and, because these equations represent heat transfer processes that are highly inter-related, it is necessary to apply simultaneous solution techniques if the performance prediction is to be both accurate and preserve the spatial and temporal integrity of the modelled system.

4

Once established, a simulation program can be applied throughout the design process, from the early concept stage through detailed design. It is more efficient to use a single simulation program throughout the design process than to use a progression of tools from simplified to detailed and ignore the many theoretical discontinuities and pernicious assumptions.
It is possible to use simulation at an early design stage to determine the optimum combina-

tion of zone layout and constructional scheme that will provide a climate responsive solution and so minimise the need for mechanical plant. Some simulations might focus on the choice of constructional materials and their relative positioning within multi-layered constructions so that good temperature and load levelling is attained. Also, alternative daylight capture and shading strategies might be investigated to ensure glare avoidance, excess solar gain control and minimum luminary usage. Simulation allows users to understand the interrelation between design and performance parameters, to identify potential problem areas, and so implement and test appropriate design modifications. As the built environment is extremely complex, so the building simulation models are often become very sophisticated, it is usually too time consuming to apply these models manually to a design project. During the last two decades, a range of computer software has been developed, based on simulation models. These computer applications are able to speed up the calculation process dramatically. These applications are typically classified as: · · · · Energy analysis systems Lighting analysis systems HV AC systems Structural analysis systems.

1.3. Building Energy Analysis
A building is a highly complex energy system, especially when allowing a high degree of interaction with its surrounding environment with the aim of improving its energy performance. Therefore, given the relevance of the building sector in energy consumption, the introduction of rigorous energy analysis tools able to appropriately assess operational energy implications of 5

different design options should be promoted. Developed countries need a high rate of energy consumption to maintain their standard of living and comfort. The current challenge is to seek sustainable development, maintaining activity and therefore achieving energy saving. For acceptance of energy performance of buildings these objectives are followed: · · · · · Establishing a calculation method for the integrated energy performance of buildings. Application of minimum requirements on the energy performance of new buildings. Energy certification of buildings. Energy audits in large buildings. Regular inspection of boilers and air conditioning systems

CUmatic influen(:e

..---"'-'-"-"-'--~- -"-"'-.-.-~ I

-......

-~-

. -,.- _ .

· i
· !
!
I

; i

i

_._._ . _--_.. _-;

Building mocl@l

· · i
· !
II. P'

I

Building design parameters

..

i

I
HVACsyslem model
I-

Indoor environmental conditions

i

I
HVAC plant model
I-

system - Control model

'!'"-_..... ~

Energy
performance

."..

Figure 1.3: Basic Models of a Simulation System (Clarke & Irving, 1988)

According to Figure!.3, there are four basic models within the simulation system that are used for representing the major components that affect the building's energy flow (Clarke &
Irving, 1988). These models include:

1. Building Model 2. HVAC System Model

6

different design options should be promoted. Developed countries need a high rate of energy consumption to maintain their standard of living and comfOli. The current challenge is to seek sustainable development, maintaining activity and therefore achieving energy saving. For acceptance of energy performance of buildings these objectives are followed : · · · · · Establishing a calculation method for the integrated energy performance of buildings. Application of minimum requirements on the energy performance of new buildings. Energy certification of buildings. Energy audits in large buildings. Regular inspection of boilers and air conditioning systems

Clim atic innuence

!
i

· ,
:
I

· !
; I
I

, ,

~---.-

_... -_ ._._--

- --'- '-'--- ---.- .- ....

- _.. -.- _... ._._._---.:

BUlldlnq mocl&l

, .
i
i

!
! ! ! I

Buildln~

desIgn paralneters

.. , ....
iI
~ I i

I
HVAC system Pmodel

.. ..

Indoor environmental c, ondilions

,

! 1 i

·

·
i

1
HVAC plant
model
f-

-

Control system model

......_ ....... Energy -.. perform ance

S/mulatfOn System
-.~

!.. . ·.· ._ .· . _ .... _._ ... ._ _ ._. _. _ . .. . __ ._---. . .. . - . .. .. . . .. .. . -

Figure 1.3: Basic Models of a Simulation System (Clarke & Irving, 1988)

According to Figurel.3, there are four basic models within the simulation system that are used for representing the major components that affect the building's energy flow (Clarke &
Irving, 1988). These models include:

1. Building Model 2. HY AC System Model

6

3. HV AC Plant Model 4. Control System Model As can be seen from Figure 1.3, the objective is to provide comfortable indoor environmental conditions while at the same time come up with the right energy balance for maintaining optimum levels of fuel consumption. Comparison of different design options based on their life cycle costs can also be considered as an objective. The influence of climate has an impact on the system's performance. The inputs include building design parameters.

1.4.

Energy Analysis Simulation Sofhvare
Currently, hundreds of computer programs are available in the market for energy

simulation. These programs provide users with key building performance indicators such as energy use and demand, temperature, humidity, and costs (Crawley et aI., 2005). A few of these simulation programs are described below.

Carrier HAP

The simulation software chosen for this project was Carrier HAP (Version 4.31 North American Edition). The Carrier HAP Program provides consulting engineers, design/build contractors, HV AC contractors, facility engineers and other professionals with the ability to simulate hourly building energy performance to derive annual energy use and energy costs. It also aids in the day-to-day work of estimating loads, designing systems and evaluating energy performance of HV AC and non-HVAC systems used in buildings or plants (Carrier Corporation, 2006). Key features of the program include: User Interface, Building Wizard, System Design, Energy Analysis, Climate Analysis, Load Calculation, System Design Reports, Air System Analysis, Plant Equipment, Utility Rate, and Energy Analysis Reports. Furthermore, HAP's 8760 hour energy analysis capabilities are very useful for green building design (Carrier Corporation, 2006). The program is a powerful tool for designing systems and sizing system components. HAP can easily handle projects involving:
);>

Small to large buildings.

7

~

Systems including packaged rooftops, packaged and built-up central air handlers, fan coils, and more.

~

Many types of constant air volume (CAV) and variable air volume (VA V) system controls.

~

Small office buildings, retail stores, strip shopping centers, schools, churches, restaurants, large office buildings, hotels, malls, hospitals, factories and multi-use buildings.

~

New design, retrofit or energy conservation work.

Chapter 4 describes Ryerson University buildings simulation procedure using Carrier HAP simulation program.

eQUEST

eQUEST is simple freely available energy simulation software that uses DOE-2 as a simulation engine (Hirsch, 2006). eQUEST plays a great simulation role in the energy efficient design process. It is easy to use in building energy use analysis tool. The program consists of a detailed description of the building being analyzed. eQUEST calculates hour-by-hour building energy consumption over an entire year using hourly weather data for the location under consideration. The simulation engine within eQUEST is derived from the latest version of DOE2.2. The simulation processes are accomplished by combining a Schematic Design Wizard, Design Development Wizard, and Energy Efficiency Measure Wizard. The results are in the graphical and tabular format (Hirsch, 2008).

The EE-4 software was developed to support the financial incentive program as well as support compliance checking with the performance path option for the Model National Energy Code for Buildings (MNECB) as well as the Commercial Building Incentive Program (CBIP) (Beausoleil-Morrison, 2001). It is derived directly from Energy Pro software which was developed to demonstrate compliance with MNECB and uses the DOE-2.1 engine. EE-4 automates energy use assessment, and applies all the specific ecoENERGY for New Building's (eENB) rules to verify that a design is at least 25% more energy efficient than is constructed to meet MNECB requirements. It can also be used to perform non-compliance energy analysis and

8

consequently predict a building's annual energy consumption and assess the impact of design changes to the building.

DOE-2

DOE-2 is a public domain program that performs hourly simulation of a building's energy consumption and energy cost given a description of the building's climate, architecture, materials, operating schedule, and HV AC equipment. DOE-2.2 is widely used in the U.S. and more than forty countries to design energy-efficient buildings, analyze the impact of new technologies, to develop energy conservation standards. DOE-2.2 uses a room weighting factor approach. It provides 20 input verification reports and 50 monthly/annual summary reports. DOE-2.2 also gives full life-cycle cost analysis. All reports are in the graphical and tabular format (Hirsch, 2008).

Building Loads Analysis and System Thermodynamics (BLAST)
The BLAST (Building Load Analysis and System) simulation program was developed by the US Army Construction Engineering Research Laboratories in collaboration with University of Illinois to simulate virtually any type of building, whether new or retrofit (Crawley et aI., 2005). The BLAST system is a set of computer programs for predicting heating and cooling energy consumption in buildings, and analyzing energy costs. BLAST can be used to investigate the energy performance of new or retrofit building design options of almost any type and size. In addition to performing peak load (design day) calculations necessary for mechanical equipment design, BLAST also estimates the annual energy performance of the facility, which is essential for the design of solar and total energy (cogeneration) systems and for determining compliance with design energy budgets.

TRNSYS (Transient Systems Simulation)
TRNSYS is a transient system simulation program designed to solve complex energy system problems by breaking the problem down into a series of smaller components. TRNSYS is used primarily to simulate thermal energy systems. Each physical component in the system, such as a pump or solar collector, is represented by a different FORTRAN subroutine. The subroutines are combined into an executable file controlled with an input file, which describes

9

what physical components are involved in the system and how they are connected. TRNSYS has been used for simulating solar thermal systems as well as general HVAC systems (Crawley et aI, 2005).

TRACE 700

The TRACE 700 simulation program was developed by the Trane Company and is divided into 5 distinct phases: Load, Design, System Simulation, Equipment Simulation and Economic Analysis (Trane, 2008). Different load methodologies such as ASHRAE Radiant Time Series (RTS) or Cooling Load Temperature Difference (CLTD) can be chosen by the designer. Building heat gains (based on the geometry and internal heat loads of the building) are calculated on a monthly basis in the design phase. The building is then simulated on an annual basis, i.e., 8760 hours during system phase. During the equipment phase, the program uses the hourly coil loads from the systems phase to determine how cooling, heating and air movement will consume energy (Trane, 2008).

EnergyPlus

EnergyPlus (Crawley et al. 2005) is a modular, structured software tool based on the most popular features and capabilities of BLAST and DOE-2.lE. It is primarily a simulation engine; input and output are simple text files. EnergyPlus grew out of a perceived need to provide an integrated (simultaneous loads and systems) simulation for accurate temperature and comfort prediction. Loads calculated at a user-specified time step (l5-minute default) are passed to the building systems simulation module at the same time step. The EnergyPlus building systems simulation module, with a variable time step (down to 1 minute as needed), calculates heating and cooling system and plant and electrical system response. This integrated solution provides more accurate space temperature prediction crucial for system and plant sizing, occupant comfort and occupant health calculations. EnergyPlus has two basic components: a heat and mass balance simulation module and a building systems simulation module.

10

1.5. Deep Lake Water Cooling (DLWC) System
Many cities around the world are located near ocean shores or deep lakes. The cities of Toronto, Stockholm and Honolulu, and the Cornell University campus are showing the world what can be done using cold deep water to provide the cooling of large buildings, providing a large saving in energy and cutting down on carbon emissions and pollution from energy generating plants.

Deep-water air-conditioning could be considered for other major cities located near the ocean or deep lakes, as it has the advantages of low cost, great savings on energy and on airconditioning chemicals. Deep-water air-conditioning is suitable for both large and midsize to small communities or for universities, hospitals or hotel resorts (Cummins, 2006).

Currently there is a Deep Lake Water Cooling (DLWC) system in Toronto that uses the water from Lake Ontario to cool the city's central district. This system offered by Enwave Energy Corporation, Toronto. Enwave's DL WC is the world's largest lake-source cooling system. And it is the ultimate in renewable, clean, green energy. This system has been proven to be very effective as it reduces electricity use by up to 90% compared with conventional airconditioning (Enwave, 2006).

11

1.6. Overvielv of Ryerson University Campus Energy Consumption
Due to the increasing need for energy, everyone should be responsible for energy management. An energy cost savings of S-IS percent is usually obtained quickly with little to no required capital expenditure with an aggressive energy management program. An eventual savings of 30 percent is common, and savings of SO, 60 and even 70 percent have been obtained. These savings all are from retrofit activities. New buildings designed to be energy efficient often operate on 20 percent of the energy (with a corresponding 80 percent savings) normally required by existing buildings.

From the various energy simulation studies in US and Canada in recent year, it is clear that air conditioning systems consume around SO% energy of the total electricity use in the office buildings. So, the air conditioning system is the main issue for maximum energy consume.

Table 1.1 described the floor area of All Ryerson University buildings.

12

Table 1.1: Floor Area of All Ryerson University Buildings Total gross floor area (m 2) 9345 4180 52409 22350 10964 18487 21730 13942 7077 4180 4373 12708 2985 66 184730 13100 17866 30966 24378 2033 2860 9735 6494 4280 2925 2843 7239 848 723 851 106 40946 281020
·

·

I

Name of the Ryerson University buildine;s School ofImage Art (IMA) Heaslip House Continuing Education (CED) Kerr Hall (KNE/KNW/KSE/KSW) Engineering Building (ENG) Jorgenson Hall (JOR) h Library Building (LIB) Podium (POD) 7 Eric Palin Hall (EPH) 8 Sally Horsfall Eaton Centre for Studies in 9 community Health (SHE) Student Campus Centre (SCC) 10 School of Interior Design (SID) 11 Victoria Building (VIC) 12 Heidelberg Centre-School of Graphic 13 Communications Management (HEIIGCM) Totalfloor area served by tlte central chillers plant (located on Library building) 14 Rogers Communication Centre (RCC) SI. No. 1 2 3 4 5 Pitman Hall Residence (PIT) 15 Totalfloor area served by tile celltral chillers plallt (located 011 Rogers Communication Ccentre) 16 Rogers Business Buildblg(RBB)(Existing Deep · Lake Water Cooling System) Oakham House (OAK) 17 18 Research and Graduate Studies (GER) International Living! Learning Centre (ILLC) 19 20 South Bound Building (SBB) Recreation & Athletics Centre (RAC) 21 Theatre School (THR) 22 Civil Engineering Building (MON) 23 Architecture Building (ARC) 24 . Okeefe House 25 26 ORIOffice 27 PRO/BND 28 Ryerson Book Store Totalfloor area served by tile self cooling system Total floor area All Ryerson University buildillgs
I

0/0 of total floor area

=
!

11

I

9

!

14 100

13

The Ryerson University complex consists of 28 residential, office and educational buildings. Total area occupied approximately 281,020 square meters is shown in Table 1.2. Total audit area of Ryerson University was 240,074 square meters. According to the base case energy audit, Ryerson University has two central cooling plants. The large one has capacity of 3100 tonnes. It is located at Ryerson Library Building. It serves 66% of the total campus area including 13 office and educational and library buildings, with area 184,730 square meters. These 13 buildings are considered for Deep Lake Water Cooling (DLWC) feasibility analysis. The smaller one has the capacity of 530 tonnes. It is located at Ryerson Rogers Communication Centre, with area 30966 square meters and serves 11 % of the total campus area. Self cooling system serves 14% of the total campus area. Only 9% of the total cooling area is served by Deep Lake Water Cooling (DLWC) system. The percentage of area is shown in Figure 104.

14%

IJI 66% Cooling area served by central cooling plant located on Library building

II 11 % Cooling area served by central cooling plant located on RCC building

o 9% Cooling area served by Deep Lake Water Cooling (DLWC) system

o 14% Cooling area served by Own/Self cooling system
Figure1.4: All Ryerson University Buildings' Cooling Served by the Different Cooling Systems

Ryerson University has two meters (Meter-l and Meter-2) for steam consumption for space heating and hot water demand. The required steam is supplied by Enwave. Meter-2 serves the Rogers Business Building which covers 9% of total area and Meter-l serves 20 other 14

The Ryerson University complex consists of 28 residential , office and educational buildings. Total area occupied approximately 281 ,020 square meters is shown in Table 1.2. Total audit area of Ryerson University was 240,074 square meters. According to the base case energy audit, Ryerson University has two central cooling plants. The large one has capacity of 3100 tonnes. It is located at Ryerson Library Building. It serves 66% of the total campus area including 13 office and educational and library buildings, with area 184,730 square meters. These 13 buildings are considered for Deep Lake Water Cooling (DL WC) feasibility analysis. The smaller one has the capacity of 530 tonnes. It is located at Ryerson Rogers Communication Centre, with area 30966 square meters and serves 11 % of the total campus area. Self cooling system serves 14% of the total campus area. Only 9% of the total cooling area is served by Deep Lake Water Cooling (DL WC) system. The percentage of area is shown in Figure 1.4.

14%

· 66% Cooling area served by central cooling plant located on Library building
· 11 % Cooling area served by central cooLing plant located on RCC building

09% Cooling area served by Deep Lake Water Cooling (DLWC) system

o

14% Cooling area served by Own/Self cooling system

Figure1.4: All Ryerson University Buildings' Cooling Served by the Different Cooling Systems

Ryerson University has two meters (Meter-1 and Meter-2) for steam consumption for space heating and hot water demand. The required steam is supplied by Enwave. Meter-2 serves the Rogers Business Building which covers 9% of total area and Meter-1 serves 20 other 14

buildings with area 221464 square meters which cover 79% of the total area. Self heating system (heat pump and other source) serves 12% of the total area. Table 1.2 shows heating area breakdown. Figure 1.5 shows different heating systems of Ryerson campus.

Table 1.2: Floor Area of All Ryerson University Buildings for Heating Remote and self heating for Ryerson buildings Served area by the remote steam for RBB building
I

Total Floor Area (sq m)

% of total

Heating Area

(Meter-2) Served area by the remote steam (Meter-I) Self heating system Total area for all Ryerson Campus

24378 223127 33515

9 79

I
!

i

I
!

12

281020

100

i

Different Heating System of Entire Ryerson Campus

12%

79%

CI 9% RU building area served by Meter-2 remot steam CI 79% RU building area served by Meter-l remot steam ·0 l2% self heating system

Figure 1.5: Different Heating Systems of Ryerson Campus

15

buildings with area 221464 square meters which cover 79% of the total area. Self heating system (heat pump and other source) serves 12% of the total area. Table 1.2 shows heating area breakdown. Figure 1.5 shows different heating systems of Ryerson campus.

Table 1.2: Floor Area of All Ryerson University Buildings for Heating
Remote and self heating for Ryerson buildings Total Floor Area (sq m)
% of total

Heating Area

Served area by the remote steam for RBB building (Meter-2) Served area by the remote steam (Meter-I) Self heating system
Total area for all Ryerson Campus

24378 223127 33515

9 79 12

281020

100

Different Heating System of Entire Ryerson Campus

12%

79%

9% RU building area served by Meter-2 remot steam · 79% RU building area served by Meter-I remot steam 12% self heating system

o

Figure l.5: Different Heating Systems of Ryerson Campus

15

1.7. Methodology used for Modeling of All Ryerson University (RU) Buildings
Figure 1.6 below describes the methodology used by Carrier HAP energy simulation software for complying with data collected from the campus planning of Ryerson University and ASHRAE 90.1. The whole project work is performed and analyzed according to the following methodology.

For energy auditing, all building HVAC and Non-HVAC data is collected from the building drawing and Ryerson Campus Planning. All buildings are modeled in two different ways. The base case model and the base case model with heat recovery are both evaluated for energy sensitivity analysis. Energy simulation program Carrier HAP is used for simulating all Ryerson buildings. Deep Lake Water Cooling (DL WC) system is used for space airconditioning. Due to DL WC feasibility analysis of Ryerson University, DLWC system model is created by using base case building data. Building base case model and DL WC system model are compared for a feasibility analysis. All calculations are designed to determine the amount of potential benefit and GHG emission reduction.

16

1.5

Energy Audit of All Ryerson University Buildings

Weather Data

Operation Characteristics

Energy Consumption

Building Modelling

HVAC System Modeling

Output parameter

Building Simulation Modelling

Modelling of Deep Lake Water Cooling (DLWC) System

Ryerson Univers.ity 1S buildings

Rogers Business building of RU

Energy Calculation and GHG Emission Calculation

Conventional Cooling System

Deep Lake Water Cooling (DLWC) System

Result and Conclusion Recommendation

Figure 1.6: Flow Chart ofModdling the All Ryerson University (RU) Buildings

17

1.8. The Objective of the Study
The main objectives and goals of the study are energy conservation of Ryerson University buildings as well as gaining specific information for sustainable HVAC systems. Specific details
are:

·

An energy audit and base case energy simulation of all Ryerson University buildings using the Carrier HAP energy simulation program. These consist of a detailed examinations of how the facility uses energy, how the facility loses and wastes energy, how much the facility pays for that energy, and recommended energy conservation measures to increase efficiencies.

·

Deep Lake Water Cooling (DLWC) feasibility analysis for the entire RU campus.

The following scenarios will be assessed as part of the energy audit: a. Base-case building with standard chiller, and b. Building with Deep Lake Water Cooling

The following information will be gathered or estimated for each case:

i. Total annual energy consumption with breakdown for heating/cooling/electricity
ii. Annual C02, SOx and NO x reduction for conventional air-conditioning system and DLWC system. iii. Total annual energy cost for conventional chiller and for the Deep Lake Water Cooling system.

18

CHAPTER-2

2.

Deep Lake Water Cooling (DLWC) System
Deep lake water cooling (DLWC), and Seawater district cooling (DSC), is a technology

which is beginning to make a significant impact on energy conservation as a feasible alternative to conventional central air conditioning systems (Looney, 2007).

2.1. Background of the Deep Lake Water Cooling (DLWC) Concept
In every part of the world's tropical oceans, seawater temperatures decrease with depth.
The existence of the deep-water ocean heat sink results from natural climatic processes. In this natural climatic process, water is cooled at the poles, becomes dense, and sinks into the deep ocean. Deep water cooling is an energy efficient way to air-condition buildings located near large bodies of water. The general idea of the system is to draw the cold energy from the body of water and distribute it to the desired locality. In this way it provides cooling. Deep water cooling requires little or no energy for actual cooling and it is different from conventional refrigeration methods which consume large amounts of energy to chill water or cooling medium. The only energy needed is to transfer the coldness of the water from the source to the desired warm area. Toronto is a place where a large concentrated demand for cooling is located beside a large, possibly inexhaustible source of water that remains at just above the freezing point. The large concentrated demand for cooling is in Toronto's downtown business district, the centre of which is less than one kilometre from Lake Ontario's north shore. This district is a forest of several dozen high-rise office buildings that would be uninhabitable. The large source of cold water lies within Lake Ontario whose greatest depth is 243 metres. Below about 80 meters depth that is reached from six kilometres to Toronto, the water temperature remains at close to 4°C throughout the year. With this result when the surface of the
19

lake falls below 4°C in the winter, surface water becomes cold and it sinks. In summer Surface water becomes warm, but being less dense than the water below it remains at the surface. The result over the millennium has been the accumulation of a huge body of deep cold water. The top of this water is warmed in summer and replenished in winter. Chicago is a city that might be thought also to lie beside such a reservoir of cold water. The depth of Lake Michigan certainly contains a huge amount of water at 4°C, larger than that in Lake Ontario. On the other hand, southern part of Lake Michigan is relatively shallow, and Chicago lies some 50 kilometres from any point where the depth of the lake is greater than 80 metres. It might be financially feasible the construction of a six-kilometre tunnel in the bed of Lake Ontario to serve Taronto with cold water. The construction of a 50-kilometre tunnel in the bed of Lake Michigan to serve Chicago would almost certainly be too costly compared with acceptable alternatives. Other large cities with a high demand for cooling lie near a body of water, usually sea water, that is cold enough to be used for cooling or partial cooling for at least a part of the year. Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Portland, San Francisco, Seattle, Tokyo, and Vancouver are the examples. But only Taronto is close to water that remains cold enough to supply all of its cooling requirements. Robert Tamblyn of Engineering Interface Ltd proposed and first studied the idea of using the nearby source of cold water to cool buildings in downtown Toronto. It concluded that the free cool concept was technically and economically sound, and worthy of further study. Attempts were made during the 1980s and the latest was in 1988 to move the scheme towards implementation. Customer connections, heat exchangers, and interim financing charges are included in the cost of the system. Operating costs would be substantially lower than for on-site systems chiefly on account of reduced energy use: operation of the lake-water pumping system would require less than 10 percent of the energy required to operate chillers delivering the same amount of cooling. According to study the general cost per unit of cooling, including capital costs, would be substantially less than the cost per unit for on-site alternatives (Canadian Urban Institute, 1993).

20

2.2. Importance of DL we System

There is a great demand for air conditioning to provide a comfortable indoor environment for human beings throughout the warm months of the year. As a result, there is also an equally high demand for energy to operate these systems. Demand can be reduced by DLWC system for energy considerably. By eliminating the use of conventional air-conditioning methods, energy consumption can be lowered providing many benefits to the user and the environment. The most significant is the economic benefits that are a direct result of energy savings. As the cost of energy has increased over the years and will continue to increase in the future, considerable savings can be realized by a consumer through the use of a DLWC system. Such a system would free up energy from electricity grids, thereby reducing the electrical overloads. Users would be less affected by energy restrictions during hot summers when conventional air-conditioners are traditionally consuming much the city's energy. Since DLWC mainly relies on a widely abundant and renewable source, there is no risk of a shortage. The reduced energy consumption is also beneficial to the environment as power generation (fossil-fuel burning) is a significant contributor to air pollution. Less energy would need to be produced if the system is large enough to meet the demands of a city during the summer months. Also, DL WC system can eliminate the use of conventional cooling methods using chillers, condensers and cooling towers, with the use of CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons) and increase air pollution and humidity, Generally, DLWC has got many benefits- economical and environmental. These benefits can make this technology as an attractive alternative.
Main Benefits of Deep Lake 'Vater Cooling (Enwave, 2006):

·

Compared to conventional chillers, Deep Lake Water Cooling system reduces electricity usage by 90%.

· ·

Harmful ozone depleting refrigerants, such as CFC's and HCFC's, are reduced. Tonnes of carbon dioxide are avoided, which is equivalent to take thousands cars off the road.

·

DLWC minimizes buildings exposure to increased rate and volatile energy markets because it relies on renewable energy source.

21

·

Customers will avoid increasingly restrictive CFC regulation because DLWC is a CFC-free chilling technology.

·

Clean drinking water is produced because the water used in the cooling process comes from a deeper part of Lake Ontario.

·

Deep Lake Water Cooling reduces noise, pollution and humidity generated by chillers, fans and cooling towers.

·

Reduces the strain on our electricity infrastructure, including transmission grids and local distribution networks.

·

Enhances Toronto's world-class reputation as a place to live, provides cleaner air for breathing and makes Toronto a leader in sustainable energy.

2.3. Example of Deep Water Cooling (DWC) System
In order to show examples ofDWC system in Canada two case studies are described. The first, a medium scale saltwater cooling system in Halifax, Canada, was constructed in 1986. This is one of the oldest deep water cooling systems in operation. The second, a large-scale network in Toronto, Canada, began operation in 2004 and continues to expand. These projects provide an interesting set of complimentary and contrasting features. They differ in scale, one uses saltwater and the other lake water, and one was constructed by a developer to serve one building complex and the other was constructed by a company that provides cooling as a service to multiple sites. However, both projects were and are successful economically and in terms of electrical demand displacement (Newman & Herbert, 2009).

Case study one: Purdy's wharf, Halifax:
On the waterfront of Halifax, the Purdy's wharf office complex is placed, and the buildings extend out over the harbour on pilings. Cold seawater is dra'V\TI from the bottom of the harbour through a pipe to a titanium heat exchanger in the basement of the complex. There the buildings' closed loop of cooling water is cooled by the seawater, and it is then pumped to each floor of the building where fans blow air over the cooling coils to cool the air. The seawater is returned to the harbour floor. The project consists of an 18-story tower, a 22-story tower, and a 22

4-story retail centre, and was constructed from 1983 to 1989. The total area cooled by the system was 65,000 m2 ·

The seawater cooling system was a $400,000 upgrade over a conventional cooling system, primarily due to expensive titanium heat exchangers. Although the cold ocean water is freely available, pumping costs bring the water into the building cost $30,000 per year. Other operational costs include cathodic protection of the saltwater intake at $3500 per year for copper bars. Estimated annual savings, however, total $177,350 reduced electricity load, building maintenance and operation load with respect to a conventional air conditioning system. The simple payback was estimated to be 2.3 years. The system cannot functions year round due to fluctuate harbour temperatures; this was understood at the time of construction. Since construction, Purdy's wharf has demonstrated that deep water cooling systems can provide financial benefits even when they cannot operate year round.

In order to mitigate the corrosive power of seawater, Purdy's wharf required innovative technologies. Piping is corrosion resistant polyvinyl and polystyrene. The pumps are made of stainless steel. One of the obstacles to this project was control of marine growth. Initially chlorine was used to prevent marine growth in the system, but this was both costly and potentially environmentally damaging. That system was replaced by cathodic protection provided by copper plates.

To provide the required cooling performance, the water temperature must be below 10°C. The intake for the pumping system is located less than 200 m offshore at a depth of 18 m where conditions are appropriate for cooling for 10.5 months a year. Purdy's wharf operates conventional chillers in the late summer when harbour temperatures are too high (Newman & Herbert, 2009).

Case study two: Enwave, Toronto:

Purdy's wharf initiative is smaller than Enwave's Deep Lake Water Cooling project. Pipes extend 5 km into Lake Ontario and draw water from a depth of 83 m to the John Street pumping station where heat exchangers cool Enwave's closed cooling loop that snake through 23

downtown Toronto. The lake water, slightly wanned, then goes on to supply Toronto with drinking water. The idea of providing cooling to Taronto using lake water had been considered at various times, but the project began in earnest in 2002. As of June 2006, 46 buildings were signed to the system and 27 were already connected. As the system nears capacity energy savings will be 85 million kWh, for a CO 2 reduction of 79,000 tonnes annually, or the equivalent of 15,800 cars. The total cooling area will be 3,200,000 m2, or 50 times the area of the Purdy's wharf development. Energy savings are about 90%.

The total cost of the Enwave project in Toronto was over $235 million, including $175 million in capital costs and $55 million for a new city water intake. In 2005, the deep lake cooling system was operating at 51 % of planned capacity but was still generating sufficient cash flow to cover its operating and financial costs and a lender therefore predicted that continued growth in the company's profitability is highly predictable and from the customer's perspective connecting to the deep water cooling system is advantageous, as illustrated by the case of Toronto City Hall. The air conditioning capital costs required to tap into Enwave's system were estimated at $2.5 million as compared to $3.1 million for a conventional system, with additional operating cost savings of$100,000 per year.

Enwave's system uses one-tenth of the electricity of a standard air conditioning system and it frees up 61MW of electricity from Ontario's electricity grid during peak period. This savings avoid total emission of 79,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide, and reduce the need for water for cooling towers by 714 million litres of water. Capital costs continue as the urban pipeline network expands. Low interest loans were provided by the Federal government and incentives for companies were provided by Toronto Hydro to hit their buildings up to the system in order to overcome the high initial capital cost (Newman & Herbert, 2009).

Cornell's reliance on fossil fuels has been reduced by the renewable resource tapped by Lake Source Cooling (LSC) of New York State. Since coming on line, LSC has saved 86,000,000 kilowatt-hours of electricity or an average of 25,000,00 kWh per year which is enough to continuously supply 2500 homes in Tompkins County. This represents about an 86% reduction in energy use for campus cooling (Cornell University, 2006). 24

LSC has also reduced the pollutants associated with electricity generation (greenhouse gases, acid rain, and the effects of mining and transporting oil and coal). Based on data collected through New York State's Public Service Commission, all the energy savings translates to a significant, permanent reduction in local and regional air pollution. Table 2.1 depicts actual emissions reductions associated with LSC.

Table 2.1: Annual Emissions Reductions due to LSC (Cornell University, 2006) Fiscal Year Ending 2001 2002
I

kWh Saved 18,200,000
1

S02 (tons) 26.4 35.7
I I
i

NOx (tons) 11.6 15.6 16.2 11.4

CO2 (tons) 7,850 10,610 10,998 7,720

24,600,000 25,500,000 17,900,000

2003 2004

37.0 26.0

2.4. Working Procedure of Enwave DLWC system

A relatively new technology which uses one-tenth of the electricity of a standard air conditioning system is Deep Lake Water Cooling (DLWC) system. DLWC is an environmentally-friendly, reliable, cost-effective, long-term method of cooling. This system has already been used in buildings around Toronto such as the Air Canada Centre, the Metro Toronto Convention Centre, Steam Whistle Brewery, a telecommunication facility at 151 Front Street West, Rogers Business Building at Dundas Street that offered by the Enwave Energy Corporation. A DLWC system can be broken down into four systems: the water intake and outfall, heat exchange, close loop distribution and finally the air-cooling system. Enwave's three intake pipes draw water 39.2°F (4°C) from 5 kilometres off the shore of Lake Ontario at a depth of 262.5 ft (80 metres) below the surface shown in the Figure 2.1. Naturally cold water makes its way to the City'S John Street Pumping Station. There, heat exchangers facilitate the energy transfer between the icy cold lake water and the Enwave closed chilled water supply loop. The 25

water drawn from the lake continues on its regular route through the John Street Pumping Station for normal distribution into the City water supply. Enwave uses only the coldness from the lake water, not the actual water, to provide the alternative to conventional air-conditioning (Eliadis, 2003). The basic element of Enwave DLWC is shown in Figure 2.2.

"" .gu 5"
~

50

~

a.
:::s

=r

3

~

70

.,
~

In

80

JAN

FEB

APR

JUJIf

JUL

AUG

OCT

NOY

OEC

Month

Source: Canadian Urban Institute

Figure 2.1: Temperature of Lake Ontario at Different Depths Throughout the Year

26

water drawn from the lake continues on its regular route through the John Street Pumping Station for nOlmal distribution into the City water supply. Enwave uses only the coldness from the lake water, not the actual water, to provide the alternative to conventional air-conditioning (Eliadis, 2003). The basic element of Enwave DLWC is shown in Figure 2.2 .

." . :- " . : >.-:.:-' -: ~ .." - ~. . .. -. .... "

""N

FEB

lIAR

"Pit

.,,"

Jtnt

JUL

AUG

SEP

OCT

NOY

DEC

Month

Source: Canadian Urban Institute

Figure 2.1: Temperature of Lake Ontario at Different Depths Throughout the Year

26

Potablo Water to City Enwavo C 00 I mg PI an
Raw W a t e r
Intoko

Customer Bui lding

39.2 -F

~{~t'O~
_ .... 1

5 4 "f ~

4 1 ° r-

sa"F

,----

40"F

John ~SI"'~1
PUnlpong
~

Lake Ontario

:':~~~~ ..,~'~;~:s._- ;
City Drlnkmg Wator Loop

--- ~
St .. , 1on 40-r
H IX

5S"F

I

eNl .....

I
56"F

Ir. I
HlX

1 ~ 1:
~

68" F

I I

·

District Cooling Loop

Customer l3uilding Loop

Figure 2.2: Basic Elements of Enwave Deep Lake Water Cooling System (Eliadis, 2003)

27

CHAPTER-3
3. Carrier HAP Energy Simulation Program

3.1. Carrier HAP Overview
There are a large number of computer programs on the market designed to help the HV AC professional in many ways. Only a few years ago, due to the limitations of the computing power and memory of personal computers (PC), the scope of the programs were quite limited, and for sophisticated programs, one had to use mainframe computers, which were relatively more difficult to access and use for the typical HV AC professional.

During the past few years, the rapid and substantial progress ofPCs allowed the development of many sophisticated programs for these practical, fast and inexpensive computers. At present, there are programs available which are capable of assisting the HV AC professional in: · · · · · · Design heating and cooling load analysis Energy analysis Psychrometric analysis Pipe and duct design and sizing Equipment selection Economic analysis

Here, one of the commercially available heating and cooling load calculation programs will be briefly reviewed. The program is called HAP (Hourly Energy Analysis Program) and is also capable of simulating the energy consumption of a building. HAP program is a part of a series of programs available from Carrier Corporation which are known as the E20-II, which include pipe and duct design and economic analysis programs as well (Crawley et aI., 2005).

28

··
3.2. Introduction to "Carrier HAP" Progranl
Carri.:'r HAP is the building energy simulation software developed by Carrier Corporation \\ h.:r-.;' H.-\P means hourly analysis program. This computer tool helps engineers to design and size HX :\C systems for diflerent facilities. It consists of two tools. The first tool is used to ,,"S!im;lte the load and design system. The second tool is used to simulate energy use and to
~.l!~cl..l!e ;.U~)

energy cost. This combination of two tools in single package saves time and effort. It

simubtes hourly building energy performance to determine annual energy use and cost of l Carrier COlJ.X)r.ltion, ::006).

e~ef'-;y

H..-\P estinutes desip cooling and heating loads for commercial buildings in order to

detemline required. sizes for HV AC system components. Ultimately, the program provides infoITllltion needed for selecting and specifying equipment. Specifically, the program performs the follo\\ing tasks: · Calculates design cooling and heating loads for spaces, zones and coils in the BVAC system. · · · · Determines required airflow rates for spaces, zones and the system. Sizes cooling and heating coils. Sizes air circulation fans. Sizes chillers and boilers.

I-L-\P estimates annual energy use and energy costs for HV AC and non-HVAC energy

consuming systems in a building by simulating building operation for each of the 8,760 hours in a year. Results of the energy analysis are used to compare the energy use and energy costs of alternate HVAC system designs. So the best design can be chosen. Specifically, HAP performs L"1e follo\\ing tasks during an energy analysis: · Simulates hour-by-hour operation of all heating and air conditioning systems in the building. · Simulates hour-by-hour operation of all plant equipment in the building.

29

·

Simulates hour-by-hour operation ofnon-HVAC systems including lighting and appliances.

·

Uses results of the hour-by-hour simulations to calculate total annual energy usc and energy costs. Costs arc calculated using actual utility rate features such as stepped, timeof-day and demand charges, if specified.

·

Generates tabular and graphical reports of hourly, daily, monthly and annual data.

HAP is comprised of three branches: an input branch and two analysis branches: \Veather and Space Input Branch: The first branch of IIAP handles data entry for the basic weather and building data used in both design load and energy analysis calculations. Design Load Branch: The second branch of HAP estimates hourly cooling and heating design -loads. Design loads data may be used to size air terminals, cooling and heating equipment. Energy Analysis Branch: The third branch of IIAP performs detailed hourly simulations of air system and plant operation. Simulation results are used to compute annual energy consumption. The program considers a variety of fuel types as well as electrical energy and demand charges in order to compute the annual operating costs for the building.

3.3. Different Calculation Engines
In order to conduct a building simulation, HAP uses combination of six different calculation engines (Crawley et aI, 2005): · To analyze dynamic heat transfer in the building, producing space cooling and heating loads, the loads engine uses the ASHRAE Transfer Function · ·
~lethod.

The "Systems engine" simulates the thermo-mechanical operation of the airsiJ.: system. The Loads Engine and the Systems Engine are integrated by
t~;:

"'Stzing Engim:.... and

helps to estimate the proper size for diffusers. air termiml. fa.·!$, coil:;. a::J. c:.rmjdifil,.'Ts. · · The "Plant engine" simulates the operation of chilled wa:er a::J bo~ wa:r:r pI;l;:::t;. Energy and fuel consumptions daD trom the system
a.'~j

p!a.-:!

c:;L;~.a.:::c'cs 21:0:

col!ectJ.:d

by the "Building engine" and combines it \\ith utility n:e s~-...:~:~;::t::r;)'c;). t'J rrf:CL:c':; energy consumptions :lnd energy costs.. 30

·

Life cycle costs are determined by the "Life Cycle Engine" which combines the energy costs with the equipment costs, operating costs and maintenance costs.

3.4. Carrier HAP Strength and Limitation
Carrier HAP program has some strengths and few a limitation which are described as below (Carrier Corporation, 2006):

Carrier HAP Strength: · Carrier HAP program IS a powerful tool for designing systems and sIzmg system components. · · · · HAP can easily handle projects and archive features. Equally good for small, medium and large building energy modeling. Carrier HAP can be used for new design, retrofit or energy conservation work. Systems including packaged rooftops, built-up central air handlers, fan coils, and tenninal unit and more. · Different types of constant air volume (CAV) and variable air volume (V AV) system controls are available. · Comprehensive system sizing infonnation, component loads, and building temperatures can be gathered from design report. · Building simulation reports provide hourly, daily, monthly, and annual energy and cost perfonnance data. · · · · HAP can be used for complex utility structures. This program provides more than 50 design, energy analysis reports and graphs. Carrier HAP is used for estimating life cycle cost of components as well as equipment. All Reports can be exported to word processors and spreadsheets for further use.

Carrier HAP Limitation: · · Carrier HAP is not suitable for research work. Up to100 buildings are pennitted per project.

31

· · · · ·

Up to100 plants and 250 systems are permitted per project. Up to 250 systems are permitted per project. Up to 2500 spaces can be inputted per project. Air system has a limit of spaces up to 100 spaces. Limitation for input full geometric description of wall, roof, floors, windows, skylights and doors.

·

Weather data cannot be edited and is only available from Carrier.

3.5. Carrier HAP Weather Data
Weather Data refers to the temperature, humidity and solar radiation conditions experienced . by the building and its HVAC equipment. In HAP, this term is also used to refer to information about the geographical location of the building, the nature of local time and local soil properties. Weather data has a significant effect on building loads and equipment operation. It plays a key role in load calculations and system performance calculations. The weather form consists of three main parts (Carrier Corporation, 2006). · It provides a database of design weather data for more than 800 cities worldwide.

·

It uses Typical Meteorological Year (TMY) and Typical Reference Year (TRY) type
hourly weather data for energy simulation.

HAP deals with two distinct kinds of weather data: · Design \Veather Data is used to perform cooling and heating design load estimates.
)

Cooling design weather data consists of 24-hour profiles of temperature and humidity representing warmer than normal conditions, and clear sky solar radiation profiles representing maximum sunshine conditions for each month. This data is used to estimate design cooling loads according to standard industry practices. Heating design weather data consists of information about the winter design temperature and humidity. This data is used to determine design heating loads according to standard industry practices. · Simulation Weather Data is required when performing 8,760 hours energy simulations. Simulation weather data refers to the 8,760 hours sequence of actual weather data used to 32

simulate building loads and HVAC equipment operation over the course of a year. Results of these simulations are used to compute annual energy use and energy costs. This data is only used in HAP and not in HAP System Design Load.

The operating calendar defines the sequence of days during the year. Because energy simulations are dynamic, thermal performance on one day affects performance on one or more subsequent days. Internal heat gains and equipment operation are usually closely tied to human activity in the building, which turns to the day of the week and holidays. Therefore, it is important to define the sequence of days for the 365-days simulation year.

In HAP, a project only uses one set of weather data at a time. This is in contrast to data such as spaces, systems and plants for which multiple items can exist in each category of data. Rather, one set of weather data exists and the current weather data that has been defined is .used for all program calculations (Carrier Corporation, 2006). Weather Properties of Toronto is shown in Figure 3.1.

~ We;'her Properties - [Toronto]
j

Q.~1]9n.E~~.!!!~~~i!1 Design Tempet atures' Design Solar'
Begion: !,.ocation: .city: Lgtitude: L.Qngitude: Eleyation: Summer DesignQB Summer Coincident WB Summer Daily Bange Wjnter Design DB Winter Coincident WB

Sirm.dation

I

ICanada IOntario IToronto
143_7 179.6 1568_0 187.0 171.0 120_2 1-4.0 1-5.3

3
... 1

3
deg deg

8tmospheric C1eamessl1 00 Nurnbet Average liround 10_20 Reflectance
~oa Conductivity

10.800

BTU/hrlfllF

DesignClg Calculation Months

IJan ..:J tol Dec ..:J

It

·F ·F Of OF OF

lime Zone (GMT +/-} 15.0 hours Doylight Samgs r. Yes r No Time DST .B.egins Apr ::] DST .Ends Oct

I I

..:J f31

rr-

I

Data Source: 2001 ASHRAE Hanchook

OK

Cancel

Figure 3.1: Weather Properties Screen (Carrier Corporation, 2006) 33

-

Help

The thermal envelope or the thermal environment determines how a building will respond to external environmental factors. The physical layout of the building, the site location, the orientation, its outer construction, all determine the thermal environment of the building, which are needed for proper energy simulation and analysis.

The thermal environment can be subdivided into one or more zones as shown in Figure 3.2. Building construction is defined as an entire collection of interior and exterior features of the structure. Building may consist of one or more zones. A zone is defined as a group of surfaces that can interact with each other thermally and have a common air mass at roughly the same temperature. Surfaces are walls, roofs, ceilings, floors, partitions, windows, shading devices. Surfaces consist of a series of materials called "construction", Construction is a group of homogeneous one-dimensional material layers. Each surface must have a single construction . definition, and each construction is made up of one or more materials (Siddique, 2008).

BUILDING
~HERMAlE~RONMENn

I
I I

I
ZONE.3

ZONE,"

ZONU2
I

I I I
I
I

,-----

L ____

~

: SURFACEltt
I

!I - r
I

h4r

1 1
I

-r
~
N...",,.2

nl,

.e.II..,.

Q - ~ED
~

,_____ l -----1
I

i
I I I I

1 I
1

: SURFACEil! :

'----- ------

I

SURFACE 112

------- -----,

I i

l

Material,"

11 ~ ..........

GONSTRUCTION

Figure 3.2: Simulation Modeling of the Thermal Environment (Siddique, 2008)

34

3.6.

Space Usage and Interior Environment
Thennal simulation reqUires infonnation about the functions taking place inside the

building and how, these might add or subtract heat from the zones. Thermal simulation requires infonnation on air leakage to and from the building to detennine its effect on the building heating and cooling needs. Nothing is constant inside a building-people come and go, lights and equipment get turned on and off, etc. and the thennal simulation needs details on what is happening through the day and year within a building (Siddique, 2008).

Schedules are a way of specifying how much of a particular quantity is present, or at what level something should be set, including:

·

Occupancy density Occupancy activity Lighting Thennostatic controls Shading element density

·
· · ·

Types of Internal Gains:

· · · ·
· · · · · · ·

People Lights Equipment Infiltration

Heat Additions from Internal Gains: Sensible and Latent Sensible: energy addition associated with (dry-bulb) temperature change in zone Latent: energy addition associate with moisturelhumidity change in zone Sensible Heat Gains Convection Thennal (Long Wavelength) Radiation Visible (Short Wavelength) Radiation (generally lights only)

35

HVAC System:
After calculating heating and cooling load for a particular thermal environment inside a building, the next step is to find something that must meet these heating and cooling loads in order for the thermal comfort goals to be met by the HV AC system. There are two systems: · · Secondary System meets thermal loads of the zones. Primary System (central plant) produces or converts energy for use by the secondary system.

·
Zone Sizing:
· · Calculates required supply air volume to maintain zone set points. Computes maximum cooling load, heating load and airflow for systems sizing and sizing zone components. · Determine outside airflow rate per person based on the total number of people for all people statements in zone.

3.7. Heat Balance Method
For sizing equipments, the heat balance method is used such as fans, chillers, boilers, etc. Based on design criteria and thermal properties of the building, the cooling, heating, latent and fresh air loads of the building will be estimated to determine the design flow rate and capacity of the air-conditioning system and its equipment (Chen and Wang, 2002).

There are many methods for the determination of building thermal energy and load, for example, the room response method, equivalent temperature difference method, harmonized wave decomposition method and finite difference method. The simplified methods such as the degree-day method and the bin method are used to predict the energy consumption of buildings or total cooling and heating load (Chen and Wang, 2002).

36

3.7.1.

Building Energy Analysis Method
There are many methods for estimating building energy consumption and, in general,

they can be divided into two categories (Chen & Wang, 2002):

1. Steady-State Method 2. Dynamic Method

Steady-state methods, such as the effective heat transfer method, degree day method, bin
method, temperature frequency method and full load coefficient method, are simple to use, but they cannot provide information about the variation of energy consumption with the time and do not consider the effect of thermal storage in the building structure (Chen & Wang, 2002).

Dynamic methods are more detailed and usually require hourly calculations over the whole year
for the analysis of annual load and energy consumption. Conversion from the heat gains to cooling load can be carried out by the heat balance method (Chen & Wang, 2002).

3.7.2. Transfer Function Method
The Transfer Function Methodology (TFM) is a dynamic means of accounting for heat transfer. Although there are other methods of accounting for heat transfer, Carrier's HAP program utilizes TFM in its calculations because it extends the analysis to account for specific system behaviour to control the air temperature in the thermostat zones.

Different software programs use different methodologies for calculating heating and cooling loads. For example, the "Design Master HV AC" software program uses the Cooling Load Temperature Difference (CLTD) method, Trane's TRACE program uses the Transfer Function Method (TFM), and Carriers' HAP also uses the Transfer Function Method (TFM). The TFM is based on two important concepts (MacQuiston et aI, 2005).

37

Conduction Transfer Function (CTF): The Conduction Transfer Functions are used by TFM to describe the heat flux at the inside of a wall, roof, partition, ceiling, or floor as a function of previous values of the heat flux and previous values of inside and outside temperatures. Conduction Transfer Function coefficients depend only on the physical properties of the wall or roof and not on the construction of the rest of the zone. Conduction Transfer Function coefficients for walls, roofs, partition, floors, and ceilings, can be determined using the Conduction Transfer Function routines (Chen and Wang, 2002).

\Veighting Factor: The Weighting factors are also known as Room Transfer functions and are used by relating a current variable to its past values and other variables at discrete time intervals. These intervals are usually at I-hour period for transfer functions used in building analysis (Chen and Wang, 2001).

3.8. Fundamental Terminologies of HAP
In using the HAP, input of following six main categories of data related to building and its HVAC equipments are necessary.

1. Element: Elements are the components of the building, which are responsible for heat
gain or loss. In other words, its main characteristic is to affect the heat transfer of the facility. Examples for the elements are walls, windows, doors, roofs, skylights, floors, partitions, lighting, people, electric equipment, miscellaneous heat sources and infiltration (Carrier Corporation, 2006).

2. Space: In general, a space means a single room. But for some applications, it may be more efficient for a space to represent a group of rooms even an entire building. A space consists of a number of "elements" such as walls, roofs, windows. So, a space is a region of the building comprised of one or more heat flow elements and is served by one or more air distribution terminals. All spaces for the portion of the building being analyzed must be defined so system design calculations or energy simulations can be performed (Carrier Corporation, 2006). 38

3. Zone: A zone is a group of one or more spaces having a single thermostatic control.

Zones are often used differently for different applications. In some systems, each room contains a thermostat. Therefore, each zone contains one space representing a single room. In other situations, one thermostat is allocated to a group of rooms. For

preliminary block load estimates, a zone might be defined as the entire building. The choice of zones affects system operation, the accuracy of system design and energy analysis calculations, and the effort required to model the system (Carrier Corporation, 2006).

4. Air System: The air system is the equipment and controls used to provide cooling and

heating of the building which serves one or more zones. The air temperature of each zone is controlled by thermostat. Examples of air systems are packaged rooftop units, packaged vertical units, split systems, packaged DX fan coils, hydronic fan coils and water source heat pumps. In all cases, the air system also includes associated ductwork, supply terminal and controls (Carrier Corporation, 2006).

5. Plant: The plant is composed of the equipment and controls used to provide cooling or

heating to coils in one or more air systems such as the chiller plants, hot water boiler plants and steam boiler plants (Carrier Corporation, 2006).

6. Building: The building is the envelope containing all the HV AC systems under

consideration. Though literally, building represents one individual structure it can also represent a group of structures. For example, a "building" could represent a campus in which all the structures are served by a common set of plant equipment (Carrier Corporation, 2006).

39

3.9. Using HAP to Design Systems and Plants
In conceptual terms, how to use HAP to design systems and plants? The basic five steps procedure are needed for designing systems and plants (Carrier Corporation, 2006) and can be shown in Figure 3.3.

1. Define the Problem: Before using HAP, it is needed to define the scope and objectives of
the energy analysis. For example, what type of building is involved? What type of systems and equipment are required for HV AC? What special requirements are to be considered for system features?

2. Gathering Data: Before performing energy analysis, information about the building, its environment and its equipment must be gathered. Data involves HVAC as well as nonHVAC systems, following specific types of data include: · · Climate data for the building site. Construction material data for walls, roofs, windows, doors, exterior shading devices and floors, and for interior partitions between conditioned and non-conditioned regions. · Building size and layout data including wall, roof, window, door and floor areas, exposure orientations and external shading features. · Internal load characteristics determined by levels and schedules for occupancy, lighting systems, office equipment, appliances and machinery within the building. · Data concerning HVAC equipment, controls and components to be used.

3. Enter Data into HAP: To enter climate, building and HVAC equipment data into HAP. Then define the following types of data which are needed for energy analysis work:

a. Enter Weather Data: Weather data defines the temperature, humidity and solar
radiation conditions the building encounters during the course of a year. These conditions play an important role in influencing loads and system operation.

b. Enter Space Data: A space is a region of the building comprised of one or more heat
flow elements and served by one or more air distribution terminals. To define a space, all 40

elements which affect heat flow in the space must be described. Elements include walls, windows, doors, roofs, skylights, floors, occupants, lighting, electrical equipment, miscellaneous heat sources, infiltration, and partitions. Also infonnation about the construction of walls, roofs, windows, doors and external shading devices is needed, as well as infonnation about the hourly schedules for internal heat gains. c. Enter Air System Data: An Air System is the equipment and controls used to provide cooling and heating to a region or zones of a building. Zones are groups of spaces having a single thennostatic control. Examples of systems include central station air handlers, packaged rooftop units, packaged vertical units, split systems, packaged DX fan coils, hydronic fan coils and water source heat pumps. In all cases, the air system also includes associated ductwork, supply tenninals and controls. To define an air system, the components, controls and zones associated with the system should be defined as well as the system sizing criteria. d. Enter Plant Data: A Plant is the equipment and controls used to provide cooling or heating to coils in one or more air systems. It includes chiller plants, hot water boiler plants and steam boiler plants. This step is optional; it is only required if we are sizing chiller or boiler plants. To define a plant for design purposes, the type of plant and the air systems it serves must be defined. This data is entered on the plant input fonn. 4. Generate Design Reports: Once weather, space, air system and plant data has been entered, HAP can be used to generate system and plant design reports. Design procedure is shown in Figure 3.3.

11
I

------------------------ -----------------------Enter Weather Data

II

Enter Space Data

I

Enter Air System Data

I Enter Plant Data I:
J

. I I Enter Data mto the HAP I l________________________ -______________________

Generate Design Reports Select Equipment

Figure 3.3: Design Procedure of Systems and Plants using HAP 41
,

5. Select Equipment: Finally, the data from the generated reports used to select the appropriate cooling and heating equipment from product catalogs or electronic catalog software. System and plant design reports provide information necessary to select all the components of your HVAC system including air handlers, packaged equipment, supply terminals, duct systems, piping systems and plant equipment.

3.10.

Using HAP to Estimate Energy Use and Cost
In conceptual terms, how to use HAP to estimate annual energy use and energy costs for

a building is an important concern. For doing an energy analysis, all energy analysis work requires the same general five step procedure shown in Figure 3.3 below. Note that, certain steps are identical or similar to those used for system design which is already described in previous section. If a system design has already been performed for a building, all of the data entered for design can be reused for the energy analysis, and this significantly reduces the effort needed to complete the energy analysis. Note that energy analysis features are only available in the HAP program and not in HAP System Design Load (Carrier Corporation, 2006).

In order to do an energy analysis, the first two steps involve defining the problem as well
as data gathers are the same as described in previous "designing of systems and plants" section. Weather data and space data which include defining zones are also the same as described in the previous section (Carrier Corporation, 2006). Energy Analysis procedure is shown in Figure 3.4.

1------------------------- --------------------------1
I : I Enter Plant Data Enter Utility Rate Data Enter Buildinf! Data

l
I

I

~

____________________~~~~~~~~eHA~ ____________________ ~
Generate Simulation Reports Evaluate Result

Figure 3.4: Energy Analysis Procedure 42

An Air System is the equipment and controls used to provide cooling and heating to a region of a building. An air system serves one or more zones. To define an air system, the components, controls and zones associated with the system must be defined as well as the system sizing criteria. For energy analysis, performance information about DX cooling equipment and electric and combustion heating equipment must also be defined. All of these data are entered into the air system input form (Carrier Corporation, 2006).

A Plant is the equipment and controls used to provide cooling via chilled water or heating via hot water or stearn to coils in one or more air systems. This step is optional; it is only required if chilled water, hot water or stearn plants are used in assigning building. To define a plant for energy analysis purposes, the type of plant and the air systems must be defined along with its configuration, controls and distribution system information. This data is entered on the plant input form (Carrier Corporation, 2006).

Utility rate data defines the pricing rules for electrical energy use and fuel use. An electric rate structure must be defined for all energy studies. One fuel rate for each non-electric fuel source must also be defined. Electric rate data is entered using the electric rate form. Fuel rate data is entered using the fuel rate form (Carrier Corporation, 2006).

A Building is simply the container for all energy-consuming equipment included in a single energy analysis case. Building data consists of lists of plants and systems included in the building, utility rates used to determine energy costs and data for non-HV AC energy or fuel use. Data is entered using the building form (Carrier Corporation, 2006).

When all input data has been entered, HAP can be used to generate simulation reports. Simulation reports for individual air systems and plants included in analysis can also be generated. Use the same procedure but select air system or plant items instead. System and plant simulation reports provide more detailed performance information for individual pieces of equipment. They are often useful for learning about equipment performance and for troubleshooting unexpected results (Carrier Corporation, 2006).

43

In order to design system and plant for HV AC and to generate energy simulation reports for a building, the Carrier HAP works by following methodology are as shO\\'TI in Figure 3.5.

rfl II)

''2
~
II)

0.. 0 ;.... 0...

I-

+i +1 +1
~

General- Floor Area, Ceiling Height, Building Weight, Type of space Internals-lighting, Plug Lode, People, Miscellaneous Load Walls, Windows, Doors-Exposure, Construction type Roofs. Skvlights-Exposure. Construction type lnfiltration-Desilm Cooling & Heating. Energv Analvsis

:1

II
I(
:1

u

II)

CI'l

0..

t':l

+-1

.-J -l
Building Simulation model using Carrier HAP Program
~

Floors-Above Conditioned, Unconditioned, On Grade, Below Grade Partition-Ceiling and Wall partition, U-Value General-Equipment type, Air System Type, Number of Zones System Component-Ventilation, Economizer, Supply & Return Fan Zone Comp.-Space, Thermostats, Supply Terminals, Heating Units Sizing Data-System Sizing, Zone Sizing Equipment-Terminal Cooling Units General-Plant Type Systems-Air systems with Chilled Water or Steam Coils Configuration-# of Chillers, Plant Control, Design & Max LCHWT Boiler- Est. Max Load, Full Load Capacity Eqpt. Schedule -Full Load Capacity, Cooler & Condenser Flow Distribution-Distribution System, Fluid Properties, Primary Loop
I

,E

l
I-

rl

H
~
~ ~I

::=

Weather ~ Data

IZl

I

:.(

* ...
;>.,
til
<l)

E

'I

I

+1
'f:
~
0

+l
I--

<l)

... 0...

Q.

1:: t':l 0::

1
.-J

.1

+1

<\)

4-

e::::

Cii
;>.,

~

Ei<etri, R""
Fuel Rates

u..l

~ <\) c

~
:;
<l)

Lighting Electrical Equipment Occupancy Thermostat

+-

-0
<\)

-§
IZl

+-

H +1 +1
44

I I I I

Figure 3.5: Flowchart for Building Simulation Model using Carrier HAP Program

CHAPTER-4 4. Energy Audit of Ryerson University Campus

4.1. Overview of Energy Assessment / Audit
Energy assessment/audit has become an accepted first step in identification and implementation of various energy efficiency opportunities in residential, commercial, institutional and industrial facilities. An energy audit is an organized survey which consists of a detailed examination of how a facility uses energy, what the facility pays for that energy, what are the probable sources of energy wastes and losses and finally, a recommended program for changes in operating practices or energy-consuming equipment that will cost effectively save dollars on energy bills. The objective of an energy audit is to identify economical energy/cost saving measures that do not adversely affect the quality of work/product and the environmental consequences of the equipment and processes. Energy audit is a needed step in implementation of any detailed and sizable energy efficiency project. Often there will be the need for engineering design before implementation of the project. The major impetus behind an energy audit is that the analysis of energy consumption and identification of potential conservation measures in facilities relate to various disciplines of engineering, that are often beyond the expertise of one person or small engineering firms. Currently, there are hundreds of computer programs on the market for energy simulation. These programs provide users with key building performance indicators such as energy use and demand, temperature, humidity, and costs (Crawley et aI., 2008).
Project Approach

To conduct an energy audit study, several activities are typically carried out depending on the type of the audit and the size and function of the audited building. The energy audit serves to identify all of the energy streams into a facility and to quantify energy use from an economical standpoint. Thus, the main purpose of an energy audit is to identify quantitatively where a
45

facility of a building, such as, using energy and the opportunities to save energy and reduce costs. The approach used in Ryerson University campus energy audit was as follows:

Step 1 - Identify Energy Audit Scope and Objectives
The first step in conducting an energy audit is to understand the scope and objectives. The scope of the audit includes understanding which building(s) will be audited. A clear understanding of the objectives is also vital to the success of the audit. This will help detennine the outcome of the audit and the type of work that needs to be completed in order to achieve the objectives. Based on the objectives, one can decide which kind of audit to perfonn (i.e. miniaudit or maxi-audit). The objective will also help to detennine the type of simulation software to use since there are numerous packages on the market that perfonn audits to varying degrees of complexity. i. Mini-audit:

This audit requires detailed analysis of energy invoices (preferable for the last 3-5 years), some tests and measurements to quantify energy uses and losses and to evaluate the economic potential of energy conservation measures. So, this step energy audit can be called as Energy Survey and Analysis. This includes a more detailed building survey and energy analysis. This level analysis identifies and provides the savings and cost analysis of all practical measures that meet the owner's constraints and economic criteria, along with a discussion of any effect on operation and maintenance procedures.
It also lists potential capital-intensive improvements that require more thorough data

collection and analysis, along with an initial judgment of potential costs and savings. This level of analysis is adequate for most buildings and measures. ii. Maxi-audit:

This audit is usually conducted as a part of detailed energy study. It contains an evaluation of how much energy is used for each function such as lighting, process, etc. It

46

~~------------------------------------------------------------------------------------~

also requires a model analysis, such as computer simulation, to determine energy use patterns on a year-round basis, taking into account such variables as weather data. Step 2 - Building and Utility Data Analysis The main purpose of this step is to evaluate the characteristics of the energy systems and the patterns of energy-use for the building. The building characteristics can be collected from the architectural (Le. building dimensions, construction details), mechanical (i.e. HV AC and DHW system design and operational data) and electrical (Le. lighting system, motors, etc.) drawings. The energy-usc patterns can be obtained from a compilation of utility bills over several years. Analysis of the historical variation of the utility bills allows the energy auditor to determine if there are any seasonal and weather effects on the building energy-use.

Step 3 - Building Walk-through A building walk-through is a visual scan of the facility which aids in identifYing potential energy savings measures. Some of the activities involved in this step include: identifying customer needs and concerns, checking the current operating and maintenance procedures, determining the conditions of major energy-use equipment, and estimating the occupancy, equipment, and lighting. The outcomes of this step are essential because they determine whether the building requires any further energy auditing work.

,"

Step 4 - Developing Baseline for Building Energy-Use Using the information from steps 2 and 3, the energy engineer now has all the required information to develop a base-case or baseline simulation model that represents the existing energy-use and operating conditions for the bUilding. The simulation results should be comparable with the actual data; otherwise, further refinement of the model is necessary to improve the accuracy of the simulation. This model will be used as a reference to estimate the energy savings incurred from the proposed energy conservation opportunities.

Step 5 - Evaluation of Energy Conservation Measures When the baseline simulation model has been completed, it accurately represents the existing energy consumption for the building; it is then updated to include energy conservation 47

alternatives. A comprehensive list of energy conservations measures should be prepared using the information from the walk-through, as well as research. After these measures have been incorporated into the baseline model, the simulation is run once again. The results are compared with the baseline simulation results from step 4 to determine the projected savings. This procedure is repeated for all the energy conservation alternatives. Step 6 - Economic Analysis When the projected energy savings have been determined, the associated costs are estimated. An estimate of the initial costs required to implement the energy conservation measures are pertinent when evaluating the cost-effectiveness of each energy conservation opportunity. Using the estimated costs and savings, an economic analysis is carried out to make a comparative evaluation of energy saving measures. Energy study approach is shown in Figure .4.1.

STEP 3
Building Walkthrough
:.:,.. :.:.J,

Audit Scope and Objectives

,\ /

STEP 4
Develop Baseline for Building Energy-Use

.\

STEP 5
~EVaruaticin'cif' .'

/

Energy Conservation Measures
:=:::..:::.,,-~

... ;;;.-:::-." :-.y.;,-,'"

~

STEP 6
Economic Analysis
. ·',:.::.:..':.:...7.:: '.'"

Figure 4.1: Energy Study Approach (Crawley et aI., 2008)

4.2.

History of Ryerson University
Ryerson University campus is located in geographical coordinate of 43°40' N and 79°25'

W, Toronto, Ontario, Canada (http://boating.ncf.callatlong.html). The University is now one of the most applied-to universities in Ontario, and the University began in 1948 as the Ryerson Institute of Technology under the visionary leadership of Howard H. Kerr. From day one, Ryerson has undergone constant evolution in the heart of Toronto, establishing its unique focus on career-ready education. Since 1948, Ryerson has built its reputation on the strength of its academic curriculum, and offers close to 100 PhDs, master's, and undergraduate programs, with a total enrolment of 48

25,000 and more than 65,000 registrations annually m the G. Raymond Chang School of Continuing Education. Guided by a bold new Academic Plan, an ambitious research agenda, and its reputation with business and community leaders continues to rise (http://www.ryerson.calaboutlhistory.html). The RU campus map is shown in Figure 4.2.

Ryerson Campus Map

Figure 4.2: Ryerson University Campus Map

4.3.

Site Visit of Ryerson University
There are 28 buildings in Ryerson University campus including residential, office and

educational buildings. There are two central chiller plants in RU. One of them is located on the Library building. It serves 184730 m2 of the total campus area which includes 13 buildings. The PROPERlY Of
y;r(£RSON UN\VERStT't' US

RAiW

49

25,000 and more than 65 ,000 registrations annually in the G. Raymond Chang School of Continuing Education. Guided by a bold new Academic Plan, an ambitious research agenda, and its reputation with business and community leaders continues to rise (http://www.ryerson.ca/aboutihistory.html). The RU campus map is shown in Figure 4.2.

Ryerson Campus Map

o

Figure 4.2: Ryerson University Campus Map

4.3.

Site Visit of Ryerson University
There are 28 buildings in Ryerson University campus including residential, office and

educational buildings. There are two central chiller plants in RU. One of them is located on the Library building. It serves 184730 m 2 of the total campus area which includes 13 buildings. The

pt\OPER'TY Of
AYfl'SON UN,,,£RStn' UB

49

other chiller plant is located at Ryerson's Rogers Communication Centre. It serves 30966 m2 of total campus area which includes 2 buildings. Only DLCW for Rogers Business building is served by Enwave. The address of Ryerson buildings for energy audit is shown in Table 4.1.

Table 4.1: List of Ryerson Buildings for Energy Audit and Base Case Simulation , SI. No. Name of the Building Address

Central Chiller Plant Located on the Library building 1 2 3
·

Heaslip House Continuing Education (CED) School ofImage Art (IMA) Victoria Building (VIC)
~on Hall (JOR)

297 Victoria Street 122 Bond Street 285 Victoria Street 380 Victoria Street 350 Victoria Street 350 Victoria Street 243 Church Street 87 Gerrard Street East 99 Gerrard Street East 302 Church Street 55 Gould Street 125 Bond Street 43 Gerrard Street East 50 Gould Street 340 Church Street 379 Victoria Street

4 5 6 7 8 9

Library Building (LIB) Podium Building (POD) George Vari Engineering and Computing Centre (ENG) Eric Palin Hall (EPH) Sally Horsfall Eaton Centre for Studies in community Health (SHE) School of Interior Design (SID) Student Campus Centre (SCC) Heidelberg Centre-School of Graphic Communications Management (HEI/GCM) Kerr Hall North (KHN) Kerr Hall South (KHS) Kerr Hall East (KHE) Kerr Hall West (KHW)

r--w11
12 13.a 13.b 13.c 13.d

Central Chiller Plant Located on the RCC building 14 15 16 Rogers Communications Centre (RCC) Pitman Hall Residence (PIT) Rogers Business Building (RBB) 80 Gould Street
I

160 Mutual Street 575 Bay Street West

Remote Chilled 'Vater Served by Enwave

50

..

'

4.4. Weather Data Specification
Weather data has a significant effect on the building heating and cooling loads and the operation and perfonnance of HV AC equipment. Therefore, it plays a key role in the calculation of heating and cooling loads and system perfonnance. HV AC systems of the building and portion of the building exposed to external environment are greatly influenced by temperature, humidity. solar radiation etc. The geographical location, soil properties, local time, atmospheric clearance number, ground reflection are used under the tenn "Weather". HAP uses only one set of weather data at a time for one project (Carrier Corporation, 2006). Design Weather Data is used to estimate cooling and heating design load as per industry standards. Cooling and heating design data consists of 24-hour profiles of temperature and humidity representing maximum condition for summer and winter design-day condition. Simulation Weather Data is used to perfonn hourly energy simulations. It refers to 8760 hours sequence of actual weather data to simulate building loads. These results can be used to estimate annual energy use and costs (Carrier Corporation, 2006). The design temperature of Toronto, Ontario, Canada is shown in Figure 4.3.
~ Weather Properties - [Toronto]

Design Palametefs! Design Tempe!al:ures] Design solall Simulation

I
....

Monthly MBX/Min Dr',! Bulb Wet Bulb

tiourly Detail View
Hour IJanOB JanW8 uuuu -3.2 -3.2

~
Fe Mal
Apr May Jun Jul Aug

IMin

6.0 8.2 14.4 20.0 25.0 28.9 30.6
30.6

·5.2 -3.0 3.2
8.8

5.7 13.91 16.1 18.9 20.6 21.7 21.7 20.0 17.2

-5.5 2.
8.~

0100
0200

Sep Oct Nov Dec

27.2 21.7 16.0 9.3

13.8 17.7 19.3 19.3 16.0 10.4 4.8 -1.9

H

13.5
17.C 18.<! 18.<! 15.1 10.<! 4.5
-2.":

0300 0400 0500 0600 0700
0800

-3.8 .... 3 .... 8 -5.1

·3.9 ....5 -5.0

-

-5.2
-5.0 .... 4

-5.4 -5.5 -5.2
....6 -3.5 ·2.0 -0.3 1.6
3.4

0900 1000 1100 1200 1300

-3.4 ·2.0 -0.3 1.6
3.4

4.8

4.6

·1

I

·

...

OK

Figure 4.3: Weather Data Screen (Carrier, 2006)
51

4.5

Building Data
The building data and specification were collected from Campus Planning of Ryerson

University. The blue print I buildings drawing, manuals and other data sources were used for collection of those data.

4.5.1. Building Envelope Specification
The role of the building envelope is to separate different environments, typically the interior from exterior, by managing the flow of air, moisture, and heat between them. The envelope must also consider the impact of architectural orientation and styles. Building envelope includes the foundation, floors, walls, fenestration (windows and doors), and roof. All building envelope specification was collected from architectural and structural drawings of the buildings according to following criteria (Carrier Corporation, 2006). 1. Floors: Above conditioned space; above unconditioned space; slab floor on grade; slab floor below grade. 2. Wall assembly: Exterior wall assembly (layers defined as inside to outside); interiors wall assembly (layers defined as inside to outside) 3. Window: Types of window depends on use of glass 4. Door: Types of door like sliding, entrance, revolving 5. Roof: Roof assembly (layers defined as inside to outside) 6. Skylight 7. Partition: Ceiling partition; and wall partition

The energy audit report of Ryerson campus was conducted for 16 individual buildings. These buildings are shown in Table 4.1. The data collection process of these buildings was almost same. For an example, School of Image Art (IMA) building envelope data are given in this section. The construction data for the walls, roof, windows and door assembly are sho\vn in Table 4.2. to Table 4.5. The construction data for the walls, roof, windows and door assembly of other buildings are shown in Appendix-B.

52

Table 4.2: School ofImage Art (IMA) Building Wall Construction Wall Construction (Layers Inside to Outside) Surface Resistance 5/8-in gypsum board R-II batt insulation Air Space 4-in L W concrete block 4-in face brick Thickness (mm) 15.87 88.9 0.0 101.6 101.6 Density (kg/ml) 800.9 8.0 0.0 608.7 2002.3 Specific Heat (KJ/kglK) 1.09 0.84 0.0 0.84 0.92 Weight (kg/m2) 12.7 0.7 0.0 61.8 203.4

Overall V-Value: 0.363 W/mz/K

Table 4.3: School of Image Art (lMA) Building Roof Construction Roof Construction Surface Resistance (Layers Inside to Outside) Acoustic tile Air space Thickness (mm) 19.05 0.0 19.05 203.2 88.9 9.525 Density (kg/m3) 480.6 0.0 544.6 2242.6 8.0 1121.3 Specific Heat (KJ/kglK) 0.84 0.0 1.21 0.84 0.84 1.47 Weight" (kg/m2) 9.2 0.0 10.4 455.7 0.7 10.7

3/4 -in wood board
8-in HW concrete R-I1 batt insulation Built-up roofing

Overall V-Value: 0.337 W/mL/K

Table 4.4: School ofImage Art (IMA) Building Window Construction Window Construction Frame Type: Aluminum with thennal breaks Glazing Clear Area Air Gap (ml) (mm) Outer Inner (mm) (mm) 10 6.0 3.0 3.0 8.4 5 1.6 3.4 6.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0

Window Type Window-A Window-B Window-C Window-D Window-E

Overall VValue
(W/m 2/K)

3.6 3.604 3.612 3.656 3.629

Overall shading co-efficient for each window

=0.747

53

Table 4.5: School of Image Art (IMA) Building Door Assembly
Door Assembly
Door Area= 9.3 m! Glass Area= 7.4 m2
I

Door U-Value= 1.703 \V1m 2/K Glass U-Value= 3.293 W/m 2/K

Glass shading co-efficient
Door Area= 3.3 m2 Glass Area= 2.6

0.880

m
T

Door U-Value= 1.703 W/m 2/K Glass U-Value= 3.293 W/m2/K

Glass shading coefficient

0.880

4.5.2.

Building Operation
A building is divided into units referred to as "space" when analyzing its functionality. In

its simplest sense, a space represents a single room. A space consists of a number of "elements" such as walls, roofs, windows, and internal heat gains which influence heat transfer into and out of the space. In addition, a space can be served by one or more air distribution terminals.

In order to analyze the thermal behaviour of a building, it is divided into "zones". These do not always have to represent a single room. In some applications, it is more appropriate for a space to represent a group of rooms, a floor or even an entire building. The purpose of defining all spaces is for system design calculations or energy simulations to be performed. All Ryerson buildings are used as space such as, classroom, office space, corridor, auditorium, conference room, laboratory, library space and cafeteria. percentage of conditional area for each Ryerson building. Table 4.6 repr~sents the

54

Table 4.6: List of Conditioned Floor Area for Ryerson Buildings

I Sl.
, No.
I

Name of the Building
Heaslip House Continuing Education (CEO) School of Image Art (IMA) Victoria Building (VIC) Jorgenson Hall (JOR) Library Building (LIB) Podium Building (POD) George Vari Engineering and Computing Centre (ENG) . Eric Palin Hall (EPH) Sally Horsfall Eaton Centre for Studies in community Health (SHE) School of Interior Design (SID) Student Campus Centre (SCC) Heidelberg Centre-School of Graphic Communications Management (HEUGCM) Kerr Hall (KNE) Kerr Hall (KNW) Kerr Hall (KSE) Kerr Hall (KSW) Rogers Communications Centre (RCC) Pitman Hall Residence (PIT) Rogers Business Building (RBB)

Conditioned Floor Area (m2)
2302
I

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
11

7219 9788 8188 15426 13421 17583

,
,

17334 2888 2993 2399

12 l3.a l3.b l3.c 13.d 14 15 16

30125

10871 2166 16740

4.6.
4.6.1.

HVAC System Data
Air Distribution System
Air is normally treated in air handling units (AHUs) in order to control moisture content

and temperature in buildings that are centrally cooled or heated. Once the air is treated, it is transported and distributed to various parts of the building. A typical air distribution system

55

L

consists of fans, ducting, dampers, filters, air inlets, and air outlets, as shown schematically in Figure 4.4.

In systems like this, a mixture of outdoor air (provided for ventilation) and part of the air returning from conditioned spaces (return air) are filtered and then treated by the coils. Thenceforth, the fan transports the treated air through the supply ducting system, which distributes it in required quantities to the spaces to be conditioned via outlets and dampers. After performing the necessary cooling or heating, air is later returned from the conditioned spaces through the inlets and return ducting. Some of the return air is then re-circulated back to the AHU while the balance is expelled to allow sufficient fresh air to be added to the system. In an air distribution system, the fan provides the necessary energy to move the air by overcoming frictional losses in the ducting and pressure losses due to components in the system, such as 'filters, coils, and various fittings. The electrical energy required to operate the system can be minimized if the system design is optimized to reduce these losses.
Exhaust air

Return air
~

Fan (optional)

~

Return air ducting

r-------->--'----'--"

Filter

~ Fan
Cooling coil
Supply air (outlets)

Return air (inlets)

Figure 4.4: Typical Air Distribution System (Jayamaha, 2007)

4.6.1.1.

Type of Air Distribution System Air Distribution Systems is classified into single and dual duct categories as well as

constant and variable volume categories.
56

Single-Duct Systems: · · · Main heating and cooling coils in series arrangement Ducts supply air to all terminals at a common temperature Capacity varied by varying temperature or flow rate

Types of single-duct systems: 1. Constant Air Volume (CAV)

· · · · ·
· ·
· ·

Single zone Multiple-zone reheat

2. Variable Air Volume (VAV)
Throttling Fan-powered Reheat Induction Variable diffusers

Dual-Duct Systems: Main heating and cooling coils in parallel May use separate warm and cold air duct distribution systems, blending alr at the terminal device · · May blend air near the main unit and have separate duct for each zone Most vary supply temperature, limited number (around 1% of all installed systems) vary flow rate Types of dual-duct systems: 1. Single Zone ("dual duct") · · Constant volume Variable air volume

2. Multi Zone · · Constant volume Variable air volume

57

·

Three-deck multi zone

Comparison between CAV and V AV System Fans for air handling units are normally sized to handle the maximum airflow and it is required to meet peak load conditions. However, peak load conditions are usually experienced only for short periods of time and the capacity of air handling units is controlled to match requirements by varying the supply air temperature or the amount of air supplied. In constant air volume (CA V) systems, the capacity is controlled by varying the supply air temperature. In such systems, the fan is operated at a fixed speed to give a fixed quantity of air. This not only wastes energy by supplying a constant volume of air irrespective of the load, but also leads to high space relative humidity in air-conditioning systems at low loads due to higher operating supply air temperatures at part load.

To stay away from these shortcomings, variable air volume systems with devices such as discharge dampers, inlet guide vanes, or variable speed drives can be used to regulate the air volume with load while maintaining a fixed supply air temperature. Although discharge dampers and inlet guide vanes are able to reduce the air volume, the energy savings achieved are much less than for variable speed drives, which are able to closely follow the theoretical "cubic" fan power relationship. Cooling operation varies in the occupied and unoccupied periods as described in the fan/thermostat schedule. VAV system is shovvn in Figure 4.5.
Supply air

Return air

Room temperature sensor

Filter coils
Outdoor air

Supply air

Room temperature sensor

Figure 4.5: Arrangement of a VAV System (Jayamaha, 2007)

58

In the case of Ryerson University buildings, central air system is used for supply heating and cooling air to the specified zones for individual building. Zoning was done on the basis of the space function.

Every building has its own air distribution system. Two different types of air system are used in Ryerson buildings, V A V and CAV system. Most of the buildings have V A V air system. Air distribution systems for the individual building are shown in Table 4.7.

Table 4.7: HVAC Air Distribution System Properties of Ryerson Buildings

Sl. No.
I

Name of the Building
Heaslip House Continuing Education (CEO) School of Image Art (lMA) Victoria Building (VIC) Jorgenson Hall (JOR) Library Building (LIB) Podium (POD) Engineering Building (ENG) Eric Palin Hall (EPH) Sally Horsfall Eaton Centre for Studies in Community Health (SHE) School of Interior Design (SID) Student Campus Centre (SCC) Heidelberg Centre-School of Graphic Communications Management (HEIIGCM) Kerr Hall (KNE/KNWIKSE/KSW) Rogers Communications Centre (RCC) Pitman Hall (PIT) Ryerson Business Building (RBB)

Air Distribution System Type
VAV CAV&VAV CAY CAY VAV VAV VAV VAV VAV VAV VAV VAV CAY VAV VAV VAV

Air System Equipment Type
CHWAHU CHWAHU CHWAHU CHWAHU CHWAHU CHWAHU CHWAHU CHWAHU CHWAHU CHWAHU CHWAHU CHWAHU CHWAHU CHWAHU CHWAHU CHWAHU

No. of . Zone 63 51 93 98 118 68
77
i

I

2 i3 4 5 6 ·7 8 9 10 11 12
13

186

20 36 28 i

I
380 76 15 208

14 15 · 16

NB: VAV: Variable Air Volume System; CAY: Constant Air Volume System; CHW: Chilled Water.

59

HV AC data and specification were collected from the campus planning of Ryerson University. The building blue print, manuals and other 'data sources were used to collect the necessary data. For example, HV AC data for School of Image Art (IMA) is given in this section.

IMA building has two AHUs. Those air handling units' specifications are shown in Table 4.8. Table 4.8: Air Handling Unit (AHU) Specification for IMA Building AHU System Served Area (m"') Economizer Supply Fan Capacity (LIs) Supply Fan (kW) Supply Fan Type Return Fan Capacity (LIs) Return Fan (k\V)
i

OS-1 VAV 3567 Integrated enthalpy control 15000 35.4 VFD 12500 9.5 VFD 12.8 15.6 12.8

OS-2 CAY 3652 Integrated enthalpy control 18000 35.4 FC
I

14000 9.5 FC 12.8 15.6 12.8

Return Fan Type Cooling Coil Supply Temp (OC) Precool Coil Setpoint (C) Preheat Coil Setpoint (OC)

Exhaust Fan Schedule of IMA building is shown in Table 4.9. Table 4.9: Exhaust Fan Schedule ofIMA Building Schedule of Exhaust Fan Capacity System (CFM) 2750 Toilet Exhaust 2184 Chemical Mixing Room 3900 Hood Exhaust 1136 Process Machine Exh.
!

I

No. TE CME E-l E-2

l\Iotor (RPl\f) 420 935 510 1430

Motor (HP) 3/4 1/3 1 113

60

Motorized Heaters Schedule of IMA building is shown in Table 4.10. Table 4.10: Motorized Heaters Schedule ofIMA Building Schedule of Motorized Heaters Capacity Location (BTU/HR) 51,100 Main Entrance Stair # 1 26,400 Elevator Shaft Basement Floor Stair # 2 49,000 Stair # 3 40,200

I
FAN (RPM) 1000 700 1500 1500 Motor (HP) 1120 1/50 1120 1130

!

No. FFH-1 FFH-2 UH-l UH-2

Heating and Plumbing Pumps Schedule of IMA building is shown in Table 4.11. Table 4.11: Heating and Plumbing Pumps Schedule of IMA Building Schedule of Heating and Plumbing Pumps Capacity Head Motor System (GPM) ft{wg) (RPM) Chilled Water 840 1750 50 Condenser Water 190 50 1750 Booster Coil 1750 50 125 60 Condensate Pump Receiver 1750 80 Fire Pump 85 93 1750 Domestic Hot Water Circulating Pump 20 20 1750 Elevator Sump Pump 20 25 3450
I

.1

.,

Motor (HP) 15 20 3 2 5 114 112

Steam Injection Humidifier Schedule ofIMA building is shown in Table 4.12. Table 4.12: Steam Injection Humidifier Schedule ofIMA Building Schedule of Steam Injection Humidifier Capacity Steam Capacity Location and System (CFM) (lb/hr) GS_15t Floor 40,000 330 GS-2na Floor 40,000 330 ra SS_3 Floor 25,000 210 61
!

No. GS-l GS-2 SS-l

Relative (%) 40 40 30

I

4.6.2.

Economizer
The outdoor air economizer is an energy saving feature that can be incorporated into

AHUs in some climates. The basis of this strategy is to use 100 percent outside air when it is below a certain temperature to cool the space rather than using a mixture of outside air and return air.

When the outdoor air dry-bulb temperature is below the indoor temperature, the economizer cycle can be programmed to convert the AHU to use 100 percent outdoor air by adjusting the position of the outdoor air and return air dampers. In order to activate this energy saving strategy it is better to use enthalpy (sensible and latent energy level) based controls in humid climates.

Figure 4.6 shows a typical arrangement of an AHU working on an economizer cycle. An economizer system normally includes indoor and outdoor temperature sensors, motorized dampers, and controls. Since the outdoor air damper needs to be large enough to provide 100 percent outside air, this becomes a constraint when fitting economizers to existing AHUs.

In Ryerson University buildings, every air system has economizer with integrated enthalpy control for energy savings.

I
lit

Return air

'"

'"

..--- Return air damper closed Filter cooling coil

-'0 utdoor air . -f-r-!-

.,

\

V
62

@?

Supply air

.,

Outdoor air damper open

Figure 4.6: Typical Arrangement of an AHU on Economizer Mode (Jayamaha, 2007).

4.7. Lighting System Data
Lighting fixtures produce convective as well as radiative heat gains. The type of lighting fixture used influences the relative sizes of the convective and radiative components and the way in which radiative heat gains are distributed. From the electrical drawing of these buildings, the lighting load (kW) was calculated. Total lighting load (kW) were calculated based on the lamp types, fixtures, total number of lamp used in the specific area, types of exit lights. Plug loads were also calculated for the lab equipments, computers, printers and electrical appliances. Some assumptions were made for those lighting load and plug load according to ASHRAE 90.1 standard (ASHRAE, 2004) due to lack of information. The lighting specification of the Ryerson buildings is shown in Table 4.13.

Table 4.13: Lighting Specification of Ryerson University Buildings
Lamp Watts 32 26 32 32 32 32 32 32 75 25 Lamp Type T8 PLQT T8 T8 T8 T8 T8 CFL PAR CFL

Type Al Cl Fl
"

F3 F4 F6 F8

Use Washrooms, Corridors, Service Desks and Cove Location Corridors, Vestibules and Classrooms Located in Stair General Areas, Mechanical Spaces and Non-Public lighting All Classroom Whiteboard Classroom and Corridor Non-Public Corridor Ryerson Corridor

Description Strip Fixture Mounted Recessed Compact Fluorescent Down Light Long Surface Wall Mounted Long Fluorescent Strip Chain Hung

Ceiling Mounted Recessed Fluorescent

Kl
Ll
Tl

Recessed Mounted Recessed Mounted compact Fluorescent

-

-

63

...

4.8. Energy Price and Operation Cost (Flat Rate and TOU)
Electricity price is very important for calculation of total energy cost. Two types of electricity price are used in Toronto area. Those are Time of Use (TOU) and Flat Rate which are sho\\<TI in Table 4.14. Hydro TOU prices for different seasons of the year includes on peak, mid peak and off peak hour (Toronto Hydro, 2007).

Table 4.14: Hydro Price (¢/kWh) for Toronto Area according to Time of Use and Flat Rate

Time of Use (TOU) and Flat Rate of Hydro Price for Toronto Area
Hour 1 2 3 Winter Weekdays (Nov. 1- Apr. 30) Mode Price (¢/kWb) Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 7.7 Off Peak Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 14.7 14.7 Off 14.7 Off Peak 14.7 Mid Peak 11.7 11.7 Mid Peak 11.7 Mid Peak Mid Peak 11. 7 11.7 Mid Peak 11.7 Mid Peak 14.7 On Peak On Peak 14.7 14.7 On Peak 11.7 Mid Peak 11.7 Mid Peak Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 Flat Rate
·

!

n=t 5
6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

·

!

Summer Weekdays (May 1- Oct. 31) Mode Price (¢/kWb) Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 OffP~ 7.7 MidP 11.7 Mid Peak 11.7 Mid Peak 11.7 Mid Peak 11.7 14.7 On Peak On Peak 14.7 On Peak 14.7 On Peak 14.7 14.7 On Peak 14.7 On Peak Mid Peak 11.7 11.7 Mid Peak 11.7 Mid Peak 11.7 Mid Peak MidPeak 11.7 Off Peak 7.7 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak (All Year) : 10.0 ¢/kWb

!

~
Off

All Weekend and Holiday Price Mode (¢/kWb) Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 7.7 Off Peak Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 7.7 Off Peak Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7 Off Peak 7.7
1.1

7.7

64

CHAPTER-5

5.

Base Case Model Energy Simulation with Carrier HAP
Ryerson University has two central conventional chiller plants and they were installed in

the Library building and RCC building. In order to detennine the base case heating and cooling demand, and detennine the annual heating, cooling and electricity cost, the Carrier HAP program was used.

5.1. Creating Input Data File (IDF) for HAP Simulation

5.1.1.

Location and Design Climate
Ryerson University is located in do\\'ntown Toronto, Ontario. The addresses for all of the

University buildings are shown in Table 4.1. Sixteen buildings were selected for an energy audit out of28 buildings. The total area of those buildings is 240074 m2 (86% of the total RU area).

The IDF for HAP includes data relevant to the characteristics that directly impact the thennalloads on the building. These characteristics are concerned with the orientation, geometric shape, the weather data, the internal loads including sensible heat, HVAC system, as well as the material construction of the building.

Most of the input data has already been described in Chapter 4. The weather data, as well as the existing/assumed HVAC system data, would also need to be inputted into HAP. The latest Toronto simulation weather data file was provided by Carrier HAP. According the HAP weather data, the annual solar heat gain for Toronto is shown in Table 5.1.

65

o

Table 5.1: Annual Solar Heat Gain for Toronto (Carrier Corporation, 2006)
I

Month January February March April May June ·July August September October November ·December Month January February March April May June July August September October November December

Multiplier 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00

=

Design Day Maximum Solar Heat Gains (W/m") N NNE NE ENE ESE E SE
55.4 70.2 55.4 70.2 86.6 193.6 315.6 351.2 302.0 200.8 89.8 72.2 55.9 48.7 55.4 140.5 284.0 433.1 505.3 529.9 503.2 419 277.5 125.5 55.9 48.7 204.6 368.8 593 440.5 566.5 3.5 599.1 716.6 743.4 713.7 667.7 640.1 651.5 685.3 703.9 679.2 605.2 544.2 733.7 777.2 752.8 660.8 575.2 535.0 563.0 638.2 724.5 750.6 713.7 693.6

SSE
784.5 783.0 708.2 577.9 466.2 414.8 452.9 558.0 687.2 760.5 762.7 759.2

S
796.4 778.6 686.0 534.4 410.5 357.5 400.5 517.5 660.8 747.5 777.2 777.9

=

86.6 103.0 114.5 150.6 117.5 108.5 89.8 72.2 55.9 48.7

50~*0.6
683.2 672.5 675.7 672.5 634.9 548.4 422.5 377.0

1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 I 1.00 I Multiplier 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 l.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 l.00

642.7 649.8 627.2 65.1 468.3 355.8 213.6 143.1

SSW
784.7 780.4 705.0 572.3 459.5 410.3 450.1 552.0 686.8 761.4 768.4 759.2

SW
733.6 774.1 748.6 655.6 574.0

WSW
600.0 717.2 748.6

W
440.3 560.8 665.9 698.7 696.5 683.9 680.8 673.9 623.7 551.1 409.9 352.4

WNW
205.8 374.0 513.9 596.1 631.6 638.6 618.0 575.3 476.8 351.3 219.8 163.3

NW
55.4 135.3 271.8 419.8 507.6 534.4 503.5 408.0 276.1 133.0 55.9 48.7

NNW
55.4 70.2 86.6 217.8 317.2 348.4 310.1 214.5 89.8 72.2 55.9 48.7

HOR
350.8 508.3 653.8 757.4 810.7 823.7 803.3 745.5 629.2 494.1 345.2 284.1

707.9 656.8 535.2 634.5 562.4 647.1 633I 682.2 721.6 716.0 752.5 674.7 705.6 605.7 679.0 561.9

5.1.2.

Space Data Input

Carrier HAP uses space data or building envelope data of the selected Ryerson University buildings. Space data includes for each building: · · · · · Building area, ceiling height and weight, types of space, outdoor air requirements Walls, windows, doors construction Floor and roof constructions Infiltration air in terms of CFM, CFM/ft , ACH Type of partitions, area, U-value
2

66

Carrier HAP space properties screen ofIMA building is sho\\-TI in Figure 5. L

JilD Space Properties - lIMA107 Office room]
General Internals Name floor Area Avg Ceiling Height Building Weight

l-,tJ-J
Partitions

I

I Walls. Windows. Doors I Roofs. Skylights I Infiltratioo I Floors I
II!lin'll,m!~rl :·:·:111
19.3
rri m kg/rri

I

13.0
1341.8

r-)
ught

Moo.

Heavy

r

OA Ventilation Requirements Space Usage OA Requirement 1 OA Requirement.2 I OFFICE: Office Space
19.4

~
Ilhlperson

..::J

10.00

jll[s-mZj

:::J

I

Space usage defauh: ASH RAE Std 62-2001 Defauks can be chanQed via View/Preferences.

I

I

-

OK

I

Cancel

--

I

Help

I

Figure 5.1: Carrier HAP Space Properties Screen ofIMA Building

.,

Table 5.2 represents percentage of exposed wall area and exposed glass area of selected audit buildings.

67

Table 5.2: Percentage of Exposure Area of Ryerson Buildings

SI. No.

'Vall Exposed Name of building Area (%)
66 93.5 78 45 90 62 51 54

Glass Exposed Area (%)
34 6.5 22 55 10 38 49 46

1 Heaslip House Continuing Education (CED) 2 School ofImage Art (IMA) 3 Victoria Building (VIC)
4

Jorgenson Hall (JOR)

5 Library Building (LIB)
6
I

Podium Building (POD)

7 Engineering Building (ENG)

Eric Palin Hall (EPH) and Sally Horsfall Eaton Centre for Studies in Community and Health (SHE)
8

9

10
11

Student Campus Centre (SCC) School of Interior Design(SID) Heidelberg Centre-School of Graphic Communications Management (HEIIGCM) Kerr Hall (KNE) Kerr Hall (KNW)

49 60 68 75 91 76 71 61 90 74

51 40 32 25 9 24 29 39 10 26

I

12
13a
I I
!

13b

13c Kerr Hall (KSE)
13d
14

Kerr Hall (KSW) Rogers Communications Centre (RCC) Pitman Hall Residence (PIT) Rogers Business Building (RBB)

15
16

5.1.3.

Zoning of the building
A zone of individual RU building was a group of one or more spaces having a single

thermostatic control. Zones are often used differently for different applications. In some systems, each room contains a thermostat. Therefore, each zone contains one space representing a single room. In other situations, one thermostat is allocated to a group of rooms. For preliminary block

68

load estimates, a zone might be defined as the entire building. The choice of zones affects system operation, the accuracy of the system design and energy analysis calculations, and the effort required to model the system. Figure 5.2 shows the zonal configuration in HAP for the simulation model.

iE!l HAP43 · [02_IMA (Image Art Bl.lildingLRyerson University]
~~ace'_ _ _ _ _ _--li Floor Alea

I~ <New default Space>
EijJEAST CORRIDOR (2ND FL.) li.lDIMA100 Main! Opel'. Room ~IMA101 OffICe Room EijJ IMAl 02 Offlcef Room !611IMA102A Office Room 6illIlMA103 Office Room !Ei]lIMA1040ffICeRoom 6illI1 MAl 05 Srrooki'lg Room 6illIlMA105A Kitct-.en 6lliMA1OS Office Room ~IMA1070fficeroom 6illI1 MAl OS Class Room 6illI1 MA1OSP. Pro! ,Ei]lIMA109 Labor aties !6illI1MA10S6. Dark room ,6illIlMAll0 SrO(. Room 6illIlMA111 MensW'1A 6illI1MA111A Dressing Room 6illI1 MA112 Spectator Area 6illIlMA113 Dresting Room 6illIlMA113.0. W'omens W'IA 6illIlMA114 Office Room 61.3 6.2 U 11.9 19.6 8.4 119 25. 1 4.6 1&7 9.3 55. 7 17 185.8 13.9 13 15.6 11.0 &0 18.2

25.5,

7.B

. 'J

"

i '

Figure 5.2: Space (Zone) Input Data Form of Scenario

5.1.4.

Building Use Information
The heating and cooling load of the air system of the base case building model depends

on the actual schedules of all types of functions. 1. Occupancy activity schedule 2. Lighting schedule 3. Equipment schedule 4. Fan/thermostat 5. Ventilation 69

The Carrier HAP uses two types of schedule-fractional and fan/thermostat. Fractional schedules are used to describe the variation of intermil heat load (Le., lighting, equipment, control of outside ventilation in an HV AC system and hot water in a domestic water heating system and all these are the fractional schedules). Fan/thermostat schedules are used to define the hours in HV AC equipment. The occupied and unoccupied thermostat set points are assigned to each hour in HVAC system (Carrier, 2006).

The schedules for lighting, occupancy activity, equipment, heating and cooling are summarized in Table 5.3. These are the actual schedules used by the Ryerson University buildings.

Table 5.3: Ryerson University Operating Schedules
Occupants, Lighting, Equipment, and Fan Thennostat Operating Schedule of Ryerson University In hour

...
Schedule

1.
Mon-Fri Saturday Sunday Mon-Fri

0-6am

7-24 am

Occupancy Activity

0% 0% 0% 100% 100% 20% 70% 40% 20% 100% 100% 100%

100% 40% 5% 100% 100% 20% 70% 40% 20% 100% 100% 100%

Lighting

Saturday Sunday Mon-Fri Saturday

Equipment Sunday Thennostat Control (Cooling) Mon-Fri Saturday Sunday

70

5.1.5.

HVAC Equipment Data
There are two central chiller plants in Ryerson University campus. One is located in the

Library building (Part-I) and other is located in the Rogers Communications building (Part-2). For cooling, designated buildings of Ryerson University are served by these two central chiller plants. The configurations of central chillers and cooling towers are shown in Table 5.4. For heating, remote steam is supplied by Enwave for the entire Ryerson campus. B.A.C. (North, South, East and West) cooling Tower are located on Library building and B.A.C. (RCC) is located on RCC building.

Table 5.4: List of Central Chiller Plants in the Library and the RCC Building ofRU
CHILLERS AND COOLING TOWERS CAPACITY

Chillers Plant Located in the Library building Make Capacity . McQuay Absorption # 1 1200 Ton or 4220 kW McQuay Absorption # 2 1200 Ton or 4220 kW Carrier Chiller # 3 500 Ton or 1758 kW York Chiller # 4 100 Ton or 352 kW York Chiller # 5 100 Ton or 352 kW Total Capacity 3100 Ton or 10903 kW
, .
I

:

I
,

I ,

Chillers Plant Located in the RCC building . Capacity Make Trane Chiller # I 265 Ton or 932 kW Trane Chiller # 2 265 Ton or 932 kW Total Capacity 530 Ton or 1864 kW Cooling Tower Located in the Library and RCC building Model Number Make (South) B.A.C. VLTI200 Info plate missing (East) B.A.C. VLT1200 (North) B.A.C. (RCC) B.A.C. TI662NCR NC-240859-AI (West) Marley Cooling

I
i

r ,

I

,

71

Part-1 has two absorption water chillers with each capacity of 1200 tons. Absorption chillers configurations are shown in Table 5.5. Table 5.5: Double Effect Absorption Water Chillers Configuration
Chiller Plant: Double Effect Absorption Water Chiller (Capacity: 1200 Tons) Type NC (Steam-fired Chiller) Model NO. NC-73U Field Chiller Name: McQuay Condenser Type Full load Capacity COP Fuel or Energy Type Fuel Consumption Entering Cooling Water Temperature
I Leaving Cooling Water Temperature
i

Units

Object

Ton or kW

Water Cooled 1200 Tons or 4220 kW 1.46 Steam 11760 85 44 2880 22.8 5280 34.9

lbslhr
of of

Chilled Water Flow Rate Chilled Water Pressure Drop Cooling Water Flow Rate

GPM ft.H 2O GPM ft. H20 PUMP SPECIFICATION

I

I
I

Cooling Water Pressure Drop

..lc
)

!

r

NO.1 Absorbent Pump NO.2 Absorbent Pump Refrigerant Pump Purge Pump Total RLA

kW kW kW kW Amps

7.5 3.7

I

1.1
0.75 37

r

r ,

Part-l has three electric chillers. One chiller has capacity of 500 tons and other two chillers of 100 tons each. Electric chiller configurations are shown in Table 5.6. and Table 5.7.

72

Table 5.6: Carrier Electric Chillers Configuration

Chiller Plant: Electric Field Chiller Name: Carrier Chiller Type Refrigerant Type Condenser Type Full load Capacity Fuel or Energy Type Full Load Power Entering Chilled Water Leaving Chilled Water Chilled Water Flow Rate Chilled Water Pressure Drop . Cooling Water Flow Rate
!

I

Units

I

Centrifugal Water Cooled R-134a

Ton orkW

Water Cooled 500 Ton or 1758 kW Electric 0.597 85 44 1200 12.9 1500 27 15 HP I 11.22 k W
I I
!

kW/Ton of

J

of
GPM ft. H20 GPM ft.H2O HPorkW

Cooling Water Pressure Drop Condenser Water Pump

,.,
"

"

: i I ,
I ,

..

,

73

Table 5.7: York Electric Chiller Configuration
Chiller Plant: Electric Field Chiller Name: York Chiller Type Condenser Type · Full load Capacity
I

Units

Air-Cooled Scroll Chiller

Ton

Air Cooled 100 Ton Electric 1.2 2.8

Fuel or Energy Type Full Load Power Full Load COP Entering Chilled Water Temperature Leaving Chilled Water Temperature Chilled Water Flow Rate

kW/Ton

of of

85 44 240 10.7 300 20

GPM ft.HzO GPM
i

· Chilled Water Pressure Drop Cooling Water Flow Rate Cooling Water Pressure Drop

:

ft.HzO

:

~

:

r

t i

t

~

M

.~

t

.

,

[ ~

74

Part-2 has two chillers each with a capacity of 265 tons. Electric chillers configurations are shown in Table 5.8. Table 5.8: Trane Electric Chiller Configuration
Chiller Plant: Electric

i
Field Chiller Name: Trane Chiller Type Refrigerant Type . Condenser Type Full load Capacity Fuel or Energy Type Full Load Power Full Load COP
.

Units Centrifugal water Cooled

I

Ton

Water Cooled 275 Ton Electric 1.18 2.8
. I
I

kWlTon
of of

,

. .

i

Entering Chilled Water Leaving Chilled Water Chilled Water Flow Rate Chilled Water Pressure Drop Cooling Water Flow Rate Cooling Water Pressure Drop

85

..,;

44
660 16.2 825 27
i

GPM
ft.H 2O

i

GPM
ft.H20

"

75

Cooling Tower configurations are shown in Table 5.9. Table 5.9: Cooling Tower Configuration Cooling Tower (Marley Cooling Technologies) Model NC 240859-Al Field Fluid Type Condenser Water Flow Rate Condenser Pump Head Condenser Pump Mechanical
I
I

Units

Object Fresh City Water

GPM morftWG

4800 50 ft WG 80 94 95 85
10

% % OF
OF OF HP OF

Condenser pumps Electrical Hot water

i

Cold water Design Approach Full Load Fan Chilled Water set point Set Point Control

50 85 Variable Speed Fan

:

~ "

~

:

:

;

~

5.2.

Simulation Results
Generally, building simulation reports contain energy consumption and energy cost

" ., .

.'

~ '1

data produced by the building energy simulation. These reports can be used to compare energy use and energy costs for alternate designs or to investigate energy use patterns for an individual building case. Carrier HAP offers thirteen different building simulation reports (Carrier Corporation, 2006). Each report is summarized below: · · · Monthly and hourly simulation results for central cooling and heating plant. The Annual Cost Summary for comparing annual energy cost results for buildings. The Annual Energy and Emissions Summary report for comparing annual energy cost results for buildings. · Component Costs reports contain annual energy costs for a single building.

i, :.

..

76

· ·

Detailed reports contain tables of monthly energy and cost data for a single building case. Use profiles contain the hour-by-hour energy use profile for a building for one energy source or fuel type. · · · · Annual components and energy costs HV AC and non-HV AC cost totals Monthly components and energy costs Monthly, daily and hourly air system simulation reports

5.2.1.

Cooling Load Simulation
Peak cooling load for the building depends on building orientation, exposure and the

overall thermal transfer value of building envelopes. Other key variables include space internal loads, design outdoor-indoor temperature difference, etc. The individual RU buildings are located in different orientation. The internal space loads
,i

!' " i
" ,

and usage of every zone of each building are different. Depending on the above key variables, peak cooling load occurs on a different day and time for each building. Two central chiller plants are located in Ryerson University campus. One is located in Library building with total capacity of 10903 kW (including part-l buildings) and another is located in Rogers Communications Center (RCC) with total capacity of 1864 kW (including

part-2 buildings). Enwave provides remote chilled water for Rogers Business Building (RBB).
HAP hourly simulation result provides 8760 hours of cooling load data. The maximum cooling plant load was taken from 8760 Carrier HAP simulation result. The maximum cooling plant load occurred on July i
h

at 1700 hour for the central chiller plant in Library building with

a total load of 10809 kW, on July

i h at 1600 hour for the central chiller plant in the RCC

building with a total load of 1070 kW, and on July 9th at 1200 hour for the RBB with load of 2538 kW.

77

Table 5.10 represents the peak cooling load and its occurring time for each building. Table 5.10: Peak Cooling Load for Individual Building ofRU
I
:

SI.
No.

I

I Peak Cooling

Peak Cooling Load Occur Month_Day Hour 1700 1700 1700 1400 1200 1200 1700 1600

Load (k\V) Name of building July_7th July_7th July_7til Aug_5 th Aug_4th Aug_4th July_7th July_7th

1 2 3 4 5 6

I

Heaslip House Continuing Education (CEO) School of Image Art (lMA) Victoria Building (VIC) Jorgenson Hall (JOR) Library Building (LIB) Podium (POD) Engineering Building (ENG) Eric Palin Hall (EPH) Sally Horsfall Eaton Centre (SHE) Interior Design (SID) Student Campus Centre (SCC) Heidelberg Centre-School of Graphic Communications Management (HEI) Kerr Hall (KNE) Kerr Hall (KNW) Kerr Hall (KSE) Kerr Hall (KSW) . Total Peak Cooling Load Rogers Communications Centre (RCC) Pitman Hall (PIT) Total Peak Cooling Load Rogers Business Building (RBB)

221 535 786 737 1372 1067 1981 1466

7
8
9

10 11 12

185 202 154 359 362 1123 981 11531 858 222 1080 2538

July_7th July_7th July_7th Aug_5 Aug_5 th

1800 1700 1700 1400 1400 1400 1400 1200 1400 1200

~ ,

~

;
"

:~

I

13a · 13b 13c 13d 14 15 16

Aug_5 tn
tll

Au g_5 til July_7th Aug_5 th July_9 tn

..

If

~

Table 5.11 represents the maximum cooling plant load for each building and load occurring time.

78

Table 5.11: Maximum Cooling Plant Load for Selected Buildings ofRU
Sl. No. :Maximum Cooling Plant Load (k\V) AIaximulll Cooling Load Occurs on July 1h at 1700 hour for Central Chiller Plant in Library Building (parl-l) 1 Heaslip House Continuing Education (CEO) School of Image Art (IMA) Victoria Building (VIC) Jorgenson Hall (JOR) Library Building (LIB) Podium Building (POD) Engineering Building (ENG) Eric Plan Hall (EPH) Sally Horsfall Eaton (SHE) Interior Design (SID) Student Campus Centre (SCC) Heidelberg Centre-School of Graphic Communications Management (HEI) Kerr Hall (KNE) Kerr Hall (KNW) Kerr Hall (KSE) Name of building

2
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
11

221 535 786 682 1189 1032 1981 1399

I
I
I

I
I

I

184 202 154
i

12

..
I

13a

13b
13c 13d

I Kerr Hall (KSW)
Total Max Plant Cooling Load (kW) =

324 287 934 899
10809
I

Afaximu11l Cooling Load Occurs on July 1h at 1600 hour for Central Chiller Plant in RCC Building (Part-2) 14 Rogers Communications Centre (RCC) 858

j
I

15

Pitman Hall (PIT) Total Max Plant Cooling Load (kW) =

212
1070 2538

Maximum Cooling Load Occurred on July C)'h at 1200 in RBB Building
I

16

Rogers Business Building (RBB)

According to Ryerson Campus Planning energy consumption data, the cooling load was calculated for six months (May 1st to October 31 5t). Table 5.12 shows the RU chilled water demand. It also shows that cooling load in kWh per m2 for building gross area and conditioned area.

79

Table 5.12: Chilled Water Demand of Ryerson University
SI. No. Cooling Load (kWh)
I

Name of building Heaslip House Continuing Education (CEO) School of Image Art (IMA) Victoria Building (VIC) Jorgenson Hall (JOR) Library Building (LIB) Podium Building (POD) Engineering Building (ENG) Eric Palin Hall (EPH) Sally Horsfall Eaton (SHE) Interior Design (SID) Student Campus Centre (SCC) Heidelberg Centre-School of Graphic Communications Management (HEI) Kerr Hall (KNEI KNWIKS ElKS W) Rogers Communications Centre (RCC) Pitman Hall (PIT) Rogers Business Building (RBB) Total:

Gross area (m 2 )

Cooling Load (kWh/m2)

Conditioned area (m 2)

Cooling Load (kWh/m2)

1 2 3 4 5 6 7
8

205136 596157 781200 1078274 1727593 1258069 1890651 1481285 162072 198614 159308 3549164 830394 190740 1845076 15953733

4180 9345 12708 10964 18487 21730 22350 21019 4373 4180 2985 52409 13100 3828 24378 226036

49 64 61 98 93 58 85 70 37 48 53 68 63 50 76 70

2302 7219 9788 8188 15426 13421 17583 17334 2888 2993 2399 30125 10871 2165 16740 159443

89 83 80 132 112 94 108 85 56 66 66 118 76 88 110
I

9 10
11

12
I

:1

' "

q

I

I

13 14 15 16

F , .

.

I

l

I

,

r

100

5.2.2.

Space Heating Calculation by Carrier HAP
Generally in the winter time, the temperature of the outside is very cold. Maximum peak

heating load occur at that cold condition and during a specific time. Peak heating load also depends on key parameters of the building. Carrier HAP provides 8760 hours simulation result for heating. By analyzing the HAP hour by hour result, peak heating load and maximum heating

80

plant load were detennined. Peak heating load occurring time for each Ryerson building is shown in Table 5.13.

Table 5.13: Peak Heating Load for Individual Building ofRU
SI. No. 1 2 3
4

Name of building

Peak Heating (kW) 136 463 464 425 232 375 1792 510

Peak Heating Load Occurred "Month_Day January_2th Hour 700 700 600 800 700
I

Heaslip House Continuing Education (CED) School of Image Art (IMA) Victoria Building (VIC) Jorgenson Hall (JOR) odium Building (POD) Engineering Building (ENG) Eric Palin Hall (EPH) Sally Horsfall Eaton Centre for Studies in Community Health (SHE) Interior Design (SID) Student Campus Centre (SCC) Heidelberg Centre-School of Graphic Communications Management (HEI) Kerr Hall (KNE) Kerr Hall (KNW) Kerr Hall (KSE) Kerr Hall (KS W) Rogers Communications Centre (RCC) Pitman Hall (PIT) Total Peak Heating Load (kW)

~ry Building (LIB)

=
!

January_27t11 January_2tl! January_2th January_ 27 1! January_ 27
u1
1

January_27th

6 7 8
9

700 800 700

January_271l!

10

113 128 93 471 621 1333 1021 362 168

January_27tl! January_271l! January_271l! January_271l! January_27Ul January_251l! January_2M January_ 27tll January_27t11 January_1 5til

700 700 700 700 500 2200 1200 700 700 200

11
12 13a 13b
: r'
, \,1

I
I

j

13c 13d 14 15 16

;r

=

8707 1076

I

Rogers Business Building (RBB)

The main heating source for all Ryerson University buildings is remote steam. Heating load was detennined by the total amount of steam consumption. Maximum plant heating load was detennined by adding all of the buildings heating load at a specific hour when maximum total plant load occurs.

81

According to HAP hourly analysis, on January 2th at 800 hour, the maximum plant heating load was 8135 kW for the space heating of 15RU buildings. On January 15 th at 200 hour, maximum heating load occurred at RBB building was 1076 kW. Table 5.14 shows the maximum plant heating loads for 16 buildings of RU. Table 5.14: Maximum Plant Heating Load for 16 Buildings ofRU
SI. No. I
I
,

Maximum Heating Plant Load (kW) MtL"(imum Heating Load Occurred on January 21h at 800 hour for 15 Buildings
Heaslip House Continuing Education (CED) School oflmage Art (IMA) Victoria Building (VIC) Jorgenson Hall (JOR) Library Building (LIB) Podium Building (POD) Engineering Building (ENG) Eric Palin Hall (EPH) Sally Horsfall Eaton Centre (SHE) Interior Design (SID) Student Campus Centre (SCC) Heidelberg Centre-School of Graphic Communications Management (HE!) Kerr Hall (KNE) Kerr Hall (KNW) Kerr Hall (KSE) Kerr Hall (KSW) Rogers Communications Centre (RCC) Pitman Hall (PIT)

Name of building

1 2 3 4 5 6
7

123 440 397 425 228 333 1792 470 99 102 78 455 598 1261 881 306 147 8135 1076
)

I

8
9

10
11

I';:1,
I.

...

j"

12
I

H: ...
j;:
I

,

13a 13b 13e

I
i

13d 14 15

Total Max Plant Heating Load (kW) = 16
Rogers Business Building (RBB)

Maximum Heating Load Occurred on January 15'h at 200 hour for RBB Building

5.2.3.

Comparison of Electricity Consumption

Ryerson University Building's electricity demand over the past 3 fiscal years was obtained from the Ryerson University Campus Planning department. There were a total of nine bills. Some

82

buildings were included under one bill. The data sho\VTI in Table 5.15 is based on total electricity consumption. Electricity bill for Fiscal Year 2005 to 2007 is shown in Appendix C. The Fiscal Year is starts from the month of May and end of the month of April of the next year. Table 5.15: Actual Electricity Consumption of Ryerson University Buildings
Total Electricity Consumption Fiscal Year (May-April) Sl. No.
1

2005-2006

2006-2007

2007-2008

Name of the Buildings
VIC, IMA, CED ENG Kerr Hall (KNE/KNW/KSE/KSW) EPH, SHE JOR, LIB, POD SCC, HEI, OAK SID RCC, PIT RBB

(kWh)
3,608,472 4,472,078 8,306,896 3,813,068 16,895,386 1,650,957 364,543 5,500,402

(kWh)
4,067,896 4,408,548 8,771,259 4,057,548 18,376,049 1,705,010 435,840 5,397,903

(kWh)
3,599,652 4,111,201 7,130,113 3,609,473 20,399,668 1,732,166 373,760 5,607,650 4,001,970

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

-

-

Figure 5.3 illustrates the total electricity consumption data of selected Ryerson buildings graphically.

,
"

.'
:;;: 25,000,000 [Ill 2005-2006 (k\Vh) II 2006-2007 (kWh) 02007-2008 (k\Vh)

I

~
~

~ 20,000,000
<:>

-i--------------,...-r-------------i---------------I

-.:: Co E

= <5 .£ 10,000,000 + - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1
·c ....
~
<:.I <:.I

15,000,000

5,000,000 + - - - - - - - 1

VIC, IMA, CED

ENG

Kerr Hall

EPH, SHE JOR, LIB, POD

sec, HEI,
OAK

SID

RCC, PIT

RBB

Ryerson University Buildings

Figure 5.3: Actual Fiscal Year Electricity Consumption of Ryerson University Buildings 83

buildings were included under one bill. The data shown in Table 5.15 is based on total electricity consumption. Electricity bill for Fiscal Year 2005 to 2007 is shown in Appendix C. The Fiscal Year is staIts from the month of May and end of the month of April of the next year. Table 5.15: Actual Electricity Consumption of Ryerson University Buildings
Total Electricity Consumption Fiscal Year (May-April) Sl. No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Name of the Buildings
VIC, IMA, CED
ENG

2005-2006 (kWh) 3,608,472 4,472,078 8,306,896 3,813,068 16,895 ,386 1,650,957 364,543 5,500,402

2006-2007 (kWh) 4,067,896 4,408,548 8,771 ,259 4,057,548 18,376,049 1,705 ,010 435 ,840 5,397,903

2007-2008 (kWh) 3,599,652 4, 111,201 7,130,113 3,609,473 20,399,668 1,732, 166 373,760 5,607,650 4,001 ,970

Kerr Hall (KNE/KNW/KSE/KSW) EPH, SHE JOR, LIB, POD SCC, HEI, OAK SID RCC, PIT RBB

..
(

-

-

.\

Figure 5.3 illustrates the total electricity consumption data of selected Ryerson buildings graphically.

___ 25 ,000,000
..c

';' 20,000,000 +-- - - - - - - - - - . - - - - - 1 o
',c
Q.

~

I_ 2005-2006 (kWh) .

2006-2007 (kWh) 02007-2008 (kWh)

1

E 0 ~ 1),000, 00 -j--- - - - - - - - - - - -

u

c o

.f'
OJ

10,000,000 -j--- - - - - - - - - - - -

".E OJ
~
~

5,000,000

+-- - - - - -

o
VIC, IMA, ENG Kerr Hall EPH, SHE JOR, LIB,

sec, HEI ,
OAK

SID

RCC, PIT

RBB

CED

POD

Ryerson University Buildings

Figure 5.3: Actual Fiscal Year Electricity Consumption of Ryerson University Buildings

83

Table 5.16 illustrates in kWhlm2 electricity consumption (including chiller electricity consumption) for three fiscal years of Ryerson University. Table 5.16: Per Square Meter Electricity Comparison for Three Fiscal Years
SI.
I No.

Fiscal Year (May-April) Name of the Buildings
VIC, IMA, CED ENG Kerr Hall (KNE/KNW/KSE/KSW) EPH, SHE JOR, LIB, POD SCC, HEI, OAK SID RCC, PIT RBB

Gross
(mz)

2005-2006
(kWh/ml)

2006-2007
(kWh/ml)

2007-2008
(kWh/mz)

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

26233 22350 52409 21019 51181 9198 4373 30966 24378

I

138 200 159 181 330 179 83 178

155 197 167 193 359 185 100 174

137 184 136 172 399 188 85 181 164

I
i

-

-

The chiller plant for part-l is located in the Library Building. The electricity consumption for part-l chiller plant included Jorgenson Hall, the Library building and the Podium building electricity bill. The part-2 chiller electricity consumption included RCC building and Pitman Hall electricity bill. Electricity consumption for Part-l and Part-2 chiller plant was calculated based on the design of 10903 k W and 1864 k W chiller model. Table 5.17 describes annual chiller electricity consumption. Table 5.17: Annual Chillers Electricity Consumption
I

Electricity

I
i

Library Chillers Consumption (kWh)

I

RCC Chillers Consumption (kWh)

,

, Chiller Input Chiller Misc. Electric Chilled Water Pump Cooling Tower Fan Total Consumption

1229193 394722 863513 664352 3151780

146555

67860 30272 244687

The HAP program provided simulated electricity consumption result for each building. Table 5.18 represents the difference of electricity consumption between Campus Planning billing year 2006 (January-December) for 15 buildings and HAP result. Only billing year 2007 (Jan-Dec) was used for RBB. The electricity bill is shown in Appendix C. From the Table 5.18, 84

it is seen that the electricity consumption difference for JOR, LIB, POD buildings is 7.7%
because the central chiller plant is located in the Library building. Kerr Hall has different types of laboratories. So, the electricity consumption difference of Kerr Hall is 8.4%. The difference of RCC and PIT is 6.5%, because RCC has chiller plant and Pitman Hall is a residential building with heat pump equipment from
4th
th

floor to 13 floor for every room.

Table 5.18: The Comparison of Electricity Consumption for 16 Ryerson Buildings
Name of Building Bill from Campus Planning of RU (kWh) HAP Result
(kWh)

SI. No. 1 2

Difference
(%)

Heaslip House Continuing Education
"-'F'II

3
4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

School of Image Art (IMA) Victoria Building (VIC) Jorgenson Hall (JOR) Chiller Plant LIB Library Building (LIB) Podium Building (POD) Engineering Building (ENG) Eric Palin Hall (EPH) Sally Horsfall Eaton Centre for Studies in Community Health (SHE) Interior Design (SID) Student Campus Centre (SCC) Heidelberg Centre-School of Graphic Communications Management (HEI) Kerr Hall (KNE. KNW, KSE. KSW) Chiller Plant RCC Rogers Communications Centre (RCC) Pitman Hall (PIT) Rogers Business Building (RBB) Total Annual Electricity Consumption
2

3893040

3794216

2.5

17960970 4451690 3974560 400000 924080 8590220 5360462 4001970
49,556,992

16570677 4396600 3844099 390869 911249 7863450 5010384 3945188
46,726,697

7.7 1.2 3.3 2.3 1.4 8.4
6.5

13
14 15 16

1.4
5.7

Electricity consumption. in kWhlm depends on the use of the space in each building. In the RU building, there are two types of electricity consumption. They are HVAC and Non-HVAC. The air system fans, pumps and cooling tower fans are included in HVAC system. The lighting, equipments, and miscellaneous electricity are included in Non-HVAC system. Different types of pumps are used in Ryerson buildings. They are:

85

· · · · ·

Domestic hot and cold water pump Heat pump Heating glycol pump Sanitary sump pump Storm pump and Jockey pump and Fire pump

Table 5.19 represents the comparison of per square meter electricity consumption of 16 individual Ryerson buildings. For Pitman Hall, total conditioned floor area for electricity consumption is 15712 m2 · Table 5.19: Per Square Meter Electricity Comparison for Gross and Conditional Area
Electricity Consumption per unit Gross Area
(kWh/m2)

SI. No.

Name of the Building

HAP Result (kWh)

HAP Annual Energy (GJ)

Electricity Consumption per unit Condo Area (k\Vhlm2)

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
11
12

13 14 15 16

Heaslip House Continuing Education (CED) School of Image Art (IMA) Victoria Building (VIC) Jorgenson Hall (JOR) Library Building (LlB) Podium Building (POD) Engineering Building (ENG) Eric Palin Hall (EPH) Sally Horsfall Eaton Centre for Studies in Community Health (SHE) Interior Design (SID) Student Campus Centre (SCC) Heidelberg Centre-School of Graphic Communications Management (HEI) Kerr Hall (KNE. KNW. KSE. KSW ) Rogers Communications Centre (RCC) Pitman Hall (PIT) Rogers Business Building (RBB) Total Chiller Plant LIB Building Chiller Plant RCC Building Total

517658 1424168 1852390 . 62 6671607 4232528 4396600 3844099 390869 465118 446131 7863450 1811528 2954169 3945188 43330230 3151780 244687 46726697

1864 5127 6669 9053 24018 15237 15828 13839 1407= 1674 1606 28308 6522 10635 14203 155990 11346 881 168217

124 152 146 229 361 195 197 183 89 111 149 150 138 165 162 180

225 197 189 307 432 315 250 222 135 155 186 261 167 188 236 250

-

I

86

5.2.4.

Steam Consumption
Ryerson University has two remote steam meters. Remote steam is served by meter-I for

all Ryerson University buildings, except Rogers Business Building. Meter-2 only serves remote steam for RBB. Table 5.20 represents total amount of steam delivered to the entire Ryerson University campus. Table 5.20: Actual Remote Steam Consumption of Ryerson University Buildings (Meter-I & 2) Total Steam Consumption 2005-2006 2006-2007 2007-2008 (I h) (lb) (lb) 107,411,195 97,313,777 95,854,985 4,786,006 5,262,143

Fiscal Year (May-April) Meter No. Name of the Buildings 1 All Ryerson Building except RBB 2 Rogers Business Building (RBB)

-

Figure 5.4 and 5.5 illustrates total steam consumption data of selected Ryerson buildings graphically for Meter-I and Meter-2. In Figure 5.5, the Fiscal year 2006-2007 indicates only the month (September-March) and 2008-2009 indicates the month (May-January) steam consumption.

r

Meter-l
110,000,000 108,000,000 .<:>
~

,.
~

.<

-------------------------------------------

~-------------------------------------------

a =
~ E
U

106,000,000 + - 104,000,000 -f---_....._-102,000,000 + - 100,000,000 + - 98,000,000 - j - - 96,000,000 + - 94,000,000 - + - - - - . 92,000,000
-+---

= '" = <:>
('II

e

rJ'J

::!

90,000,000 1

2005-2006

2006-2007

2007-2008

Figure 5.4: Actual Fiscal Year Steam Consumption of Ryerson University Buildings 87

Meter-2
..c
,.-.

6,000,000 5,000,000 4,000,000 3,000,000 c----2,000,000 1,000,000 0 Sep'2006-ApriI'2007 May'2007-April'2008 May'2008-Jan'2009
~-----

c

;::

=
Q

e := = U e ell
II>

Q.

Q

r.I':J

<lol

Figure 5.5: Actual Fiscal Year Steam Consumption of RBB Building

The simulation result of Carrier HAP presents the annual steam consumption for the 16 individual buildings of RU. The result also presents per unit gross area steam consumption and determined annual energy uses in GJ. Table 5.21 shows the simulated steam consumption. From the Table 5.21, it is clear that the steam consumption (kWhlm2) of Kerr Hall is too high because Kerr Hall uses a Constant Air Volume (CAV) air system for an HVAC system.

88

Table 5.21: Simulation of Steam Consumption of RU
Steam Consumption per Gross Area (kWh/m2) per Condo Area (kWh/m2)

Sl. No.

Name of building

Annual Remote Steam Load (kWh)

Annual Energy Uses (GJ)

1 2
3

4 5 6 7
8
!

9 10
11

12

13
,i::

14 15 16

:/ ..

/'.'

..
"

Heaslip House Continuing Education (CED) School of Image Art (IMA) Victoria Building (VIC) Jorgenson Hall (JOR) Library Building (LIB) Podium Building (POD) Engineering Building (ENG) Eric Palin Hall (EPH) Sally Horsfall Eaton Centre (SHE) Interior Design (SID) Student Campus Centre (SCC) Heidelberg Centre-School of Graphic Communications Management (HEI) Kerr Hall (KNE, KNW, KSE, KSW) Rogers Communications Centre (RCC) Pitman Hall (PIT) Total Steam Load (kWh) Rogers Business Building (RBB)

183831 833069 664253 403630 232707 585197 1736162 547752 95374 190450 160195 9849907 321243 146650 15950420 1307372

662 2999 2391 1453 838 2107 6250 1972 343 686 577 35460 1156 528 57422 4707

44 89 52 37 13 27 78 26 22 46 54 188 25 38 79 54

80 115 68 49 15 44 99 32 33 64 67 327 30 68 112
78
I

"

f

.'

I)

The total gross area of Ryerson University is approximately 281020 m 2· Enwave serves remote steam to RU by the two individual meters. Meter-l serves 20 buildings with an area of 223127 m2 including absorption chiller and Meter-2 serves REB building with total area of 24378 m2· The central chillers plant located in Library building, has two absorption chillers that include steam consumption in Meter-I. 90.3% (95656508 Ib) of actual steam consumption is calculated from Meter-l for the total area of 201658 m2 which include 15 audit buildings in the year 2006 (January-December). The steam consumption bill is shown in Appendix C and 90.3% steam consumption is shown in Appendix E. The difference between the simulation result and the actual steam consumption was 6.26% higher than HAP result. For the REB, the steam consumption year was considered 2007(January-December) and actual steam consumption was 5804648 lb (according to the Campus Planning billing record). The difference between the simulation result and the actual steam consumption for Meter-2 was 89

6.94% higher than HAP result. The comparison of base case annual steam consumption with Carrier HAP simulation result is shown in Table 5.22. Table 5.22: Comparison of Base Case Annual Steam Consumption with Carrier HAP simulation Purpose (Meter-I) Fifteen Buildings of RU Two Absorption Chiller Total Annual Steam Total Annual Steam Difference (%) (Meter-2) Rogers Business Building (RBB) 1307372 4460753 kBTU Difference (%) 5401736 5804648 6.94 HAP Steam Consumption (kWh) (lb) 15950420 5751754 21702174 74047818 kBTU 89667980 95656508 6.26 Steam enthalpy at 250 psig 825.8 (BTU/lb) ctual Steam onsumption (lb)

Table 5.23 indicates the electricity and natural gas consumption for both HVAC and Non-HVAC components and the total amount of C02 and N20 produced as a result. Table 5.23: CO2 and N20 by HV AC and Non-HV AC Components for the Base Case Electricity Consumption Due to HVAC Component (kWh) Non-HVAC Component (kWh) Steam Produced by Natural Gas (NG) Consumption (m
3 )

Total Amount of C02 andN10 Produced (kg)Based on Emission Factors 16,174,803 kg CO2 9998 kgN10 85% Efficiency from NG to steam conversion

49,556,992 11,199,880 kg CO 2 9911 kgN10 Average Annual Emission Factor of Electricity (C0 2) = 0.226 kg/kWh (Gordon & Fung, 2009) and N 2O= 0.0002 kg/kWh (NRCan, 2004)

2615627 m.5 NG 4974923 kg CO2 86 kgN10 Emission Factor of Natural Gas = 1.902 kglm 3 (NRCan, 2007) and N20= 0.033 glm 3 (NRCan, 2004)

90

Figure 5.6 and 5.7 represent the amount of C02 and N 20 produced by the electricity and natural gas consumption for the three fiscal years of 15 Ryerson University buildings.

12000 10000

.-

t:.
'r;;
I:: c::>

=
c::>

.:!l

6000

"""
U

.. 0

E
4000 2000 0 2005-2006

I-----~I.:.I--- · CO2 (Ton) Emission Consumption of 15 RU BuilClings
·.···;,r.,----1~.t:;;;:::;;_----

.. · 1 - - -

· CO2 (Ton) Emiss ion for Steam Consumption of 15 RU BuilClings

2006-2007

2007-2008

Fiscal Year

Figure 5.6: C02 Produce by HV AC and Non-HV AC Components for the Base Case
10000 9000 8000

-j" '

7000 6000 5000 4000 3000 2000 1000 0 2005-2006 2006-2007 2007-2008
_ N20 (kg) Emission for Bectricity Consumption of15 RUBuildings ;1 _ _ _ - N20(kg)Emission for Steam Consumption of 15 RU Buildings

'-' 0
.()

I)Jl ~

= ';;j
~

.fa

I,'

. , r

"

S

0

i :: ...

Z

..

Fiscal Year

Figure 5.7: N 2 0 Produce by HV AC and Non-HV AC Components for the Base Case Based on the base case model for RU buildings, Table 5.24 represents the annual energy consumption for HVAC and Non-HVAC components. Figure 5.8 represents the annual component energy demand by Carrier HAP building simulation for 16 buildings of RU. As per the graph, the air system fan uses 6%, cooling uses 21 %, heating uses 23%, pumps use 1%, lights use 26%, equipment uses 19%, and miscellaneous electricity uses 4% of the total energy. The Annual component energy demand for each building is shown in Appendix F.

91

Figure 5.6 and 5.7 represent the amount of CO 2 and N 20 produced by the electricity and natural gas consumption for the three fiscal years of 15 Ryerson University buildings.

r -c c
0

12000 10000 8000 6000 4000 2000 0 2005-2006 2006-2007 2007-2008
· C02 (Ton ) Emiss io n fo r Electric ity Con s umpt io n of 15 RU Buildin gs · C02 (Ton) Emis sion for Steam Con s umption of 15 RU Buildin gs

t:.
.~

0

.;;;
~

E

U

0

Fiscal Year

Figure 5.6: CO 2 Produce by HV AC and Non-HV AC Components for the Base Case

8000
~

7000 6000 5000 4000
· N20 (kg) Emission for Electricity Con s umption of 15 RU Buildings · N20 (kg) Erniss ion for Steam Con s umption of 15 RU Buildings

C
0 I .;;;
.~

c

\o.J

E

1 0 , M
, Z

2000 1000 0 2005-2006 2006-2007 2007-2008

Fiscal Year

Figure 5.7: N 2 0 Produce by HVAC and Non-HVAC Components for the Base Case Based on the base case model for RU buildings, Table 5.24 represents the annual energy consumption for HV AC and Non-HV AC components. Figure 5.8 represents the annual component energy demand by Carrier HAP building simulation for 16 buildings of RU. As per the graph, the air system fan uses 6%, cooling uses 21 %, heating uses 23%, pumps use 1%, lights use 26%, equipment uses 19%, and miscellaneous electricity uses 4% of the total energy. The Annual component energy demand for each building is shown in Appendix F.

91

Table 5.24: Annual Electricity Demand for HVAC and Non-HV AC System from HAP

SI. No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13a 13b Be 13d 14 15
1
i

Building Name

Air System Fans

Cooling Heating Pumps

Lights

Equipment

Misc. Electric

Total

(OJ) CED
IMA

(OJ)
738 2146 2812 3882 6219 4529 6806 5333 583 715 574 1555 1342 5340 4540 2846 524 6642 57126

(OJ)
662 2999 2391 1453 838 2107 6250 1972 343 686 577 4956 6250 17088 7165 1156 528 4707 62128

(OJ)
31 30 220 173 125 84 297 147 7 10 7 722 2265 3612 3938

(OJ)
353 1457 2179 1932 9332 4774 6618 4220 243 412 552 859 574 3136 3837 2629 4665 5081 52853

(OJ)
504 323 331 1319 2973 2423 793 616

(OJ)
3264 · 10272 · 11872 i 14389 31075 21873 28884 21144

VIC JOR
LIB

I

POD ENO EPH SHE SID SCC HEI KNE KNW KSE KSW RCC PIT
RGB
I:

254 1052 327 1692 1588 1219 1352 1447 206 240 255 302 225 2043 1005 713 181 1519 15620

1~~
6737 6768 7409

r

IV

854 1013 791 1727 1502 71 288 5385 5142 284 97 +-3082 118 4583 7454 150 2230 72984

97 2333 3076 0 0 2756 200 9690 144 10108 890 34170 603 22576 0 10523 1089 11688 0 25553 12305 275246

I

Annual Component Energy Demandof16 RUBuildings
Miscellaneous Electric 4% Air System Fans Equipment 19% Cooling

26%

Pumps 1%

Figure 5.8: Annual Component Energy Demand of 16 RU Buildings from Carrier HAP

92

Table 5.24: Annual Electricity Demand for HV AC and Non-HV AC System from HAP
SI. No. Building Name
CEO

Air System Fans (GJ)

Cooling
(GJ)

Heating
(GJ)

Pumps
(GJ)

Lights
(GJ)

Equipment
(GJ)

Misc. Electric
(GJ)

Total

(GJ)

SCC HEI KNE 13a KNW 13b KSE 13c KSW 13d 14 RCC PIT 15 RBB 16 Total:

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

IMA
VIC JOR LIB POD ENG EPH SHE

254 1052 327 1692 1588 1219 1352 1447 206 240 255 302 225 2043 1005 713 181 1519 15620

738 2146 2812 3882 6219 4529 6806 5333 583 715 574 1555 1342 5340 4540 2846 524 6642 57126

662 2999 2391 1453 838 2107 6250 1972 343 686 577 4956 6250 17088 7165 1156 528 4707 62128

31 30 220 173 125 84 297 147 7 10 7 91 71 288 284 97 118 150 2230

722 2265 3612 3938 10000 6737 6768 7409 854 1013 791 1727 1502 5385 5142 3082 4583 7454 72984

353 1457 2179 1932 9332 4774 6618 4220 243 412 552 859 574 3136 3837 2629 4665 5081 52853

504 323 331 1319 2973 2423 793 616

3264 10272 11872 14389 31075 21873 28884 21144

sm

97 2333 3076 0 2756 0 200 9690 144 10108 890 34170 22576 603 0 10523 1089 11688 0 25553 12305 275246

Annual Component Energy Demand of 16 RU Buildings
Miscellaneous Electric 4% Air System Fans Equipment 19% Cooling 21%

26%

Pumps 1%

23%

-----------

--

--

Figure 5.8: Annual Component Energy Demand of 16 RU Buildings from Carrier HAP

92

Figure 5.9 represents annual electricity consumption for lights (GJ), equipment (GJ) and miscellaneous electric (GJ) of 16 Ryerson buildings. From the graph, it is clear that the Library building uses a large amount of electricity due to the lights and equipment compared to other buildings.

~: ~~~~~~::::i:::::ki~i~i===jl====~

2~e
KNE~

"'-

I

I

II III Misc. Electric (GJ)

o Equipment (GJ)
I 0 Lights (GJ)
I I

HEI~ sccb
SID~
EPH&SHE

..

III Pumps (GJ) CI Air System Fans (GJt

I

· -i5i~~~~IF=======~============~
i
I

,

I

POD

1 ~i
I

I

,
I
I

1 JOR 1.
LIB
VIC IMA
CED

I

,I
I

,

~~iZ~==~i==

f

r~~I==F1 ~ I
o

2000

4000

6000

8000

10000

12000

Electricity Consumption (GJ)

Figure 5.9: Annual Electricity Consumption for Air System Fans (GJ), Pumps (GJ), Lights (GJ), Equipment (GJ) and Miscellaneous Electric (GJ) of Ryerson Buildings

93

Figure 5.9 represents annual electricity consumption for lights (GJ), equipment (GJ) and miscellaneous electric (GJ) of 16 Ryerson buildings. From the graph, it is clear that the Library building uses a large amount of electricity due to the lights and equipment compared to other buildings.

I

REB
I I

PIT RCC KSW KSE

I

~

I
I

I

~

I
,

I

IlL--,

~

ell
CIl

KNW KNE HEI SCC SID EPH &SHE ENG POD
LIB

= =
c
0
J..
~

L ~
~
~

· Misc. Electric (GJ)

o Equipment (GJ) o Lights (GJ)
· Pumps (GJ) · Air System Fans (GJ)

CIl

c::

~

L
-

=-1

I
I

>

.

I
I

I

JOR VlC IMA CEO

......

II
,
I

·
~
o
2000

I
I I

4000

6000

8000

10000

12000

Electricity Consum ption (GJ)

Figure 5.9: Annual Electricity Consumption for Air System Fans (GJ), Pumps (GJ), Lights (GJ), Equipment (GJ) and Miscellaneous Electric (GJ) of Ryerson Buildings

93

Annual energy consumption for cooling (OJ) and heating (OJ) of Ryerson buildings are shown in Figure 5.10. According to the graph, Kerr Hall South East has the highest heating load due to the use of CA V air system.

18000
I

1:1 Cooling (GJ)

II Heating (GJ)

I

16000

" ":)

14000 12000 10000 8000 6000 4000 2000 0
c.;
"I

c;,:)

'-'

-= c
('II

8
~
aJ
1:.11)

>.

t..l

"" c
aJ

r-

~
~<;)

t.::.,0

t~tlr
~

I'"

1-

. l-

I

: f--

~

n. [J3J
~

rim

r

I-

[
~

.I!'W
c} ?~
~
~

~

O~

"

~

~

0<;)

-!:-" 'tJ'~ ~"" ~

9<;)

(,0

~¢' ~~"" ~~~

00 "{..f:.

~

fC'<.I

<J~

Ryerson Uniwrsity Buildings

Figure 5.10: Annual Energy Demand for Cooling (OJ) and Heating (OJ) of Ryerson Buildings

Table 5.25 expresses the annual energy consumption in OJ/m2 for air system fans, pumps, lights, equipment, misc. electricity, cooling and heating load for each building of Ryerson University. From this table, it is easy to understand the energy consumption sector.

94

Annual energy consumption for cooling (GJ) and heating (GJ) of Ryerson buildings are shown in Figure 5.10. According to the graph, Kerr Hall South East has the highest heating load due to the use of CA V air system.

18000 -r--------;:===========;-- - - - - - - - - - - - - i
Cooling (GJ) III Heating (GJ) I 16000 +-----~====================~-----I~-----~
14000 +----------------------------------------------.~------------_1
,.-.

8

~

12000

+---------------------------------------------~~-------------;

Q
~

~ ~ E

10000 +---------------------------------------------~-------------1
8000 +---------------------------------------------~~-------------;

tJJ
c
~

6000 +-------------------4000 +------------------111-2000

W

o

Figure 5.10: Annual Energy Demand for Cooling (GJ) and Heating (GJ) of Ryerson Buildings

Table 5.25 expresses the annual energy consumption

III

GJ/m for air system fans,

2

pumps, lights, equipment, misc. electricity, cooling and heating load for each building of Ryerson University. From this table, it is easy to understand the energy consumption sector.

94

Table 5.25: Annual Energy Demand per Unit Gross Area (GJ/m2)

51. No.

I Building
i

Name

.

Air System Fans
(GJ/m2)

I

Pumps

Lights

Equipment

Misc. Electric
(GJ/m2)

Cooling
(GJ/m2)

Heating
(GJ/m2)

Total
(GJ/m2)

(GJ/ml)

(G.J/m2)

(GJ/m2)

1 2 3 4

CED lMA VIC JOR LIB POD ENG EPH SHE SID SCC HEI
i

1

5 6

7 8
9

0.06 0.11 0.03 0.15 0.09 0.06 0.06 0.07 0.05 0.06 0.09 0.07 0.05 0.05 0.06 0.07

0.01 0.00 0.02 0.02 0.01

O.
0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.03 0.01 0.25

I

0.17 0.24 0.28 0.36 0.54 0.31 0.30 0.35 0.20 0.24 0.26 0.26 0.24 0.26 0.31 0.27

0.08 0.16 0.17 0.18 0.50 0.22 0.30 0.20 0.06 0.10 0.18 0.16 0.20 0.26 0.21 0.01

0.12 0.03

O.~
0.12 0.16 0.11 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.30

0.18 0.23 0.22 0.35 0.34 0.21 0.30 0.25 0.13 I 0.17 0.19 0.24 0.22 0.14 0.27 0.22

0.16 0.32 0.19 0.13 0.05 0.10 0.28 0.09 0.08 0.16 0.19 0.68 0.09 0.14 0.19 0.05

0.78 1.10 0.93 1.31 1.68 1.01 1.29 1.01 0.53 0.74 0.92 1.46 0.80 0.93 1.05 1.18

10 II 12

13

]"4"'

lIs
16

t

Kerr H. RCC PIT REB
(GJ/m2):

I

Total

5.3. Sensitivity Analysis for Cooling and Heating Load
The importance of ventilation in today's energy efficient building is universally recognized. Because of the energy savings generated, the system of choice is often a heat recovery ventilator (HRV). An HRV is a mechanical ventilation device that helps making building inside healthier, cleaner and more comfortable by continuously replacing indoor air with fresh outdoor air. HRVs are sometimes called air-to-air heat exchangers because they preheat or precool incoming air using exhaust air. A ventilation reclaim device is used for the HRV system. In base case simulation, there is no HRV system in air system for every building. Ventilation reclaim has two options 1) sensible heat and 2) sensible and latent heat. For the sensitivity analysis, the sensible and latent heat option was selected with HRV system. The thermal efficiency of this equipment was 90%. With the implementation of HRV system, 5.6%

95

energy saving was achieved for cooling load. Table 5.26 represents the comparison between base case air system and air system with the HRV. Table 5.26: Comparison of Annual Cooling Load with Heat Recovery Ventilation (HRV) system for 16 buildings of Ryerson University.
I

SI. No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
I

Name of building Heaslip House Continuing Education (CEO) School of Image Art (IMA) Victoria Building (VIC) Jorgenson Hall (JOR) Library Building (LIB) Podium Building (POD) Engineering Building (ENG) Eric Palin Hall (EPH) Sally Horsfall Eaton Centre (SHE) Interior Design (SID) Student Campus Centre (SCC) Heidelberg Centre-School of Graphic Communications Management (HEI) Kerr Hall (KNE, KNW, KSE, KSW) Rogers Communications Centre (RCC) Pitman Hall (PIT) Rogers Business Building (RBB)

Annual Cooling Load Base Case UsingHRV (kWh) (kWh)

205136 596157 781200 1078274 1727593 1258069 1890651 1481285 162072 198614 159308 3549164 830394 190740 1845076

199554 538568 749012 1054452 1685691 1205502 1809594 1439614 156802 192125 152387 3105112 808045 185299 1784892

!

13 14 15 16

Annual Total Cooling Load (kWh) =

15953733 ~5066649 Annual Savings (%) 5.6%

Figure 5.11 graphically expresses the comparison of cooling load between base case and with heat recovery system.

I

1

1

I
96

4,0

· Base Case (GWh)

· llsing lIRV (GWh)

35

.~

... -- .. , ..

:c
8
~
<:> ~i

3.0

~,

, -..

,.~-~--~-----

..-

=

2.5
2,0

E

8 >. ... "" ...

'" '" =

Ii
--._._-IlL

~i

15
1.0 0.5
1----

'"

=

--

-~

-~------------------~--"~

....,._-

tlii"-~~,
'i

,-

.1-

m

m

_ ..-

-

-

"----

.-

~ -'i

C;I

m

m

; (i:

:l;

~:

E:1

Figure 5.11: Comparison of Cooling Load Between Base Case and with Heat Recovery System

The sensitivity analysis offers a before and after comparison, and in the before scenario, there is no HRV system. The HRV system was added to base case building simulation with 90% thermal efficiency for sensible and latent heat option. With the implementation of the HRV system, 76% energy saving was achieved for the heating load. Table 5.27 describes annual heating load between base case and with heat recovery ventilation.

97

4.0

· Base Case (GWh)
3.5

· LS ing HRV(GWh)

S
,::
0

::::

?

3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 00
CED
IMA
VIC .l O R

c:

~ c: U

Q. E

CD

... ..
c

....

"-l

LIB

PO D

ENG

R)'crson Buildings

EPH & SHE

SID

SCC

HE I

Kerr HaU

RCC

PIT

RBB

Figure 5.11: Comparison of Cooling Load Between Base Case and with Heat Recovery System

The sensitivity analysis offers a before and after comparison, and in the before scenario, there is no HRV system. The HRV system was added to base case building simulation with 90% them1al efficiency for sensible and latent heat option. With the implementation of the HRV system, 76% energy saving was achieved for the heating load. Table 5.27 describes annual heating load between base case and with heat recovery ventilation.

.,'

97

Table 5.27: Comparison of Annual Heating Load with Heat Recovery Ventilation (HRV) for 16 Buildings of Ryerson University Annual Heating Load Sl. No. Name of building Base Case (kWh) UsingHRV (k\Vh) 122401 376969 314498 264693 140976 150695 827190 145137 53490 63135 29332 801755 206009 101972 491510

1 2
i

3

·

I

I

4 5 6 7 8 9 10
11

·

12

---.n
14 15 16

Heaslip House Continuing Education (CED) School of Image Art (rMA) Victoria Building (VIC) Jorgenson Hall (JOR) Library Building (LIB) Podium Building (POD) Engineering Building (ENG) Eric Palin Hall (EPH) Sally Horsfall Eaton Centre (SHE) Interior Design (SID) Student Campus Centre (SCC) Heidelberg Centre-School of Graphic Communications Management (HEI) Kerr Hall (KNE, KNW, KSE, KSW)

183831 833069 664253 403630 232707 585197 1736162 547752 95 190450 160195 9849907

·

Rogers Communications Centre 321243 (RCC) /"50 Pitman Hall (PIT) Rogers Business Building (RBB) 1307372 Annual Total Cooling Load (kWh) ::::: 17257792 Annual Savings (%)

4089762
76%

Figure 5.12 graphically expresses the comparison of heating load between base case and with the heat recovery system. From the graphical analysis, it becomes apparent that Kerr Hall uses more steam due to the use of CAY air system. As a result, HRV provides the highest savings.

98

12.0 -,----..- - - - -..... - - - - -.......- - - - - - - - - - -..· Base Case (GWh)
10.0

...... - - - - - ... - - -...... - - . - - .... - - - -

· Using HRV (GWh)

+-----.. . . - - - -.. . ---.-..------------------;;;~-------

4.0~--------------------

----------1·-----------

2.0
0,0

+--..--..-..- -.. - - -.. - - - -.. ---.--.. . . - - - -..-.-..- . - -..
J.... ____

L_L. . . _______
IMA VIC lOR LIB

..........L_L_. L_~__________. Il_ .--'----~~.
POD ENG EPH & SHE SID

CED

sec

HEI

Ryerson Buildings

Kerr Hall

RCC

PIT

RBB

Figure 5.12: Comparison of Heating Load Between Base Case and with Heat Recovery System

5.4.

Energy Intensity

The numbers of energy consumption were determined in relation to the total campus
e " "

" I'

floor area. Energy intensity also depends on the age of the building, the energy source, the physical characteristics of the building, the air-conditioning settings, the floor area, the type of facilities, the degree to which energy conservation measures are implemented, and so forth. All

.'

floor area was used for the feasibility study, except unused space, void and mechanical room . Each factor affects the level of energy intensity independently and in its own complex way. Table 5.28 describes the energy intensity for each building ofRU.

,
99

I

J

r-

12.0

~-----

---------

· Base Casr (GWb)
10.0
+-1- - - - -

· Us ing HRV (GWh)

8.0

6.0

4.0 - - -

I
2.0

o.o ~

L
IMA

L
VIC

..
JOR

--

- -~
POD ENG EPH & SHE SID

---_._.
HEI Kerr Hall

CEO

LIB

sec

-----RCC

PIT

---RB B

I I

Ryerson Buildings

Figure 5.12: Comparison of Heating Load Between Base Case and with Heat Recovery System

5.4.

Energy Intensity

The numbers of energy consumption were determined in relation to the total campus floor area. Energy intensity also depends on the age of the building, the energy source, the physical characteristics of the building, the air-conditioning settings, the floor area, the type of facilities, the degree to which energy conser ation measures are implemented, and so forth. All floor area was used for the feasibility study, except unused space, void and mechanical room. Each factor affects the level of energy intensity independently and in its own complex way. Table 5.28 describes the energy intensity for each building ofRU.

99

Table 5.28: Without Chiller Energy Intensity GJ/m 2 for 16 Ryerson University Buildings
Annual Energy Electricity (GJ) 1864 5127 6669 9053 24018 15237 15828 13839 1407 1674 1606 28308 6522 10635 14203 155990 Annual Energy Steam (GJ) 662 2999 2391 1453 838 2107 6250 1972 343 686 577 35460 1156 528 4707 62129

SI. No.

Name of the Building

Gross Area (m 2) 4180 9345 12708 10964 18487 21730 22350 21019 4373 4180 2985 52409 13100 17866 24378 240074 Conditioned Area
(m~)

Total Energy (GJ) 2526 8126 9060 10506 24856 17344 22078 15811 1750 2360 2183 63768 7678 11163 18910 218119

Energy Intensity (GJ/ml) 0.60 0.87

I
2 3 4 5 6 7 8&9 10 11
!

Continuing Education (CED) School of Image Art (lMA) Victoria Building (VIC) Jorgenson Hall (JaR) Library Building (LIB) Podium Building (POD) Engineering Building (ENG) Eric Palin Hall (EPH) & SHE Interior Design (SID) Student Campus Centre (SCC) Heidelberg Centre-School (HEI) Kerr Hall RCC Building (RCC) Pitman Hall (PIT) Rogers Business Building (RBB) Total

v./I
0.96 1.34 0.80 0.99 0.75

0040
0.56 0.73 1.22 0.59 0.73 0.78 0.91

12 13 14 15 16

I

Chiller_LIB Chiller_RCC

188541 13037

11346 881

20706

32052 881

0.17 0.06

1

I
Figure 5.13 represents energy intensity for each building and chillers in GJ/m2·

1

J

I

I
100

·6

.2
~

,

.0 08
0.6
t---

.~

= '" d
;.,

,
I~-

loW

.. = OA
l'l

--

1--

.---~

-

1-

-

1- --

1--

.1-

-

0.2 0.0

t--- · 1 -

1=1-

--

1--- 1 -

1-

-

I-

1- .1-

0

·

Ryerson Buildings and Chillers

Figure 5.13: Energy Intensity GJ/m2 for 16 Buildings and Chillers of Ryerson University For the total chilled water production, the chiller consumes energy. So chiller energy intensity was added for each building. Table 5.29 and Figure 5.14 show the total energy intensity for each building including chiller energy intensity. Table 5.29: Total Energy Intensity for each Building with and without Chillers Building Name
I'

Total Energy Intensity Without Chiller With Chiller
(GJ/rnz) 0.78 1.04 0.89 1.13 1.52 0.97 1.16 0.92 0.57 0.74 0.90 1.39 0.65 0.75 0.78 (GJ/n?) 0.60 0.87 0.71 0.96 1.34 0.80 0.99 0.75 0.40 0.56 0.73 1.22 0.59 0.73 0.78

'.
~

.'r
;

"

CEO IMA VIC JOR LIB POD ENG EPHand SHE SID SCC HEI Kerr Hall RCC PIT

RBB

101

1.6

14
N

~ ..,

12
1.0 0 .8 0 .6 0.4 0 .2 I

-

---

---

S
I
I

>.

'" ~ C
>.

~
~

~

I
~
.:0.., 0
~

·

O~

v

~

"

0'"

<.;;

:<;-0

,,fy
.§"

0'-3

,?

c,~

,0

,*,>
~'"

,>..'"

~

~~

,0

«<:-

",>" <.;;

"

- - - -- - -

Ryerson Buildings and Chillers

Figure 5.13: Energy Intensity GJ/m 2 for 16 Buildings and Chillers of Ryerson University For the total chilled water production, the chiller consumes energy. So chiller energy intensity was added for each building. Table 5.29 and Figure 5.14 show the total energy intensity for each building including chiller energy intensity. Table 5.29: Total Energy Intensity for each Building with and without Chillers

Building Name

Total Energy Intensity Without Chiller
(GJ/m2)

With Chiller
(GJ/m2)
0.78 1.04 0.89 1.13 1.52 0.97 1.16 0.92 0.57 0.74 0.90 1.39 0.65 0.75 0.78

CEO LMA VIC JOR LIB POD ENG EPH and SHE SID SCC HEl Kerr Hall RCC PIT RBB

0.60 0.87 0.71 0.96 1.34 0.80 0.99 0 .75 0.40 0.56 0.73 1.22 0.59 0.73 0.78

101

1.6
· Energy Intensity WIO Chiller · Energy Intensity With Chiller

1.4

1.2
1.0

1-'

0.8

, ,
.1--

i-

-

i-

i-

1-

----

I-

., = ...
~

....

0.6

-

-_.

1-

......._.-

t
,

1

-

1;

,
0.4
i~-

-~
-

I ,

-l-J
~

-

-----

,

"_.__.

I~-

;

.... .....

-

~~

-

:

-

---

1-.

~.-

0.2

0.0

r

--

i-

CED

IMA

VIC

J

I-

--

-

-,

-

JaR

LIB

POD

ENG

EPH

',= :tlSID OCC

-

-

l .1 ----

'I

-

~

1-

HEI

Kerr

RCC

PIT

RBB

Figure 5.14: Energy Intensity (including chiller energy consumption) GJ/m2 16 Buildings ofRU

The NRCan 2003 survey collected data on the total campus floor area from the energy consumption data. To establish energy intensity ratios this data was used. Many factors have a direct bearing on energy intensity. The weather which is one of the leading factors affects energy consumption in different ways across Canada. Its impact is noticeable especially in regions where heating and cooling account for a significant portion of energy consumption. For example, the Prairies are relatively colder than British Columbia, and the quantity of energy used for heating in the Prairies is accordingly greater. Energy intensity also depends on the age of the building, the energy source, the physical characteristics of the building, the
air-c~mditioning

settings, the floor area, the type of facilities, the. degree to which energy conservation measures are implemented, and so forth. Independently, each factor affects the level of energy intensity and in its own complex way (NRCan, 2005). Figure 5.15 shows, for each region, the energy intensity of universities, expressed in gigajoules per square metre (GJ/m2). Floor area is the total area of all the buildings of a sector. Total energy intensity fOf,16 buildings of Ryerson University was determined 1.04 GJ/m2 which is much lower than the other universities.

102

1.6
· Enerb'Y Int ensit y W IO Chiller · Enerf,'Y Int ensit y With Chiller

1.4

1.2
M

~ C .;;;

.§ ...

1.0

~ c

0.8

..
I.J

>.

~

0.6

c

CEO

IMA

VI C

JOR

LIB

POD

ENG

Ryerson Buildings

EPH and SHE

SID

sec

HEI

Kerr Hall

RCC

PIT

RBB

Figure 5.14: Energy Intensity (including chiller energy consumption) GJ/m2 16 Buildings of RU

The NRCan 2003 survey collected data on the total campus floor area from the energy consumption data. To establish energy intensity ratios this data was used. Many factors have a direct bearing on energy intensity. The weather which is one of the leading factors affects energy consumption in different ways across Canada. Its impact is noticeable especially in regions where heating and cooling account for a significant portion of energy consumption. For example, the Prairies are relatively colder than British Columbia, and the quantity of energy used for heating in the Prairies is accordingly greater. Energy intensity also depends on the age of the building, the energy source, the physical characteristics of the building, the air-conditioning settings, the floor area, the type of facilities, the degree to which energy conservation measures are implemented, and so forth. Independently, each factor affects the level of energy intensity and in its own complex way (NRCan, 2005). Figure 5.15 shows, for each region, the energy intensity of universities, expressed in gigajoules per square metre (GJ/m\ Floor area is the total area of all the buildings of a sector. Total energy intensity for 16 buildings of Ryerson University was detem1ined 1.04 GJ/m 2 which is much lower than the other universities.

102

2.5

2.26

. .""' e

.., -I.:)

2.0 1.64 I"'"
~c'

1.94 1.69
r""I

2.04

....
,....
t

l""

.-

'-'

'r;;

C
<l.l

.0 1.5 c <l.l

[,;,
f:,~
. ~~;

~

f':
[ ...·

.I:).IJ ....
s..

1.0 I

1.04
1>,
f~
i'

F ,.
-~-~

I';, ~,),
i''c

ie.
i~:;
IcJ; t:

[.;

f·' f';:
...·..

Ii
L

i· I;~
i'.

I'
; [._._...

>0'
..- - - - - -

~

c

0.5 +-0.0

I,
16 Buildings of Ryerson University

~:

~

t.'
Ie'
Quebec

[:

i·

~

r.,
,:

I?

,~

.....-

rr I~
Prairies

British Columbia

Altantic

Canada

Ontario

Region

Figure 5.15: Comparison of Energy Intensity of Regional Universities, 2003 (NRCan, 2005) with RU

Figure 5,16 shows the total energy intensity per area vs. Ryerson buildings' gross area for each building including chiller energy intensity. According to the building gross area, it is clear that the Library Building has high energy consumption. The Library building uses more light and plug load than other buildings.
TEe/Area (GJ/m )
1.6
104
2

1.2 '"'"" "'E -. -. 1.0
0
'-'
0:1
~

U

--

-<

.....

0,8 0.6
004

UJ f-

0.2 0.0 0 5000 10000 15000 20000
2 )

I
25000 30000
Ryerson BuiIidngs Gross Area (m

Figure 5.16: Energy Consumption GJ/m2 vs. Ryerson Buildings Gross Area (m2) 103

2.5

2.19

2.26 -

NE

-~

C,j
'-'

C
~

1.5

'" c
c

0.1)
~

...
c

.....

1.0

w

0.5

16 Building;; of Ryerson Uni vers it y

British Columbia

Altantic

Quebec

Canada

Ontario

Prairies

Region

Figure 5.15 : Comparison of Energy Intensity of Regional Universities, 2003 (NRCan, 2005) with RU

Figure 5.16 shows the total energy intensity per area vs. Ryerson buildings' gross area for each building including chiller energy intensity. According to the building gross area, it is clear that the Library Building has high energy consumption. The Library building uses more light and plug load than other buildings.
TEC/Al-ea (GJ/m )
1.6
2

IA
~

1.2 1.0 0.8 0.6
I

"',:

..::: -.
o:s
~

0 '-"'

u

-< -w

·
--

·

·

·

·
.*

y

= I E-05x + 0.7938 , R- = 0.0992

I f-

OA
0.2 0.0

+
---

· ·
5000 10000

·-- -.
--.

.

·

o

15000

20000
2 )

25000

30000

~------------------~--

Ryerson Builidngs Gross Area (m

---------.---------

Figure 5.16: Energy Consumption GJ/m2 vs. Ryerson Buildings Gross Area (m 2 ) 103

CHAPTER-6

6.

Feasibility Study ofDLWC System in Ryerson University
It is a matter of fact that in conventional chillers, CFCs are used. It becomes apparent that

CFCs are blamed for damaging the ozone layer. The coal-fired generating stations used for electrical peaking contribute to global warming. However, the district energy industry is balanced to play a vital role around the world become committed to develop strategies for sustainable energy. Deep Lake Water Cooling (DLWC) system is one such strategy.

6.1. DLWC System ofRBB
Ted Rogers School of Management (RBB) located at 575 Bay Street, is one of the main educational building of Ryerson University. The RBB is in the heart of the City of Toronto. Total building area ofRBB is 24378 m2 · It includes classrooms, offices, auditoriums etc. From May 151 to October 31 5t, air-conditioning is required for this building. Deep Lake Water Cooling (DL WC) was chosen as the best alternative solution to meet the cooling requirements for RBB. The DLWC has been provided by the Enwave since 2006. According to Campus Planning data, the total remote chilled water consumption of RBB for year 2007 (May 151 to October 31 51) was of 1936358 kWh. Table 6.1 tabulates the total remote chilled water consumption of RBB. Table 6.1: Chilled Water Consumption for the Year of2007 ofRBB
Chilled Water Consumption (Ton-hr) 50027 104070 114476 124155 105148 52695 550,571 Chilled Water Consumption (kWh) 175945 366014 402612 436653 369805 185328 1936358

Year-2007 Month
May June July August September October Total

104

Figure 6.1 graphically presents the chilled water consumption per month. As per graph, it is clear that the cooling demand ofRBB for the month of August is higher than any other month.

500 450 400 350

· Chilled Water Consumption (MWh) in Year 2007 ofRBB
~

,..,
t
'.

I,

_ _ _ !B
II:

~____

._

-= ::

300 250 200 150 100 50 0

H:

f~

f f\
- - - - - i'

:E

I:'

i),

1;1
f ··

'"

..

~.-

..

IV
I::.'

f'

~~
r---I",· r---

jJ,
I'

I

I,'
May

Ii
June

"

I;,
!5
July

K
~
August Month

I"
t

tf ~.,'.
I' ....
September

f~:'

fi:1;.-

I~

le,-

L
October

Figure 6.1: Actual Chilled Water Consumption (MWh) in Year 2007 for RBB According to base case simulation of RBB building, HAP results provided chilled water consumption of 1.8 GWh for the month May to October. Table 6.2 represents the chilled water consumption difference which of 4.7%. Table 6.2: Chilled Water Consumption difference ofRBB

Building Name
RBB

Actual Chilled 'Vater Energy Consumption (k'Vh) 1936358

HAP Chilled Water Energy Consumption (kWh) 1845076

Difference

(%)
4.7

6.1.1.

Potential Benefit of DLCW for RBB
Carrier HAP provides the simulated hour by hour remote chilled water requirement.

For the potential savings and GHG emission benefit comparison with conventional chiller, a total load of2538 kWh conceptual electric chillers was designed.

105

Figure 6.1 graphically presents the chilled water consumption per month. As per graph, it is clear that the cooling demand of RBB for the month of August is higher than any other month.

500 450 400 350

· Chilled Water Consumption (MWh) in Year 2007 ofRBB

I~

300 250 200 150 100 50 0 May

I~

June

July

August

September

October

Month

Figure 6.1: Actual Chilled Water Consumption (MWh) in Year 2007 for RBB

According to base case simulation of RBB building, HAP results provided chilled water consumption of l.8 GWh for the month May to October. Table 6.2 represents the chilled water consumption difference which of 4.7%. Table 6.2: Chilled Water Consumption difference ofRBB

Building Name

RBB

Actual Chilled Water Energy Consumption (kWh) 1936358

HAP Chilled Water Energy Consumption (kWh) 1845076

Difference

(%) 4.7

6.1.1.

Potential Benefit of DLCW for RBB
Carrier HAP provides the simulated hour by hour remote chilled water requirement.

For the potential savings and GHG emission benefit comparison with conventional chiller, a total load of2538 kWh conceptual electric chillers was designed.

105

For base case simulation, the chiller electricity consumption was 924594 kWh as shown in Table 6.3. Table 6.3: Electricity Consumption for Model Chiller Plant ofRBB.
Electricity Consumption
(kWh)

Chiller Input Chilled water pump Cooling Tower Fan
Total

683466 109126 132001
924594

The model chiller and cooling tower specification are shown in Table 5.6, 5.7 and 5.8 and Table 5.9. A set of 8760 hour data was analyzed from the HAP simulation result. The total cooling load for the RBB was of 1845076 kWh. From the hourly analysis, electricity consumption for the base case chiller was 924594 kWh with GHG emission of 204829 kg of CO 2, 203 kg of NOx and 511 kg of S02. For analyzing the GHG production, hourly GHG emission factors were used (Gordon and Fung, 2009) as tabulated in Table 6.4. Table 6.4: Hourly Electricity and GHGs Production for Base Case Electricity Year Consumption (kWh) 2007 924594 CO 2 (kg) 204829 NO x (kg) 203

S02
(kg) 511

According to Enwave chilled water consumption data, the overall plant efficiency of Enwave is between 0.2 kW/Ton and 0.3 kW/Ton for delivering chilled water to the RBB. The maximum peak cooling load of 2538 kW occurs on July 9 at 1200 hour. For total DL WC system electricity consumption calculation, Enwave plant efficiency, minimum outdoor
th

106

--------------------------------------------. . aw~ .

t~mp~rature of 11.2" C tmd ma.Xll1ml11 outdoor temperature 32.3°C was considered. Total
I

calculation is sho\'\'TI in Appendix D. Table 6.5 gives a summary of the result. Table 6.5: Hourly Electricity and GHGs Production for DL WC Year Electricity Consumption (kWh) 2007 132931 CO2 (kg) 30176 NOx (kg) 35
i

S02 (kg) 35

Table 6.6 represents the total saving of electricity consumption and reduction of gas emission for conventional chiller and DLWC system. As per Table 6.6, 791663 kWh of electricity was saved for air-conditioning of RBB. GHGs emission was calculated from the HAP hourly analysis. The total amount of gas emissions (C02, NO x, S02) reduction was 175093 kg.

Table 6.6: Annual Electricity Savings and Emissions Reductions due to DL WC for RBB Year kWh Saved 2007 (%) Reduced 791663 86 CO2 (kg) 174652 85 NOx (kg) 238 85 S02 (kg) 203 85

6.2. Proposed DLWC System of Ryerson University Campus
Ryerson University campus is situated in downtown Toronto. Specially, in summer time, in the month of May to October, campus buildings become very hot. This is the main reason that campus needs air-conditioning for each building.

The University has two central cooling plants. The largest plant has a capacity of 3100 tons where 5 chillers are used. It is located at Ryerson Library Building. It serves 66% of the total campus area. Smaller plant has capacity of 530 ton where 2 chillers are used. It is located at Ryerson Rogers Communication Centre and serves 11 % of the total area. Rogers Business Building already has DLWC system. This DLWC system serves 9% of the total campus area for

107

RBB. 77% of total campus area, served by 2 different chiller plants is considered for DLWC feasibility analysis. The proposed flow diagram for DL WC system is sho\\'Tl in Figure 6.2.

To implement this DLWC system within the Ryerson buildings would require minimal effort. The buildings already have heat exchangers which could be connected to the DL WC system supply pipe. Enwave already has the DLWC system plant for serving the required amount of remote chilled water for the selected buildings. Furthermore, some minor upgrades to the existing cooling system would need to be implemented. After it is completed, existing chillers and cooling towers can be decommissioned.

-------------.., I I
RBB Building is using DLWC System : Eng Building

RCW to Buildings Roof RCW Chilled water

~----------~

I I I

EPH&SHE CEO Building SID Building SCC Building

I I I :

Pump for lifting Remote Chilled Water to all Buildings Roof (Head 60 ft-1S0 ft)

,
I I

,

RCW to Buildings Roof

-------------,
I
I

GCM Building Library Building Jorgenson Building

I

DLWC System

I

I l _____________________ ,

Ryerson University Buildings
POD Building

I I

:,1. ,

IMA Building

r-__ C_h_il_le_d_W __ at_e_r__~' I CEO Building

,
I I I I I I I I

L_____________I
Two Central Chiller Plant in Library Building and RCC Building of Ryerson University
Ryerson University BuiIJinf'5I

I

Kerr Hall

:

Figure 6.2: Proposed DL \VC System for Entire Ryerson Uni\"ersity Campus 108

Based on the Rogers Business Building case study, the total energy savings and amount of reduction of gas emission for rest of selected buildings ofRU was determined.

6.3. Comparison between existing Conventional Chiller and DLWC System
Analyzing the base case energy demand for two central chiller plants ofRU, Carrier HAP has given hour by hour energy consumption data. For Library chiller plant, two types of energy are used for chiller input. They are steam and electricity. Another chiller plant only uses electricity for its input.

6.3.1.

Potential Benefit for DLWC ofRU Buildings
DL WC systems generate huge energy savings primarily by eliminating the chiller-based

cooling.

Based on the estimated energy savings, the overall plant efficiency of Enwave was considered between 0.2 kW/ton and 0.3 kW/ton for delivering the chilled water to the RBB. Total steam consumption for Library chiller plant was 5751754 kWh and electricity consumption was 3151780 kWh. Table 6.7 presents the total energy savings due to the use ofDLWC system. This represents about 89.2% reduction in energy consumption for RU campus cooling.

109

Table 6.7: Energy Consumption due to Conventional Chillers and DLWC System Energy Consumption due to Conventional Chillers (kWh) 5751754 3151780 244687 Energy Consumption due to DLWC System (kWh) Energy Savings (%) 100 70.6 71.2

Energy Consumption By

Steam Consumption by Chillers in the Library Building Electricity Consumption by Chillers in the Library Building Electricity Consumption by Chillers in the RCC Building
Total Energy Consumption(kWh)

924646 70351

9148221

994997

89.2

Figure 6.3 graphically presents the total energy consumption of conventional chillers and DLWC.

:C'10000 ::: 9000
'-'

~

.:: Q.

c

sooo

7000 6000 E ::I 5000 c '" 0 4000 U .... 3000 ~ 1.0 2000 CI.I c 1000 ~ 0
Convention Chillers Cooling System

t-

il

DLWCSystem

Figure 6.3: Annual Energy Consumption for Conventional Chillers and DLWC System

For Ryerson University cooling, the annual energy costs were estimated based on Time of Use (TOU) price and Flat Rate price. Steam cost was calculated by using the flat rate of $0.03/lb. The total cost of 91 % for TOU price and 91.5% for Flat Rate price are reduced due to the use of DL WC system for air conditioning of Ryerson University. TOU prices are shown in

110

Table 4.14. From hourly analysis, Annual energy cost due to conventional chillers and DLWC system are shown in Table 6.8.

Table 6.8: Annual Energy Cost due to Conventional Chiller and DLWC System
!

Type of Energy Consumption by Chillers

Total Annual Cost Chillers (TOU) DLWC System (TOU) Total Savings (TOU)

Total Annual Cost Chillers (Flat Rate) DLWC System (Flat Rate)

i

($)
Steam used by Chillers in the Library Building Electricity used by Chillers in the Library Building Electricity used by Chillers in the RCC Building Total Cost ($)

($)

i

840064

99928

(%) 100

($)
840064

($)

Total Savings of Electricity Cost Due to Flat Rate For Conventional Chillers (%)
7.5

i

92465

339826

91.5

315172

!

27321

8043

70.6

24469

7035

I I

1207221

107971

1179750

99500

I

91% 91.5% Total Cost Reduced (%) Steam (Flat Rate = $O.03Ilb and electricity (Flat Rate) = $ O.10/kWh

Figure 6.4 represents the annual energy cost due to conventional chillers and DL WC system. As per the graph, it is clear that the DL WC system generates a large amount of energy cost savings for air-conditioning of Ryerson University. The graph also represents the benefit of Flat Rate price. If Ryerson University uses TOU price, it will pay 7.5% more on its electricity bill.

j

\
111

1400000

.. EA

1200000 1000000

".
"

"""""
'"

U

0

~

800000 600000 400000 200000
0

,

;

-;

= .... '" <

(

ie'
';>.

c:::l
Chillers (TOU) DLWC System (TOU)

'.';,'.:

c:::I
DLWC System (Flat Rate)

Chillers (Flat Rate)

Type of Use

Figure 6.4: Annual Energy Cost due to Conventional Chiller and DL WC System

I I
1

6.3.2.

GHGs Emission of RU Buildings

The energy survey report (NRC an, 2005) for consumption of energy for universities. In 2003, considers three types of GHGs: carbon dioxide (C02), methane (Gl-it) and nitrous oxide (N20). Table 6.9 shows, for each region, the total GHG emissions of universities are associated with their three main energy sources, namely natural gas, electricity and heavy fuel oil.

In 2003, the energy consumption of universities alone produced more than 2 million tonnes of GHG emissions. This emission is equivalent to the average annual emissions of approximately 595000 compact cars or 389000 sport utility vehicles. Ontario universities accounted for 37 percent of the total emissions, compared with 25 percent for the Prairies, 18 percent for Quebec, 12 percent for the Atlantic region, and 8 percent for British Columbia and the Territories. GHG emissions by energy source for universities are shown in Table 6.9.

j

I

112

Table 6.9: OHO Emissions (thousands oftonnes) by Energy Source for Universities (NRCan, 2005)
Region Natural Gas Electrici!Y Heavy fuel oil Total Energy

! Atlantic
Quebec Ontario Prairies British I Columbia Total

183 500 314 93 1090

62 150 237 190 63 701

156 27 5

3 198

251 366 746 514 160 2037

The percentage of OHO emissions attributed to each of the energy sources is shown in Figure 6.5. The use of natural gas accounted for 54 percent of the universities' OHO emissions, compared with 34 percent for electricity and 10 percent for heavy fuel oil. Regionally, the use of natural gas accounted for 67 percent of the universities' OHO emissions in the Prairies, 57 percent in British Columbia and the Territories, 52 percent in Quebec and 50 percent in Ontario. The use of heavy fuel oil was the main source of emissions for the Atlantic region, because it is accounted for 62 percent of this region's emissions (NRCan, 2005).

,

Percentage ofGHG Emissions by Energy Source, Universities, 2003
Electricity 34%

54%
dis tillates 2%

Figure 6.5: Percentage of OHO Emissions by Energy Source for Universities (NRCan, 2005)

113

Table 6.9: GHG Emissions (thousands oftonnes) by Energy Source for Universities (NRC an, 2005)
Region Atlantic Quebec Ontario Prairies British Columbia Total Natural Gas
-

Electricity

Heavy fuel oil

Total Energy

183 500 314 93 1090

62 150 237 190 63 701

156 27 5

3 198

251 366 746 514 160 2037

The percentage of GHG emissions attributed to each of the energy sources is shown in Figure 6.5. The use of natural gas accounted for 54 percent of the universities' GHG emissions, compared with 34 percent for electricity and 10 percent for heavy fuel oil. Regionally, the use of natural gas accounted for 67 percent of the universities' GHG emissions in the Prairies, 57 percent in British Columbia and the Territories, 52 percent in Quebec and 50 percent in Ontario. The use of heavy fuel oil was the main source of emissions for the Atlantic region, because it is accounted for 62 percent of this region' s emissions (NRCan, 2005).

Percentage ofGHG Emissions by Energy Source, Universities, 2003
Electricity 34%

10%

54%
distillates 2%

Figure 6.5: Percentage of GHG Emissions by Energy Source for Universities (NRCan, 2005)

113

Due to the calculation of total steam consumption for chiller plant of RU, some factors were considered. For example, low pressure steam required 1200 BTUs to 1400 BTUs of input energy to produce 1 pound of steam. Steam. is produced at 85% efficiency. One standard m3 natural gas (NG) has 35.312 kBTU. Steam is produced by using Natural Gas

(www.energysolutionscenter.orglboilerbumerlEfCImprove/Steam_Distribution/Steam_Trap_ Le aks.asp). Table 6.10 indicates the natural gas consumption and the total amount of CO 2 produced. Table 6.10 also represents the conversion of natural gas and steam.

Table 6.10: Natural Gas and Steam Conversion Table
Steam Consumption due to absorption chiller (kWh)
i

5751754
Steam is produced at 85% efficiency Emission Factor of Natural Gas = 1.902 kglm3 (NRCan, 2007)

Natural Gas Consumption (m 3) due to produced steam Total amount of CO 2 produced (kg) - Based on emission factors

655560 1246875 kg CO2

In a feasibility study project of RU, three types of GHGs are considered: carbon dioxide (C02), nitrous oxide (N20) and Sulphur dioxide S02. Table 6.11 shows the total GHG emissions of Ryerson University associated with their two main energy sources, namely natural gas and electricity. In 2006, the energy consumption of Ryerson University alone produced 2183 tonnes of CO2, 0.96 tonnes ofN20 and 2.4 tonnes of S02 emissions. Gas emissions due to conventional chiller and DL WC system are shown in Table 6.11. The emission calculation was done in an hourly manner. For electricity, TOU emission factors were used (Gordon and Fung, 2009).

r

I

1

I

)

1

I

1

114

I

Table 6.11: GHGs Emission due to Conventional Chiller and DLWC System
Type of Energy Consumption Total amount of COl produce by chillers
(kl?;)

Total amount of CO 2 produce by DLWC System
(kl?;)

Total amount of SO. produce by chillers
(kl?;)

Total amount of SO. produce by DLWC System (kl!)

Total amount of NO. produce by chillers
(kl?;)

Total amount of NO, produce by DLWC System
(kl?;)

Steam used by I Chillers in the i Library Building
i

1246875

-

-

20

-

I

I Electricity used by I Chillers in the Library Building Electricity used by Chillers in the RCC Building

677523

207133

1971

604

787

241

55587

16410

161

49

65
I

19
I

i

246 Total Gas 2183 2.40 0.71 0.96 Emission (Ton) I Total Gas 89 70.4 70 Emission Reduction (%) NO, emission factor for Natural Gas =0.03 gm/m" (NRCan, 2004)

0.29

Figure 6.6 shows the percentage of GHG emission reduction associated with the use of DLWC, reduction of 89% of CO2, 70.4% of S02 and 70% ofN20 were achieved.

115

-------------------------------------------------~------------

100

~ ~
Q

',c
<J

= = "='
a:
OJ

90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20
IO

.~

=
~

·s
'-'l

'" '"

'"

""

0
C02 Reduction by Electricity and Natural Gas SOx Reduction by Electricity NOx Reduction by Electricity and Natural Gas

Type orGas Emission

Figure 6.6: Percentage of Gas Emission Reduction due to DLWC System Figure 6.7 shows the percentage of CO 2 and NO x emissions attributed to each of the energy sources. According to base case analysis, the use of natural gas accounted for 63 percent of the Ryerson University GHGs emissions, compared with 37 percent for electricity of total energy use for chillers.

Percentage of C02 and NOx Emissions by Energy Source due to Chillers, Ryerson University

Electricity 37%

63%

Figure 6.7: Percentage of CO2 and NO x Emission by Energy Source for Ryerson University due to Chillers

116

100 ~---

90 +-------~~~~-----------

80
70 + - - - 60 + - - - 50 + - - - -

40
30 + - - - 20 + - - - -

10
0 ..1.---C02 Reduction by Electricity and Natural Gas SOx Reduction by Electricity NOx Reduction by Electricity and Natural Gas

Type of Gas Elniss ion

Figure 6.6: Percentage of Gas Emission Reduction due to DL WC System Figure 6.7 shows the percentage of CO 2 and NO x emissions attributed to each of the energy sources. According to base case analysis, the use of natural gas accounted for 63 percent of the Ryerson University GHGs emissions, compared with 37 percent for electricity of total energy use for chillers.

Percentage orC02 and NOx Emissions by Energy Source due to Chillers, Ryerson University

Electricity

37%

63%

Figure 6.7: Percentage of CO 2 and NO x Emission by Energy Source for Ryerson University due to Chillers

116

CHAPTER-7
7. Conclusion
The above information that was reviewed in the previous sections was used to audit the proposed interventions and perform well targeted simulations for the assessment of potential energy conservation scenarios at Ryerson University. From Section 5.3, the results of the sensitivity analysis show that heat recovery system with air system would result in a 5.6% cooling load saving and 76% heating load saving for Ryerson University. In Section 5.4, energy intensity of Ryerson University was determined and compared with other regional universities. From Figure 5.13, it is clear that the total energy intensity of Ryerson University was 1.04 OJ/m2 which is much lower than the other universities. From Section 6.3.1, it becomes apparent that the implementation ofDLWC system over the conventional HV AC system would result in 89.2% energy savings due to chillers, with the energy consumption from 9148221 kWh to 994997 kWh. From Table 6.8, it becomes obvious that the application of TOU and Flat Rate pricing schemes results in 7.5% savings on electric energy costs due to the Flat Rate price use. If Ryerson University uses TOU price, 7.5% higher electricity bill should be expected for cooling. From Table 6.11 (which is based on Carrier's Hourly Analysis Program), it becomes apparent that, comparing base case with DLWC, the C02 emission will decrease by 89% and NO x will decrease by 70% for chillers due to the use of electricity and steam. SOx will decrease by 70.4% for chillers due to use of electricity. From Figure 6.7, according to base case energy simulation, the percentage of OHO emission by energy source ofRU uses 37% for electricity and 63% for natural gas due to chiller. DLWC system is both technically and economically feasible today and, once installed, the energy supply is inexhaustible, renewable, and has minimal environmental impacts.

'

117

CHAPTER-8
8. Recommendations
In this energy audit, 86% of the area of Ryerson University was considered; the remaining 14% of the total area should be properly audited in order to achieve the proper energy audit result, 100% area of RU needs to be considered. Since many Ryerson buildings shear one electricity meter, it becomes difficult to evaluate each building'S electricity consumption individually. For a proper electricity audit, separate electricity meters as well as central chiller plant electricity meters should be installed in each building. The main obligation of electricity simulation for each building is a lack of information about plug load. The plug load of Library building and the RCC Building has different types of pump due to chiller plants. EPH and SHE, the Engineering Building, Kerr Hall have different types of laboratories. The plug load information for these buildings are not readily available. The steam consumption bill from the Campus Planning was not clear to get total steam usage information. Two types of air systems are used in Ryerson buildings, VAV and CAY. Kerr Hall, IMA building, Victoria Building and Jorgenson Hall have CAV system. In HVAC system, CAV system is requires more energy than YAY. To reduce energy consumption, all CAY systems should be replaced by VAV systems. Some. buildings are very old. The lack of building information is another reason causing in proper energy consumption result. The existing HV AC system in the Ryerson University does not have any energy recovery equipment. In order to save energy, it is recommended that energy recovery equipment such as, ventilation reclaim systems should be used. For DLWC system feasibility study, Enwave chilled water bill was not provided. To determine DLWC system, cooling cost should be provided.
118

r

I

I

I

1

I

I

I

9.

References

ASHRAE. (2004). "Energy Standard for Buildings Except for Low-Rise Residential Buildings". In ASHRAE Standard 90.1-2004. Atlanta, GA: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers. Beausoleil-Morrison, t, Calla, R., Mottillo, M., Purdy, J., Wyndham-Wheeler, P., Lopez, P., Dubrous, F., & Lubun, M. (2001). Using Building Simulation to Support an Energy-Efficient Incentive Programme. Seventh International IBPSA Conference. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, August 13-15,2001. Canadian Urban Institute. (1993). Cooling buildings in downtown Toronto. Urban focus series; 93-2. Toronto, Canadian Urban Institute. Carrier Corporation. (2006). Carrier HAP Building Simulation Hourly Analysis Program. Engineering Economic Analysis User's Alanual. Available at http://www.commercial.carrier.comlcommerciallhvac/generallO.. CLI1_DIV 12_ETI496_MID435 5,00.html, Date retrieved: Sept. 30, 2008. Chen, Y., & Wang, S. (2002). A simple procedure for calculating thermal response factors and conduction transfer functions of multilayer walls. Journal ofApplied Thermal Engineering 22, 333-338. Clarke, J. A., & Irving, A. D. (1988). Building Energy Simulation: An Introduction. Energy and Buildings 10, 157-159. Clarke, 1. A. (2001). Energy simulation in building design. Oxford, Butterworth-Heinemann. Crawley, D. B., Hand, 1. W., Kummert, M., & Griffith, B. T. (2005). Contrasting the Capabilities of Building Energy Performance Simulation Programs. U S Department of energy, Washington, USA, University ofStrathclyde, Scotland, UK, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Wisconsin, USA, Ver. 1.0. July, 2005. Cornell University Sustainable Campus. (2006). Energy Use, Lake Source Cooling. Lake Source Cooling project. Ithaca, NY, USA. Available at http://www.sustainablecampus.comell.edulenergyllakesource.cfm. Cummins, J. (2006). The Blue Revolution: Air Condition and Energy from Deep Waters of Lakes and Oceans. A Article ofInstitute ofScience in Society. London, UK. A vailab Ie at http://www.i-sis.org. uk/Deep WaterEnergy. php. Eliadis, C. (2003). Deep Lake Water Cooling A Renewable Technology. A Alagazine of Electrical Line, (pp. 26-28). North Vancouver, BC, Canada. Available at http://www.electricalline.comlimages/mag_archive/25. pdf.

119

Enwave Energy Corporation. (2006). Deep Lake Water Cooling. Toronto, Ontario. Available at http://www.enwave.comldlwc.php. Gordon, C., & Fung, A. S. (2009). Hourly Emission Factors from the Electricity Generation Sector - A Tool for Analyzing the Impact of Renewable Technologies in Ontario. CSAIE Transactions 33(1), 105-118. Hirsch, J. J. & Associates (2006). The Home of DOE-2 based Building Energy Use and Cost Analysis Software. Available at http://doe2.coml, Date retrieved: August 2, 2008. Jayamaha, L. (2007). Energy-Efficient Building Systems. New York, USA, The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Looney, C. M., & Oney, S. K. (2007). Seawater District Cooling and Lake Source District Cooling. Energy Engineering 104(5), 34-45. MacQuiston, F. c., Parker, J. D., & Spitler, J. D. (2005). Heating, ventilating, and air conditioning: analysis and design. Hoboken, N. J. : John Wiley & Sons. Newman, L., & Herbert, Y. (2009). The use of deep water cooling systems: Two Canadian examples. Renewable Energy 34, 727-730. NRCan. (2004). Canada's greenhouse gas inventory: 1990-2002. Environment Canada, Greenhouse Gas Division, Ottawa, annex 7. NRC an. (2005). Consumption of energy survey for universities, colleges and hospitals, 2003. Natural Resources Canada. Gatineau, QC. NRC an. (2007). Total End User - GHG Emissions. Natural Resources Canada. Ottawa, ON. Available at http://www.oee.nrcan.gc.ca/corporate/statistics/neudldpa/tablesanalysis2/aaa_00_l_e_2.cfm?attr =0 Date retrieved: Sept. 14, 2008. Rey, F. J., Velasco, E., & Varela, F. (2007). Building Energy Analysis (BEA): A methodology to assess building energy labelling. Energy and Buildings 39, 709-716. Siddique, A. (2008). Energy Performance Analysis of Region of Peel Headquarters Building As ASustainable Building Using The "Carrier HAP", "eQUEST" Simulation Program and "Ret SCREEN" Cost Analysis Program. lv/Eng Thesis, Ryerson University, Toronto, Canada. Toronto Hydro. (2007). Toronto Hydro Electric Systems, Electricity Rates and Time of Use. November, 2007. Trane. (2008). TRACE 700 methodology and calculations. Available at http://www.trane.com/COMMERCIALIDna/View.aspx?i=2396. Date retrieved: Sept. 21, 2008. Turner, W. C. (2001). Energy management handbook, lh edition. Fairmont Press, New York. 120

Appendix A: GHG Emission factors of Natural Gas (Source: NRCan, 2007)

.+.

NlltUmt ResourC>K CI!!I""dIt

Ressour_ fllrlUrenn Cftnll<l1l

Cana(m

Factor I Convenion Description

Fuel

Value

Units

Source
,1...aL.rol R'liOiJI"Ct!S c:an.:f.a, ~SU@S Tabies, 1;;}:la-11i~. 11l9;t, WW'''U1CepOill'
, C?lnational...,PI'tICHsl .sSV!!s<lf1dex_It. htrrj
~>O/!.al

,. Ferscnal;
Trr~ioo
t
I

Choo..--s 1'{1 a iJeldcem ..ehdlt
Fue--~cie-T.

Nab.lral G.H

,~,
~.53

Gjim"

:t-vr·;:
E."Ie!W
Amou:4of Liquid ener;r.,'in Felroleum primary tJeI Gas
(LPGlpropa~

· Vehi::.'e 1Nint'!nan:e · Fue ConsUMptJon
Ca-:::J~

EnIt'OlY So.a!'d [of

Con~

GfrrP

.ldir.;) t A::IrTloiti'.<;! Fuels · Tr.rsp:r:tion Lnits

~~~t
ac~ Retrieved

,D9oemi:<!r ZJC4

Li~FuelOil

nrns an:: ;,crtives · :>ub';;atcns
t
t

jr2

23.69 41.73 1 8:J% !
.

(;jlrrP (;jIm"

~a/ Re1lOUl'Cu

Car1a:f.a,

C~a'8~

£:xir.:s 3I1d analys.s .FA=

~(SunkerC)
Natural Gas Liquid Pe1roleum Gas

Heavy Fuel Oil'

·0utf0<:lic An lJpda!:Vl, 1999

%
%

7::% A\'era;!1t CaP&1y e!fic'enqt of (LPG,'propa~ . Factor oornbus':ion Li~FuelCit Oil'!!!' 'J"!3T 6::1% #.<2
Heavy Fuel 0;1

I
kg::.
v

I,.brbek Re-soun:e
Consultants

/113 (Sunk9l' C)
NalUralGas Liquid Pelroleum Gas
\LPGipropa~ :

SO%
1.Q02 1534

kg::.O:elrrP

" "
l

GHG

°

elm" Environme"lt Canada.

Emissions

1,..:IUS'Jial

~~~~.G~

Fa¢CX'5

oornbus':ion

I'MftWty. 1990-2002;

Light FIRI Oil
jr2

2S40

kg::.o~eirrP kg::.O~elm"

Annex 7: E.'T1:uion Factors, AI....g;.rst lOO4

Heavy F>JeI 0,1 /113 (Sunk9l' C) 3112

Q-rtario
a·... '<Igein

8ectricily
8~otricily

0.45:1 [k;-:0.&:10:,,'\111=
i

2002
Quebe.c Emissions a....~g.1!in
GHG

Fac:ors

zon

I, a's Greenhous4P ~ o OJ1a kgCO.e/k·/IIh'il'MftWty, 1990-2002;

I I'

vironme"lt Canada.

. J .

Nova S::otia a....-agein 8eotricily

tt..nn.x 13: EJec1ricity .lnte-'lSity T abe. kJgus;t

O.75;t !kg::.O:I!!.'l.'/IIh\Zl04 10c0

2000
~oIu~ Conversion

-

-

titresllJll

. ,....... ""iir ..""""·.·.,....oj·:m ".,m,'

121

Appendix A: GHG Emission Factors of Natural Gas (Source: NRCan, 2004)

A 13.1.1.2 Methane (CH 4 )
Emissions of CH 4 from fuel combustion are technology dependent. Sectoral emission factors (Table A13-1) h3".'e been de\'eloped based on technologies typically used in Canada. The factors were developed based on a review of emission factors for combustion technologies and an analysis of combustion technologies (SGA, 2000). The emission factor for the producer consumption of natural gas was developed based on a technology split for the upstream oil and gas industry (CAPP, 1999) and technology-specific emission factors from the U.S. EPA report AP-42 (EPA. 1996).
TABLE A 13-1: Emission Factors for Natural Gas and tlGls {En ergy Station ary Combustlon Sources)

Emission factors

Source
Natll ral Gas

CO2

CH..

1420

gJ'm3
1891 1 1891 1 2389 1 1891 1 1891 1
Uquids

Electric Utilities Industrial Producer Consumption Pipelines Residential, Commercial. Agriculture
t~atural Gas

' 0.4g2 0.0372
6.53 .4
1.g2

gJ m 3

gJm3
0.04g2

0.0332 0.06 2 0.052 0.0352

0.0312
gJl

gIL
9761 1500
1

gil
nla
0.1082 0.1082

Ethane Propane Butane

nJa
0.0242 0.0242

1730 1

122

Appendix B: Building Envelop Data of Ryerson University (Source: Campus Planning, RU)

Building Envelop Data of Ryerson University Buildings Overall Uvalue : W/m21K 0.377 0.31 0.354 0.322 3.601 3.617 3.629 6.329
I I

Buildin~

Name

Item East Wall Assembly North WaH Assembly South Wall Assembly Roof Assembly Type-l Window Assembly Type-2 Window Assembly Type-3 Window Assembly Type-4 Window Assembly Type-5 Window Assembly Type-6 Window Assembly Door AssemblY

Shade Coefficient

Glass Shade Coefficient

Heaslip House Continuing Education (CED)

I I
I
I

0.747 ' 0.747 : 0.747 : 0.747 i
I

0.747 I 0.747 I 3,293 0.478 0.317 2.69 1.703 0.327 0.403 0.403 0.316 0.476 3.61 3.611 3.612 3.613 3.615 5.617 1.703

Victoria Building (VIC)

Wall Assembly Roof Assembly Window Assembly Door properties Assembly East Wall Assembly North Wall Assembly South Wall Assembly West Wall Assembly Roof Assembly Type-l Window Assembly Type-2 Window Assembly Type-3 Window Assembly Type-4 Window Assembly . Type-5 Window Assembly Type-6 Window Assembly Door Assembly

0.641 3.293

Jorgenson Hall (JOR)

I

i

I

0.7471
I

0.747 I 0.747 '
i

0.747 0.747 0.747 3.293

123

Appendix B: Building Envelop Data of Ryerson University (Source: Campus Planning, RU) Overall Uvalue W/m 2/K 0.347 0.348 0.348 0.348 0.352 3.594 3.605 3.612 3.613 3.615 5.617 1.703 0.344 0.344 0.344 0.379 3.594 3.595 3.6 3.606 1.703 0.376 0.323 0.407 0.549 0.358 3.62 3.087 3.03 3.571 3.18 3.041 3.654 1.073 Shade Coefficient Glass Shade Coefficient

·

Building Name

Item

Library Building · (LIB)

·

i
I

East Wall Assembly North Wall Assembly South Wall Assembly West Wall Assembly Roof Assembly Type-l Window Assembly Type-2 Window Assembly Type-3 Window Assembly Type-4 Window Assembly Type-5 Window Assembly Type-6 Window Assembly Door Assembly East Wall Assembly South Wall Assembly West Wall Assembly Roof Assembly Type-l Window Assembly Type-2 Window Assembly Type-3 Window Assembly Type-4 Window Assembly Door Assembly Wall Assembly-l Wall Assembly-2 Wall Assembly-3 Roof Assembly-l Roof Assembly-2 Type-l Window Assembly Ty~e-2 Window Assembly Type-3 Window Assembly Type-4 Window Assembly Type-5 Window Assembly Type-6 Window Assembly Type-7 Window Assembly Door Assembly

0.747 0.747 0.747 0.747 0.747 0.747 3.293

Podium (POD)

3.293

I

Engineering Building (ENG)

·

0.648 0.427 0.435 0.747 0.833 0.479 0.792 3.293

124

Appendix B: Building Envelop Data of Ryerson University (Source: Campus Planning, RU) Overall Uvalue W/m 2/K 0.384 0.363 0.363 0.329 3.668 0.385 0.329 0.363 0.329 3.617 1.073 0.386 0.344 0.348 0.386 0.344 3.618 3.624 3.612 3.631 0.505 1.073 0.33 0.339 0.321 0.321 0.348 3.271 3.286 3.266 3.624 3.586 3.584 3.583 3.29 Shade Coefficient Glass Shade Coefficient
!

Building Name EPH Eric Palin Hall (EPH)
I

Item East Wall Assembly North Wall Assembly South Wall Assembly West Wall Assembly Window Assembly East Wall Assembly North Wall Assembly South Wall Assembly West Wall Assembly Window Assembly Door Assembly Roof Assembly East Wall Assembly North Wall Assembly South Wall Assembly West Wall Assembly East Window Assembly North Window Assembly South Window Assembly West Window Assembly Roof Assembly Door Assembly East Wall Assembly North Wall Assembly South Wall Assembly West Wall Assembly Roof Assembly Type-l Window Assembly · Type-2 Window Assembly Type-3 Window Assembly Type-4 Window Assembly Type-5 Window Assembly Type-6 Window Assembly Type-7 Window Assembly Type-8 Window Assembly

,
I

I
i I

I
0.747
I

; Sally Horsfall : Eaton Centre (SHE)

I
I

0.747 I 3.293
I

I
I

I
I

I

Interior Des!gn (SID)

I

I

0.747 ' 0.747 0.747 0.747 i

I I

I
3.293

!
I

Student Campus Centre (SCC)

J
I I

0.751 ; 0.751 : 0.751 : 0.7471 0.7471 0.747 · 0.747 0.751

125

Appendix B: Building Envelop Data of Ryerson University (Source: Campus Planning, RU) Overall Uvalue W/m 2/K 0.285 0.695 0.233 0.215 0.235 0.203 0.388 3.301 3.275 3.321 3.278 1.703 0.253 0.233 0.27 0.285 0.379 3.301 3.299 3.321 3.329 1.703 0.319 3.185 3.339 1.703 Shade Coefficient Glass Shade Coefficient

Building Name Rogers Business Building (RBB)

Item North Wall Assembly South Wall Assembly East Wall Assembly West Wall Assembly Type-1 Roof Assembly Type-2 Roof Assembly Type-3 Roof Assembly Type-A Window Assembly Type-B Window Assembly Type-C Window Assembly Type-D Window Assembly Door Assembly North Wall Assembly South Wall Assembly East Wall Assembly West Wall Assembly Roof Assembly Type-l Window Assembly Type-2 Window Assembly Type-3 Window Assembly Type-4 Window Assembly Door Assembly Wall Assembly Type-l Window Assembly Type-2 Window Assembly Door Assembly

0.751 0.751 0.751 0.751

1.703

Heidelberg CentreSchool of Graphic Communications Management (HEI)

I

0.751 0.751 0.751 0.751 3.293

Pitman Hall (PIT)

0.641 0.811 3.293

126

Appendix B: Building Envelop Data of Ryerson University (Source: Campus Planning, RU)
i

Building Name Rogers I Communication Centre (RCC) I

Item North Wall Assembly South Wall Assembly East Wall Assembly West Wall Assembly Roof Assembly Type-A Window Assembly Type-B Window Assembly Door Assembly Wall Assembly . Roof Assembly Type-l Window Assembly Type-2 Window Assembly Type-3 Window Assembly Type-4 Window Assembly Type-5 Window Assembly Door Assembly Wall Assembly Roof Assembly Type-l Window Assembly Type-2 Window Assembly Type-3 Window Assembly Type-4 Window Assembly Door Assembly Wall Assembly Roof Assembly Type-l Window Assembly Type-2 Window Assembly Type-3 Window Assembly Type-4 Window Assembly Door Assembly Wall Assembly Roof Assembly Type-l Window Assembly Type-2 Window Assembly Type-3 Window Assembly Type-4 Window Assembly Door Assembly

Overall V-value Shade 2 Coefficien t (W/m /K) 0.203 0.244 0.348 0.2 0.497 3.662 0.74 0.74 3.635 . 1.703 0.32 0.317 3.14 3.645 2.782 3.623 2.816 1.703 0.361 0.305 3.686 3.18 3.659 3.611 1.703 0.186 0.317 2.646 2.657 2.709 2.629 1.703 0.351 0.317 3.611 3.641 3.625 3.617 1.703

Glass Shade Coefficient

I

3.293

Kerr Hall (KNE)

0.628 0.747 0.696 0.747 0.71

i

i
!

3.293
I

Kerr Hall (KNW)

0.792 0.833 0.747 0.747 6.416 .

Kerr Hall (KSE)

!
I

0.82 0.641 0.641 0.641 6.416

I I

I I

I

Kerr Hall (KSW)
I

0.747 0.747 0.747

I
6.4161

127

Appendix C: Hydro Bill Fiscal Year 2005 of Ryerson University (Source: Campus Planning, RU)

Hydro Kwh Report Fiscal Year 2005
8\J1Ul1NG
.;1 ' -

Total Of KWH
115.9H IH.::'S}
1-16. 7IlI
\o1~'40

May

Jun
S.4ZO
U.IlM

Jut
12.1'J()
ItlM

Nov
9.6(0
7..21\(1

.laD

Feb
17.0()(J

101 Gl:litMRD ST.

7.200

9),00
U~

11.I.~IO

?I20
16.680

1.630

7.:!OO
II.IIJO

"

IIIIlOl'iD ST.
1121l0~OSI.

14.1'»
'.081}

7.1160

6.900

8.220
22,5(iO

13.060
6.95Q

.. ,. IIH."RIIIIIID ST.

IM28
4.44(1
].120
4::'8l~1

1_'1(,(1
1340

1..100

1.760

34.3110
1.2.. "0
),MI)

I>PO

11/,50
UIIO
~.l2O

8.400
12,360
·U·IO

U2U

'.410
J.640
6(11.161

U78ONIl!>f.
1110 lIt.Jl1.J....L ST.

Sl,lllO

l.bXO
!l24!r.7
114

:uoo
~..w)

1._
'19.112
11lI 142,200
J~J54

',160

1l.'1llI
9, __

IMIIO
'.2611

to.ZOO
4.QI

5.500.402 ")2.W
l.llO
2.128.670 .... n.071
11)(1

426_'144

m.m
M
44.11110

>I ".3901
2&2

3&6.617
2M
Zl7.::lIO

43j.l43
124

420."9
180
1~1,9'IQ

17 {]OlJLO 51.
: 2-10 HkVIS SL
20 cm:RCH ST.

l.th

hID

140
llJl.OOO 4OL2f,O
2~f>4.4

'hi
1~~21)

Jl.)S,tIlO
J9~.%1

141.120
3'1'9.881

I?I!._ J1!l.538

1£400
365.224

316, l6IJ
}44.~

1112,1(1)

381.486 317.247
}J.4~

}"J.301
311).337 37.600
)OJIIlO

H$.I11)4

38't.49tI
346..WJ

311."1

., 13' ,'lCl'ORIII SI,,*100 ,'I(T()RIJ\ St. ".'
.'~::
}(J2CHI~OI

3.&I"H2

292.'109
29.460

277.tlbl
1$.600

2$2126
25.~

261.'107
25,120

JUS.VlI
Z~.21J()

J40.I:H

In.,n5
J6.IW
31.410

Jf,(,.",'"
J.M5U
~U'12

nn(l
1$.600

H.2(l(l 29.7110
1t..IIIJO

31,\l.W 21.500

ST.

21.223
M.ISl

:!I..SOO
61,290
+1.000 4Y1.KIIa

25.1.01)
".200
~.OOO 4%..l~ 1.~.]61

25.600 t:!..OO S1.ooo
4<11.(110

33.m
~2.1IOO

J'.!I20

l"'-3CHllkLll Sl.

PonG
4-1.000
~.D80

92,400
JZ.OOO H2.61>&

7"'400
3:!.&OO W.\I9>.I
1.(I~.'lf"

,.tOO
30.400
4~1,7j)

:ro,lilO
27.200
!II17.9(~

93..400
RIJ(IO

· ". 141 CHURCH ST.

4~H.oo

:H.100
.uU'I7

H.200
~1l.6)1

:H..JOO
j()l.1!l1.J

]61 \'ICTOIUA ST.
~;. \' llKl "k:IlJRJII ST..- .

'.911l.fflt.

:lD-I.on
I.I44.2t4
III,laO

16.m..U61.29U22 1.8'1>1.198
l',1.lOO
Vg.200 I.MO,9:i7 J.SI3.0NI

2.0:1.1.6)1
24.'IW
200.000 12!l.n20 274.667

1.'1{18.-IO] 1.l(.(J.I{l] J.WH22
2&.560
192.000

1.06'.MP 1,IIH.l1I
17.4441 l!II.l6I1

1,101.103

IDf't' 44 Gf.RJWU) ST;;:f~.

Ui4t1
:!I:14.200 12'U\l7
Jtt2.17~

21l.l211
192.000

25,120
1'2.000
'2!l,I~

1.1.3H1
193.600 1411.257
)IM~

n~hD

1I>,4l1D 19(1.400
1.1O,4'J'1 33O.'l1'1

11.1411
1%.100

f'"'.~ 5!.IGOn.DST....~
~
,,'~

2UJ.200

161',400
151.950
';~.ln

llI9.1iOO 117,9'17 )S.910

248.000
1:It1.1142

"<JOLLO SI.
IIH;tlUtIlRDST.

129.170
~I.IOS

HU.n
291.430

141,-4119

ISI.Un
J~3.zS)

1111-11)

)46.",1

J.46.7H
l.m.~*

~,lIO.ln 3,~ OIl.JOll 4,Mt.M6' U\ll.61\

4.1016.S81 3.9II!!,lS4 ),191,002' ~nl UU,114 l.13O,m

1..943.iIl4

128

Appendix C: Hydro Bill Fiscal Year 2006 of Ryerson University (Source: Campus Planning, RU)

Hydro Kwh Report Fiscal Year 2006
BUILDING
I()!I OI)NO !;T.
III 80ND ST, III GLRRARIJ !'T.

Total 01 KWH

May

./un
·

Jo.j

Aa.v
·

,_ ···'0 . . . . ' · · "'\.-....,-

5""

Oct

New
6S,160 14.SZ»
ItUlO

Feb

Mar
11,000
1l,lll\O

142.920

2J.lItU
1t.,6ICO

12.960
X)20

14.41'"

B4,71l.l
1!I6.m
113.420
'.391.903 2.105 2,023,47.

9.360

11.160 14.440

14.100

a.4~

lI,m
II. 7.!IJ

17,11>0
8.JlO
43'.191 116
IOl,lllO

14.000
4.980

12.800
12,410

14.010

12.000
21.1110
429....10

1,920
14.~

Il.ll>O
12,900 44l,814

IllOoNt) ST. 160 Ml'n':AL ST.
17 GQlq"D ST.
240 JARVIS "',.,

5,.11111

7.320
363.246

11,'10
420.51\1

461.053 138
134.760

H U96 154 1b8.!I6S
J~l.)41

:501.309

SJU.so
144
1&1.92<J 383.6117

4!16.m
118
I Ut-\OO 39'1.5119

409,j06
1<111
202.100 18S.59'I

400,1121

134
1'lll.l71
36.~.UIS

ISS
167.11>0 117.l1S7

:1m
m.JlJO
J44.£4CS
~1I.9$4

21'6

212

19:'1
36.1I'IIl

19I!.I:?O
).6OJI(J9
~13.fI.1!)

10 CHlIRCH ST.
Z8~

4,401!.548
4.01>7.896 J35.·.1'J!1 435.l!.tO 985.231) 41>.'I.MJ 6,(»4.8""

)91.6116
33'.22$ 29.921 21.200
~9.631)

361.124
1I6..90Z
28.~

381-"71

"ICTORlA sr.

314.239
l.l520

3JQ.72,J

31"-920
24.4110 J9.6lfO 92.400
.',2110

333.86;!
22.0e0
3(.,I('()

324.63.1
28.J1Q 4',120
~411O

m.279
24.640

301-'3'
)1.}60

300 VICTOIUA ST.

19.160 29,160 114.000
4'-200

42.240 47))1(1
91,21K'

1I.680 )1.440
n,IJOO

29,1~

.102 ClIl'R(11 ST.

29,440
85.200

29,121)
93,600

32.320
I>4.SOO

17.4lO
7l,lU()

4U:!O

12' (lIPRal ST.
341 eHlIRel-! ST.

1J.:lOO
lMOO
~21.2t1J

.'.1>00
}1.600

28.<153

44,8\)11 492.01>4

49.fIIM)
~9I.MlH

31.200
~19.J32

2UOO SI5.4I'

43.200

33._
~.m

32.8(10 S6/UU
1.193.336 19.}60 111,200

3M ,'K.T(lR"" ST.
J8()

4'Xl.1I1

510.111

51\.1.111

sn.ou
1.13W7S

J13.I-I¥ 1.JOJ.533
21.440

,'ICTORlA ST~

18.216.049 1.516.126 2.038.412 USJ.61B 2.161.959 2!t.,<ll(! 2.726..400
1.1~.Ol(l
4.0~1.~

1.888.991 l.301.121

1.261.453 1.IJj9.1Jf
2....91>0

l.llIl3.22·' 11.m
222.400

44

GERRARD ST.

13,760

20.%11
220.800

~-IOO

24.160

21>.!160
244.800

ru-w
216.000 m.lIl!! 347,"4

14.....10
163.200

l.l..J4O
2'17.<011(1

SQ OOUlD ST.
"'o()lll.l) ST.

ltMOO UO.lJ'
34J.36~

22'.600
120.34'

217._ 111.119
2'I~.69S

140.(01) ISI).I62 337,210

252.111)11
144.109

I2HilO

I2I.S"H> 31)3,012
'.·".1

145.1!61
3)6,~

1"'.31'!o,S33

I!1'1JU7
l'~,U4

1"'.491 369.8J4

&1 GERRARD ST.

324.124

31'.!I63

351\.21611
~,.

SI,m.$.56 ",lJ.t;4In4.1lO,I1l ',011,661' ".91.).904:::4,73&,609 ...045.12$' .;11'0,139 1.511,5'-", 4.zJO.1l:l(i:~.I5O.7U
.....

4,3\4.,.."110

".":.~.;.'

, ... "

'.~>~.",,-~, · · ' , ;

,~,'"

;',,~._=c;;:::..:::;.,;.~

"''''.u,"

·· _ ' . " _ , , .. _~_

129

Appendix C: Hydro Bill Fiscal Year 2007 of Ryerson University (Source: Campus Planning, RU)

Hydro Kwh Report Fiscal Year 2007
8U1lD1NG
101 GUR'RI)!lT.
TOIaIOfKWH

IIIay
~360

Jun
7,IJIIO
9.J~

Jul

Oct
10.3:0 16.&00 U.lOO 6..000 204,0110 1.3611

IOI,.'!)

6.7211
lAW

6.000
2.700
6.'100

11.280
NlOtl
I.-Ill\l

9.120
36.~)(J

II.~

1I.1m

<I.lI39

I.!J.IO
S5.20l

lOS IlOM' ~r. 1I11l0M)Sl.

(,m;nn
114, 'llI3
1lU.~ 114,~ ~.~J7,6:W1
1.<N:!,7~7

12.41111

JUlIO
1f,.6l!O

11._
1,220

101.138

'I,J6II
100JJl.1

B.OM

17.160
IO.~

II.GeO
IJIf(I

IHI60
8.!>CO

IUJO
9.SW

III (lEllll'\llD ST.

11.180
6,J.l<I
.&69.7'01

12.l40

1I,j20

10.640

9.600

..!>CO

··.tOO

m IIOl'iIHT.
lliOMI:n: .... L ST.

6.J.l<I
4~.H7

61113
'14.4II'f

'-"61
'26.(126

6.\173
~~.1'9

14.1)71)
~2.4)1

1Il.l48
4l4.4J'

lUll
J.I'.6b'

II JI62

l2.li33
.11.101>

10.9.:17
4J15U

&.100
4J95111 29£»0
)40,(,.;111

·m,:171
IIIVJNlO

140 JAR ..' IS ST.
143 CHURCH ST.

ItUOO J.lO.16

93,1>00
)2II,'~1

9l.l1W
~\.I1.l)()11

151.92(1 334,113

14M'}?
J.lK.2IM

.11.800
J1··~1
314,81)1

IJS_-\OO
344.219

1'I4·.tOO
J(W.WlI

:rouoo
)JUIII

11>.'.600
Jb',OW

~.III.:lIIl

In''7
m,2lI1
)0.411(1
7II.IWIO

28' VICTORIA ST.
.lO2 mURal ST.
32$ C/llIRal Sl.

L"'».6'2
J73.7~

JOO,OH
)S.ilIII1

r,4.111
111,&00
b7~

217,~?

l11,JOO
)1,610

183.11.'1.1
17~ SS.~.J

311.lfll
H.!tlIU

167,'86
19.160
111#10
)2,*_1

J 1&. 1!\4
29._
M.lIOO

;\01'.846

JIJ.19J
J2.9(,O

:U,lMO 61,1ll0

)41.401)

).1.7'1.200

'I7l.0I1O
~Rt.l1O

1',(0(1(1 4O,lIOO

93,400
~).aoo

....-IlJO
;\.I,llIJI)

M,I··} J:l.41l(l
:w.1.~"

l'I.200
J/>,400
34J)O'I

3-41 mURen sr.

42,.1110
1~),l91

311.2110
J~4,1~

39,2110
J'~."'18

",2111
)~I.III'"

J/>,.tOO l!IL,lI1'l
I.I~.-ISI

lUOO J67::IZ9
1)6$,'1(1:1

361 VICTORIA ST. 380VICTOIUA sr.
.l<I (,(It 11.D ST
~3

~_1S4.J72

4Y9.1U1

341),.10)

J,MUi\
'.~H

'16.;165

20.199.668 J.'1lI.&7S
2,77'.141

1.24M~

1,1SS,llll :'U to,T! 1 2.1l2,)119
IIISJ!OO 109.211

1.36U7() I,m,oss 1.2S'\'1QU
249.600
219,'41 196.203
1~~.910

1.413.609 ll4.800
341.910

2n,300

204,aoo

2'2,-400

217.600
}J · .I~

2J8Aoo
3R~

21).600
)~J.61'O

204,800

251>#10

DlJNO.... $ ST.
(;(}()l.U sr.

4,ool.'I1ll 1.732.166 3.61.I'J,473

l!IL,122
B4.~

lBl,7·n 126.33' !B6.S14

114.001 IlU16 2ll-4.H7

34J.145
1!>!.Ill>}
J04.71)2

34M(1O 14!.727
~.l6I

l72.on 142.620

"

tJ6.602 302,().18

141.112

IU.121

1b9.439

UUl" 113.210
·4,1.... 793

117 GUUVJlD sr.

",,~~I:1!li;.

311,088

4.1'111Z12 (.943.201

~.2:09.6'i6· ~.nl.9o;7

193.3Jl

JIO,I97

193.941

Jlo.lOZ

3::U11! U92..141

un,roo OK2.3U l)JOl.2f;1 UIUJ.4 4.l!47.3'18

130

-------------------------------------

Appendix C: Hydro Bill Fiscal Year 2008 of Ryerson University (Source: Campus Planning, RU)

Hydro Kwh Report Fiscal Year 2008
BlIIlDING
IMUONDSI.

Total Of KWH
516,''''2

May
69,92(1

Jun
7(),666

Jill

Aug

Sep
6'1,9:10

Oct
~&.116

Nov
jJ,LH

Dec:
S2,.U1
J~·.B2

....,
411.1111)

Feb

Mar

Apr

13.m
'.lO.I>4J

"".m
'11.22R 110,100
J42.11'M
2'2,{t4~

160 MlInlAi. ST. 240 JARVIS Sr.
243 CHIIR(,H ST. 281 Vl(TORIA ST.

J,IlI11.0n

471.016
77,509
3)9,11411
334,~111

'51._
1~),9IJO

4Jl..llt.

402.131

1.2:14.169
3,(l9ij.6~

111'1,020
;4~.)'12

lib. 100

IJIl(JOO
3~'.")J
2$3.':'(;0

210.6110

;:'1.1./1)
l}Q,N1I>

)(,0.0:14

310.716 2110.21)

3{l1.m
255,IY.!I
",11!0

2,'13.006 316.950
IUMB
692.%11 S2.2(10 24,(>(10 69.600

299.'23
~8.400

llW.284
11.600

253.000
1llI.7:50

~

JOO VllTtllUA SI'.

'U'3
I7~H1

J21 CIiI'RCH ST.
341 (,HI!RCIfSL 3jl '!'IIN!'};

74.400

81.~

1&.!llIl

13.200

S2.2OO

sr,

24.000 321.783 30,063 3:50.391
.\66.309

301 "lnORIA ST.

3.160.978 332.144

311.1.41S 23a,.100
J6IlS1~

377,J.30

:m.ls.1
:m.KIlO
324.913

3'2.65'
1.~J.1II.~

3!1O VII TORLA ST.
:50 (11 )utl) ST.

1553Ui6 l.m.498 %.103.791

2.313.0%7 2.214.01' 2.1>37.04'
2.111.400
:m.#~

'.m.OJ4 1331.002 1.2.10,423
230,tn1

U44.lU
3.100.2~5

20.200 339.375

222,400

23S.200
J2UJ7
121.4n
216.500

212.266 lB.191

;I02,U9

" I1UNIlAS ST. ~$ (;01)1,0 ST, 81 GERJWID ST.

328,(112

3j8.%75 145.1170
J)~7

J61.tf12
15C\...'>1t.
4l>J.:!S7

1.z25.M7
2.&:50.263

m.112
239.198

124.081

121.121
2&3.358

133.113
293.439
, .!,.·· ,~.

145.932
l~.r.9

'''1),1171 306.658

.. 40.08(,237 3:664,11. .,691,471 S.2'6,62J

273.710

099.391

4,94UH 4,301,3 Hi 4,1W56 3.917.606 <f.267.m

131

Appendix C: Hydro Bill Year 2006 (Jan-Dec) of Ryerson University (Source: Campus Planning, RU)

Building
Name

Year-2006 January (kWh)

Year-2006 February (kWh)

Year-2006 March (kWh)

Year-2006= Year-2006 April May (kWh) (kWh)

Year-2006 June (kWh)

VIC,IMA,CED Kerr Hall · ENG · TAn nAD ,LIB EPH,SHE SID SCC,HEI,OAK PIT,RCC

340134 670203 344,894 1067640 333247 29760 151950 415394
Year-2006 July (kWh)

307808 667353 335,804 1033111 335910 35200 137997 386617
Year-2006 August (kWh)

346093 704705 389,498 1161103 353253 28800 151436 435143
Year-2006 September (kWh)

335225 752033 381,n71 1144284 346734 37440 136842 420579
Year-2006 October (kWh)

i

335225 713518 391,686 1576726 343365 27200 130739 435797
Year-2006 November (kWh)

316902 712864 361,124 2038412 324324 29440 125610 467053
Year-2006 December (kWh)

Building
Name

~HEI,OAK
PIT,RCC

VIC,IMA,CED Kerr Hall ENG JOR,POD,L EPH,SHE SID

314239 717401 395,347 2253638 317563 29120 120345 531296

330723 728418 365,015 2161959 295695 29760 118719 507309

314920 748578 383,607 1888991 303012 39680 128576 531540

333862 737203 399,589 1307321 347744 36160 151915 456982

324632 759332 385,599 1268453 337210 45120 150162 409506

293279 678618 317,857 1059331 336505 32320 145861 363246

I

Building
Name

Year-2006 Total (January-December) (kWh)

VIC,IMA,CED Kerr Hall JOR,POD,LIB EPH,SHE SID SCC,HEI,OAK PIT,RCC

3,893,040 8,590,220 4,451,690 17,960,970 3,974,560 400,000 1,650,152 5,360,462

132

--------------------------------

~

Appendix C: Steam Consumption of Ryerson University for Meter-l (Source: Campus Planning, RU)

Meter·1 Fiscal Year·2005 Steam Consumption (Ib) JMay-April) 7,647,218 May. 2005 2,617,669 June 2005 July 2005 1,694,000 August 2005 1,854,757 1,892,409 Sept 2005 6,084,417 Oct 2005 10,741 258 Nov 2005

I

I

I

Dec 2005 Jan 2006 Feb 2006 March 2006 April 2006 Total

13,600,716 17,905,233 17,267,436 15,882,044 10,224,038 107,411,195

I

Meter-1 Steam Consumption I Fiscal Year-2006 i jMay-April) (Ib) 7,651,590 May. 2006 June 2006 2,719,484 July. 2006 2,532,838 August 2006 1,554,106 Sept 2006 2,997,085 Oct 2006 6,567,065 I Nov 2006 10,503,550 Dec 2006 10,127,434 I Jan 2007 16,884,195 15,851,593 Feb 2007 9,161,666 March 2007 April 2007 10,763171 Total 97,313,777

I

Meter·1 Fiscal Year-2007 Steam Consumption jMay-April) jib) May 2007 3,566,440 June 2007 2,801,018 July. 2007 2,411,719 August 2007 2,224,515 Sept 2007 2,401,000 Oct 2007 3,786,249 Nov 2007 4,793,000 Dec 2007 15,781,554 Jan 2008 17,619,732 Feb 2008 16400,608 March 2008 16,025,397 April 2008 8,043,753 Total 95,854,985

I

J

Year-2006 (Jan-Dec) Jan 2006 Feb 2006 March 2006 April 2006 May 2006 June 2006 July. 2006 August 2006 Sept 2006 Oct 2006 Nov 2006 Dec 2006 Total

Meter-1 Steam Consumption (Ib) 17,905,233 17,267,436 15,882,044 10,224,038 7651,590 2,719,484 2,532,838 1,554,106 2,997,085 6,567,065 10,503,550 10127,434 105,931,903

I

I

133

Appendix C: Steam Consumption of Ryerson University for Meter-2 (Source: Campus Planning, RU)

I

Meter-2 Fiscal Year-2006 Steam Consumption (May-April) (Ib) May. 2006 June 2006 July. 2006 August 2006 Sept 2006 248,579 495,774 Oct 2006 Nov 2006 585,672 Dec 2006 663,546 Jan 2007 950,792 Feb 2007 1,200,570 March 2007 641,073 April 2007 432,941 Total 5,218,947

-

Meter-2 Steam Consumption Fiscal Year-2007 (May-April) (Ib) May_ 2007 339,213 June 2007 186,729 153,305 · July. 2007 r---149,093 August 2007 ! Sept 2007 210,743 i 300,677 Oct 2007 540,814 Nov 2007 698,698 Dec 2007 746,711 Jan 2008 764,775 Feb 2008 738,444 March 2008 432,941 April 2008 Total 5,262,143

~

Meter-2 Fiscal Year-2008 Steam Consumption (May-April) (I b) ... 347,690 MCl y.2008 218,324 June 2008 July 2008 194,155 August 2008 204,522 Sept 2008 241,088 433,659 Oct 2008 573,457 Nov 2008 670,796 Dec 2008 838,608 Jan 2009 Feb 2009 March 2009 April 2009 3,722,299 Total

i

Year-2007 (Jan-Dec) Jan 2007 Feb 2007 March 2007 April 2007 May. 2007 June 2007 July_ 2007 August 2007 Sept 2007 Oct 2007 Nov 2007 Dec 2007 Total

Meter-2 Steam Consumption (Ib) 950,792 1,200,570 641,073 432,941 339,213 186,729 153,305 149,093 210,743 300,677 540,814 698,698 5,804,648

134

Appendix D: Calculation for Electricity Consumption for Chiller and DLWC System

Data Analysis and Calculation of chilled water for DLWC system:
From the spreadsheet (Comparison) 1. Column A: Represent Month/Day. 2. Column B: Represent Hour. 3. Column C: Represent total electric consumption for chiller (from chiller electricity consumption Excel sheet): Total Electric Consumption for Chiller Tower Fan]

[Chiller input (for compressor) + Pump + Cooling

In this case, C02 gas emission can be calculated from required amount of electricity generated
for the system running central chiller plant or DL WC system. All data was taken from HAP simulation for chiller.

4. Column D: Represent total electric consumption (kWh) for Enwave DLWC system. This calculation was done by the equation (DLWC electricity consumption Excel sheet):

The total electricity consumption for DL WC system

(Electricity consumption for remote

chilled water serves from source to Ryerson University building ground level)
Electricity consumption for remote chilled water serves from Enwave to Ryerson University (RU) building: a) According to EnWave information: Overall plant efficiency is between 0.2 kWffon and 0.3 kWffon Assumptions:
};>

The rate of refrigerating system is Power (kW) requirements per Ton of refrigeration.

135

Appendix D: Calculation for Electricity Consumption for Chiller and DLWC System

Make linear equation in tenns of outdoor air temperature with those values for calculate Power requirements in order to remote chilled water serves from Enwave to RU building ground level. );- Assumption at the lowest outdoor temperature the Enwave overall plant efficiency is 0.2 kW/Ton and at the highest outdoor temperature the Enwave overall plant efficiency is 0.3 kWlTon. b) From Carrier HAP Weather Data information: );- From Carrier HAP weather data infonnation, the lowest outdoor temperature in May is 1 1. 2°C and highest in August is 32.3°C for DLWC System. i) Linear Interpolation

The linear equation for 0.2 k\Vffon with outdoor lowest temperature 11.2°C and 0.3 kWffon with outdoor highest temperature 323°C is
y

= mx + c

is satisfied by (11.2, 0.2) and (32.3, 0.3),

So the solution is

x 31 Y = 211 + 211
where, x outdoor temperature, °C and y = kWh/Ton

ii)

Conversion kWffon to kWh/kWh

kW kW kWh . =--- = , where 1 kW=0.2843 Ton Ton 3.S2kW 3.52kWh

So, Electricity consumption for Remote Chilled Water serves from Enwave to RU building ground level = (Remote Chilled Water Load) X

kWh ) 3.S2kWh

136

Appendix D: Calculation for Electricity Consumption for Chiller and DLWC System

5. Column E, F, G: Represent hourly GHGs Emission Factor kg/kWh Conversion:
This unit converted from Ton/GWh to kg/kWh.
--=

Ton GWh

lOOOkg =--=-lOOOOOOkWh lOOOHf71

6. Column H, J, L: Represent C02, SOx and NOx emission for chiller CO 2 emission for chiller = (C0 2Emission Factor kg/kW) X (Total Electric Consumption for Chiller)
Same as follow for SOx and NOx

7. Column I, K, M: Represent CO2 , SOx and NOx emission reduction for DL WC C02 Emission for Enwave = (C0 2Emission Factor kg/k\V) X (Total Electric Consumption for Enwave)

8. Column Q, R, S, T: Represent comparison result for total electricity cost (Dollars):

137

Appendix E: Chilled Water Cost Calculation for Base Case Chillers

Library Chiller Plant Model for 13 Ryerson Building
I

Chilled output for 13 buildings (kWh)= Chilled water load for 13 buildings (kBTU)= I Steam consumption for chiller (kWh)= Steam consumption for chiller (kBTU)=
i i

13231280

45145127 5814941 19840579
496014 (kWh)

i

Steam cost $ (0.025 $lJb)=

Electricity Consumption i Chiller Input, Electricity (kWh)= Misc. Electric (kWh)= Chilled Water pump (kWh)= . Cooling Tower Fan (kWh)=
!

1229193 394722 962927 664352
Total (kWh)= 3251194 325119

Electricity cost ($) @ $O.lIkWh= Chilled water cost . Cooling cost ($)= Misc. Electric ($)= Primary Chilled Water pump ($)=
i

Condenser Pump ($)= , Cooling Tower Fan ($)=
!

658,426 39472.2 22964.5 63386.8 66435.2 ·
850,685

Total cost ($)= I Chiller Output, Chilled water (kBTU)= Chilled water cost ($lTon-hr)

45145127
0.23
i

138

Appendix E: Steam Demand Calculation for Base Case (Meter-I)

Name of Ryerson Buildings

!
1 School of Image Art(IMA) 2 Heaslip House Continuing Education (CED)
I

I Gross Area (m 2)

,
I I

9345 4180 52409 22350 10964 18487 21730 13942 7077 4180 4373 12708 2985 13100 2843 6494 7239 2033 2860 3828 223127
I
I

3 Kerr Hall (KNE, KNW, KSE, KSW) 4 Engineering Building (ENG) 5 Jorgenson Hall (JOR) 6 Library Building (LIB) 7 Podium Building (POD)

I
I
I

I
!

8 Eric Palin Hall (EPH) 9 Sally Horsfall Eaton Centre for Studies in
community Health (SHE) 10 Student Campus Centre (SCC)

11 School of Interior Design (SID) 12 Victoria Building (VIC) 13 Heidelberg Centre-School of Graphic 14 Rogers Communications Center (RCC)
I

I

'

.

15 MON_Civil Engineering Building 16 South Bond Building (SBB) 17 Architecture Building (ARC) 18 Oakham House (OAK) 19 Research and Graduate Studies (GER) 20 Pitman Hall Residence (PIT)

J
:
I
I

I

I

Total area serves for "Meter-l

139

Appendix E: Steam Demand Calculation for Base Case (Meter-I)

Audit Area Serves for Meter-l

Sl. No.
I

Name of Ryerson Buildings

Area
(mz)

i
I

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
11

School ofImage Art (IMA) Heaslip House Continuing Education (CED) · Kerr Hall (KNE, KNW, KSE, KSW) Engineering Building (ENG) Jorgenson Hall (JOR) Library Building (LIB) Podium (POD) Eric Palin Hall (EPH) Sally Horsfall Eaton Centre for Studies in communi tv Health (SHE) Student Campus Centre (SCC) School of Interior Design (SID) Victoria Building (VIC) Heidelberg Centre-School of Graphic Rogers Communications Center (RCC) Pitman Hall Residence (PIT) Total audit area for Meter-l

I

9345 4180 52409 22350 10964 18487 21730 13942 7077 4180 4373 12708 2985 13100 3828 201658 90.30%

I
!

12 13 14 15

Total Steam demand for 15 buildings in Meter-l

140

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - CEO_Building (Flat Rate)
01_CED_Ryerson University

04/10/2010

Air System Fans 8.7%

17.3% Mise, Electric

Cooling 2.1% Electric Equipment

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total Annual Cost ($/m2) Percent ofTotal I

7,062 13,416 15,681 852 0 37,011 20,045 9,795 14,014 0 43,854 80,865
!

3.068 5.828 6.812 0.370 0.000 16.078 8.708 4.255 6.088 0.000 19.050 35.128

8.7 16.6 19.4 1.1 0.0 45.8 24.8 12.1 17.3 0.0 54.2 100.0

I
I

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area.
Gress Floor Area .................... "."" ........................................................... 2302.0 m2 Conditioned Floor Area ............ ,., ........................... " ... ,............... ,............ 2302,0 m 2

Hourly Analysis Program vA,3

141

AppendixF: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson Uni versity Buildi ng
Annual Component Costs - CEO_Building (Flat Rate)
01_CE D_Ryerson University
04/10/20 10

Air System Fans 8.7%

17.3% Misc. Electric

Cooli ng 1 2.1 % Electric Equipment

Heating 1 Pumps 1.1%

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total Annual Cost 7,062 13,4'16 15,681 852 0 37,011 20,045 9,795 14,014 0 43,854 80,865
($/m2)

Percent of Total 8.7 16.6 19.4 1.1 0.0 45.8 24.8 12.1 17 .3 0.0 54.2 100.0

3.068 5.828 6.812 0.370 0.000 16.078 8.708 4.255 6.088 0.000 19.050 35.128

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area ......... . ...... .... .. .... ....... ... ... .... 2302.0 m2 Conditioned Floor Area ........... ........... .................. .. ... .. ... ... ... ......... ... ... .. ... 2302 .0 m 2

Hourly Analysis Program vA.3

141

..

E77'Uif

I

..

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - IMA_Building (Flat Rate)
02_IMA_Ryerson University 04/10/2010

Air System Fans 11.6%

3.6% Misc. Electric

I

16.0% Electric Equipment

Cooling 1

9% Lights

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub·Total lights :Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total Annual Cost 29,211 38,988 71,064 834 0 140,097 62,926 40,484 8,969 0 112,379 252,476 ($/m2) 4.046 5.401 9.844 0.116 0.000 19.407 8.717 5.608 1.242. 0.000 15.567 34.974 Percent of Total 11.6' 15.4 28.1 0.3 0.0: 55.5! 24.9 16.0 3.6,

O.Oj
44.5 100.0

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area ........................................ 7219.0
m~

Conditioned Floor Area ............................... 7219.0 m'

Hourly Analysis Program v.4.3

142

..

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - IMA_Building (Flat Rate)
02_IMA_Ryerson University
04/10/2010

Air System Fans 11.6%

3.6% Misc. Electric 16.0% Electric Equipment

Cooling 1" ... -,......~

Lights

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Tota l Grand Total Annual Cost 29,211 38,988 71 ,064 834
(51m2)

Percent of Total 11.6
15A

4.046
5A01

9.844 0.116 0.000 19.407 8.7 17 5.608 1.242 0.000 15.567 34.974

28.1 0.3 00 55.5 24 .9 16.0 3.6 0.0 44.5 100.0

a
140,097 62 ,926 40,484 8,969 0 112,379 252,476

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area Conditioned Floor Area .. 7219.0 m2 ... 7219.0 m 2

Hourly Analys is Program vA .3

142

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - VIC_Building (Flat Rate)
03_VIC_Ryerson University
04/10/2010

I

I I I
Air System Fans 3.1% Cooling 17.4% 3.1% Misc. Electric 20.7% Electric Equipment

Heating 19

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling ·Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub·Total
!

Annual Cost 9,078 51,090 56,663 6,106 0 122,938 100,320 60,536 9,209 0 170,064 293,002

($/m2) 0.928 5.220 5.789 0.624 0.000 12.560 10.249 6.185 0.941 0.000 17.375 29.935

Percent of Total' 3.1 i 17.41 19.3 2.1 0.0 42.0 34.2 20.71 3.1 0.0 58.0 100.0

1

Lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric

1 Misc. Fuel Use Non·HVAC Sub·Total Grand Total

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area ........................................ 9788.0 m2 Conditioned Floor Area ............................... 9788.0 m2 Hourly Analysis Program vA.3

143

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - VIC_Building (Flat Rate)
03 VIC Ryerson University
04/10/2010

Air System Fans 3. Cooling 17.4% 20.7% Electric Equipment

Heating 19.

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment Misc, Electric Misc, Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total Annual Cost 9,078 51 ,090 56 ,663 6,106 ($/m2) 0,928 5220 5,789 0,624 0,000 12.560 10,249 6,185 0,941 0,000 17.375 29.935 Percent of Total 3,1 17 ,4 19,3 2,1 0,0 42.0 34 ,2 20 ,7 3,1 0,0 58.0 100.0

12~.938

°
a

100,320 60,536 9,209

170,064 293,002

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area "" "" """ " Conditioned Floor Area ."" .. Hourly Analysis Program vA,3 ,,9788.0 m2 '" 9788.0 m2

143

I

11:11

".aI

311

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - JOR_Building (Flat Rate)
04/10/2010

Air System Fans 13.2%

10.3% Misc. Electric

5.1% Electric Equipment

Cooling

Heating Pumps 1.30/0

1. Annual Costs
I

Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total

Annual Cost

($/m2)

Percent of Total

I
!

46,998 70,518 34,431 4,795 0 156,743 109,387 53,653 36,655 0 199,695 356,437

5.755 8.635 4.216 0.587 0.000 19.194 13.395 6.570 4.489 0.000 24.454 43.647

13.2 19.8 9.7 1.3 0.0 44.0 30.7 15.1 10.3 0.0 56.0 100.0

i

lights Electric Equipment

I
i

Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total

I

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area ...................................................................................... 8166.3 mZ Conditioned Floor Area ............................................................................ 8166.3 mZ

Hourly Analysis Program v.4.3

144

Appendix F : Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - JOR_Building (Flat Rate)
04_JOR_(Jorgenson HaliLRU
04/10/2010

Air System Fans 13.2%

10.3% Misc. Electric

5.1% Electric Equipment

Cooling 1

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total Annual Cost 46.998 70.518 34.431 4,795 0 156,743 109,387 53,653 36,655 0 199,695 356,437
($/m2)

Percent of Total 13.2 19.8 9.7 1.3 0.0 44.0 30.7 15.1 10.3 0.0 56.0 100.0

5.755 8.635 4.216 0.587 0.000 19.194 13.395 6.570

4A89
0.000 24.454 43.647

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area ................... ..... ... .... .... ... ...... .... .. ...... .......... ......... ........... 8166.3 m2 Conditioned Floor Area ........ .... ........... .... ........ .... ............ .... ....... ... ........... 8166.3 m2

Hourly Analysis Program vA .3

144

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - LIB_Building (Flat Rate)
05_ LlB(Library BuildingLRU
04/10/2010

.

Air System Fans 5.5%

10.3% Misc. Electric

Heating Pumps v.

"'4'o/;:-==-:jJ. . . . . ..;.;......:...:::

1}---32.4% Electric Equipment

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment MIsc. Electric : Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total Annual Cost ($/m2) Percent of Totall

j'

.
!

44,102 112,983 19,851 3,474 0 180,410 277,778 259,227 82,581 0 619,585 799,994

2.859 7.324 1.287 0.225 0.000 11.695 18.006 16.804 5.353 0.000 40.163 51.858

5.5 14.1 : 2.51 0.4
1

0.0 22.6 34.7 32.4 10.3

0.0
77.4 100.0

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area ...................................... 15426.6 m2 Conditioned Floor Area ............................. 15426.6 m2 Hourly Analysis Program v.4.3

145

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - LIB_Building (Flat Rate)
05 LlB(Library Building) RU 04/10/2010

Air System Fans 5.5% Cooling 14.1%

10.3% Misc. Electric

Heating Pumps 0 4U~~_""

...----.......4% Electric Equipment

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC SUb-Total Lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC SUb-Total Grand Total Annual Cost 44,102 112,983 19,851 3,474 0 180,410 277 ,778 259,227 82 ,581 0 619,585 799,994 ($/m') 2.859 7.324 1.287 0.225 0.000 11.695 18.006 16.804 5.353 0.000 40.163 51 .858 Percent of Total 5.5 14.1 2.5 0.4 0.0 22.6 34 .7 32.4 10.3 0.0 77.4 100.0

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area ...... ........... .. ..... ..... .... .. " . 15426.6 m' Conditioned Floor Area .... .. " ........ .... " ...... . 15426.6 m'

Hourly Analysis Program v.4.3

145

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - POD_Building (Flat Rate)
06_POD(PodiumLRU
04/10/2010

Air System Fans 6.1%

12.1% Misc. Electric

23.9% Electric Equipment Heating

Lights 33.7%

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling iHeating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans
I

Annual

costl
2,337 0

($/m2)

Percent of Total 6.1 14.8 9.0 0.4 0.0 30.3 33.7 23.9 12.1 0.0 69.7 100.0

2.522 82,277 49,919

6.130
3.720 0.174 0.000 12.546 13.944 9.881 5.016 0.000 28.841 41.387

HVAC Sub-Total Lights

168,385 187,141 132,617 67,317

I

Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total I Grand Total

0
387,076 555,460

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area ...................................... 13421.1 m2 Conditioned Floor Area ............................. 13421.1 m'

Hourly Analysis Program v.4.3

146

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - POD_Building (Flat Rate)
06 POD(Podium) RU
04/10/2010

Air System Fans 6.1%

12.1% Misc. Electric

- -":'> ..::170

Electric Equipment

Heating 9 Pumps

IIU/A- -

Lights 33.7%

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total Annual Cost ($/m2) Percent of Total

33,852 82,277 49,919 2,337 0 168,385 187 ,141 132,617 67,317 0 387,076 555,460

2.522 6.130 3.720 0.174 0.000 12.546 13.944 9.881 5.016 0.000 28.841 41.387

6.1 14 .8 9.0 0.4 0.0 30.3 33.7 23.9 12.1 0.0 69.7 100.0

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area ... ... ..... ... ....... . 13421.1 m2 Conditioned Floor Area .... .. ...................... 13421 .1 m 2

Hourly Analysis Program v.4.3

146

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - ENG_Building (Flat Rate)
07 _ENG(Engineering BuildingLRU
04/10/2010

3.1% Misc. Electric

Cooling 17.4%

Heating

Pumps 1.2%

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling \Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub·Total Lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non·HVAC Sub·Total Grand Total Annual Cost
($/m')

Percent of Total

37,547 123,647 148,101 8,245 0 317,541 188,005 183,846 22,016 0 393,867 711,408

2.135

5.3 17.4 20.8 1.2 0.0 44.61 26.41 25.81 3.1 0.0 55.4 100.0

7~
8.423

o~
0.000 18.059 10.692 10.455 1.252 0.000 22.399 40.458

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area ...................................... 17583.8 m' Conditioned Floor Area ............................. 17583.8 m2 Hourly Analysis Program v.4.3

147

<

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - ENG_Building (Flat Rate)
07 _ENG(Engineering BuildingLRU
04/10/2010

Air System Fans 5.3%

3.1% Misc. Electric

Cooling 17.4%

25.8% Electric Equipment

Heating 20.8%

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total Annual Cost 37,547 123,647 148,101 8,245 0 317,541 188,005 183,846 22,016 0 393,867 711,408
($/m2)

Percent of Total 5.3 17.4 20 .8 1.2 0.0 44.6 26.4 25 .8 3.1 0.0 55.4 100.0

2.135 7.032 8.423 0.469 0.000 18.059 10.692 10.455 1.252 0.000 22.399 40.458

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area ... Conditioned Floor Area Hourly Analysis Program v.4 .3 .. .. .... ... .. ... .. .. 17583.8 m2 ...... .... .... ..... 17583.8 m2

147

·

-Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - EPH and SHE_Building (Flat Rate)
08 and 09 EPH and SHE_RU

04/10/2010

Air System Fans 7.6%

3.2% Misc. Electric

I

Heating Pumps 0.8%

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Annual Cost 40,194 96,875 46,725 4,082 0 187,876 205,813 117,211 17,128 0 340,151 528,027

($/m2)
2.319 5.589 2.696 0.236 0.000 10.838 11.873 6.762 0.988 0.000 19.623 30.461

Percent of Total 7.6 18.3 8.8 0.8. 0.0 35.6 39.0 22.2 3.2 0.0 64.4 100.0

ICooling IHeating
Pumps ICooling Tower Fans

I
iLights

HVAC Sub-Total

I ElectriC Equipment

IMisc. Electric

IMisc. Fuel Use
Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area ....................................... 17334.7 m 2 Conditioned Floor Area .............................. 17334.7 m 2 Hourly Analysis Program vA.3

148

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - EPH and SHE_Building (Flat Rate)
04/10/2010

Air System Fans 7.6%

3.2% Misc. Electric 22.2% Electric Equipment

Heating

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total Annual Cost
($/m2)

Percent of Total

40,194 96 ,875 46,725 4,082 0 187,876 205,813 117,211 17,128 0 340,151 528,027

2.319 5.589 2.696 0.236 0.000 10.838 11.873 6.762 0.988 0.000 19.623 30.461

7.6 18.3 8.8 0.8 0.0 35.6 39.0 22 .2 3.2 0.0 64.4 100.0

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. ... ... .... ... .. ..... 17334.7 m2 Gross Floor Area Conditioned Floor Area ..... ... .... .... ..... .. .. ... . 17334.7 m2 Hourly Analysis Program v.4.3

148

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - SID_Building (Flat Rate)
10_SID(lnterior DesignLRU 04/10/2010

5.6% Misc. Electric Air System Fans 11.8% 14.0% Electric Equipment Cooling 2.2%

Heating 16.8%---

Pumps

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating iPumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub·Total Lights , Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non·HVAC Sub·Total Grand Total Annual Cost 5,712 1,060 8,136 199 0 15,106 23,735 6,756 2,687 0 33,178 48,284 ($/m2) 1.978 0.367 2.817 0.069 0.000 5.231 8.219 2.340 0.930 0.000 11.489 16.721 Percent of Total 11.8 2.2 16.8 0.4i 0.01 31.3i 49.2 14.0 5.6 0.0 68.7 100.0

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area .... ................................ .... 2887.7 m2 Conditioned Floor Area ............................... 2887.7 m2 Hourly Analysis Program v.4.3

149

----------------------------------------------------------------~

Appendix F : Aru1Ual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - SID_Building (Flat Rate)
10 SID(lnterior Desig n) RU

04/1 0/2 010

5.6% Misc. Electric Air System Fans 11.8% 14.0% Electric Equipment Cooling 2.2%

Heating 1

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total Annual Cost 5,712 1,060 8,136 199 0 ($/m2) 1.978 0.367 2.817 0.069 0.000 Percent of Total 11 .8 2.2 16.8 0.4 0.0

15,106
23,735 6,756 2,687 0

5.231
8.219 2.340 0.930 0.000

31 .3
49 .2 14 .0 5.6 0.0

33,178 48,284

11.489 16.721

68.7 100.0

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. ..... 2887.7 m2 Gross Floor Area Conditioned Floor Area .. ... ..... ..... .. .... .......... 2887 .7 m2 Hourly Analysis Program v.4.3

149

11_SCC (Student Campus CenterLRU

UTwnn

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - SCC_Building (Flat Rate)
04/10/2010

Air System Fans 10.4% Cooling 2.0%

17.9% Electric Equipment

Heating ?!>,4OI.r--

1. Annual Costs iComponent iAir System Fans Cooling Annual Cost 6,655 1,299 16,246 278 0 24,478 28.145 11,435 0 ($/m2) 2.224 0.434 5.428 0.093 Percent of Total 10.4 2.0 25.4 0.4 0.0 38.2 43.9 17.9 0.0 0.0 61.8 100.0

IHeating IPumps ICOOling Tower Fans
HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment

o.OOOl
8.178 9.403 3.820 0.000 0.000 13.224 21.402

IMisc. Electric
Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total

a
39,580 64, 058 l

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area ........................................ 2993.1 Conditioned Floor Area ............................... 2993.1 m2 m2

Hourly AnalysiS Program v.4.3

150

Appendix F : Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - SCC_Building (Flat Rate)
11 _SCC (Student Campus CenterLRU 04/10/2010

Air System Fans 10.4% Cooling 2.0%

17.9% Electric Equipment

Heating

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total Annual Cost 6,655 1,299 16,246 278 0 24,478 28,145 11,435 0 0 39,580 64,058 ($/m2) 2.224 0.434 5.428 0.093 0.000 8.178 9.403 3.820 0.000 0.000 13.224 21.402 Percent of Total 10.4 2.0 25.4 0.4 0.0 38.2 43 .9 17.9 0.0 0.0 61.8 100.0

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area .... ... ... .. .. .... .... ...... ..... .... .. 2993.1 m 2 Conditioned Floor Area .. . ........ ....... ....... ... .. 2993.1 m2

Hourly Analysis Program v.4.3

150

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - HEI-GCM_Building (Flat Rate)
12_HEI-GCM_Ryerson University

04/10/2010

Air System Fans 10.3%

22.3% Electric Equipment

Cooling 1"_.£7......_

Heating 1 Pumps 0.3%

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment ,Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total Annual Cost 7,088 10,419 13,665 197 0 31.:i68 21,984 15,347 0 0 37,331 68,699

($/m2)
2.954 4.343 5.696 0.082 0.000 13.074 9.163 6.397 0.000 0.000 15.560 28.634

Pe rcent of Tota I i 10.3 i 15.2 19.9: 0.3 0.0 45.7 32.0 22.3 0.0 0.0 54.3 100.0

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area ........................................ 2399.2 m2 Conditioned Floor Area ............................... 2399.2 m2

Hourly Analysis Program v.4.3

151

Appendix F : Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - HEI-GCM_Building (Flat Rate)
12_HEI-GCM_Ryerson University 04/10/2010

Air System Fans 10.3%

22.3% Electric Equipment

Cooling 15.

Pumps 0.3%

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total Annual Cost 7,088 10,419 13,665 197 0 31,368 21 ,984 15,347 0 0 37,331 68,699
($/m')

Percent of Total 10.3 15.2 19.9 0.3 0.0 45.7 32 .0 22.3 0.0 0.0 54.3 100.0

2.954 4.343 5.696 0.082 0.000 13.074 9.163 6.397 0.000 0.000 15.560 28.634

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area . .... ... .. ..... .. .... .. ........... .... 2399.2 m2 Conditioned Floor Area ..... .. .......... .. .. ... .... .. 2399.2 m2

Hourly Analysis Program v.4.3

151

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - KNE_Building (Flat Rate)
13a_KNE(Kerr Hall North EastLRU
--..;.::::..----~

04/10/2010

2.4% Misc. Electric 10.2% Electric Equipment Cooling 12.1%

Lights

1. Annual Costs

I
Cooling Heating Pumps

Component
!

Annual Cost 8,396 28,255 117,434 2,531 0 156,616 47,978 23,850 5,567 0 77,395 234,011

($/m2)

Percent of Total 3.6 12.1 50.21 1.1 0.0

lAir System Fans

2.120 7.134 29.648 0.639 0.000 39.541 12.113 6.022 1.405 0.000 19.540 59.080

Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights l":lectric Equipment
~ Misc. Electric
I I I

I 66.9)
20.51 10.2 2.4 0.0 33.1 100.0

Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area ........................................ 3960.9 m2 Conditioned Floor Area ............................... 3960.9 m'

Hourly Analysis Program v.4.3

152

Appendix F : Annual Component Costs of Rye rson University Building
Annual Component Costs - KNE_Building (Flat Rate)
13a_KNE(Kerr Hall North EastLRU 04/10/2010

2.4% Misc. Electric 10.2% Electric Equipment Cooling 12.1%

_ - Lu.5% Lights

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cool ing Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total Annual Cost 8,396 28,255 117,434 2,531 0 156,616 47,978 23,850 5,567 0 77,395 234,011 ($/m2) 2.120 7.134 29 .648 0.639 0.000 39.541 12.113 6.022 1.405 0.000 19.540 59.080 Percent of Total 3.6 12.1 50.2 1.1 0.0 66.9 20.5 10.2 2.4 0.0 33.1 100.0

Note : Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area . Gross Floor Area ..... Conditioned Floor Area .. .. .. .. .. ... ..... ... 3960.9 m 2 .. .. .. 3960.9 m2

Hourly Analysis Program v.4 .3

152

...Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - KNW_Building (Flat Rate)
13b_KNW(Kerr Hall North WestLRU
04/10/2010

Air System Fans 2.6% Cooling 10.1%

1.7% Misc. Electric 6.6% Electric Equipment

17.2% Lights

--U.01ft

Pumps

1. Annual Costs Annual Cost ($) 6.252 24,374 148,092 1,968 0 180,686 41,732 15,901 4,053 0 61,686 242,372 Percent of Total (%) 2.6 I 10.1 61.1 0.8 0.0 74.5 17.2 6.6 1.7 0.0 25.5 100.0

Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total

($/m2)

I

1.739 6.780 41.197 0.548 0.000 50.264 11.609 4.423 1.128 0.000 17.160 67.424

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area ...................................................................................... 3594.8 m2 Conditioned Floor Area ..... ................ ................ ...... ................ ................. 3594.8 m'

Hourly Analysis Program v.4.3

153

Appendix F : Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - KNW_Building (Flat Rate)
13b KNW(Kerr Hall North West) RU
04/10/2 010

1.7% Misc. Electric
Cooling 10.1%

17.2% Lights

1. Annual Costs Annual Cost ($) Percent of Total ($/m2)

Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total

6 ,252 24,374 148,092 1,968 0 180,686 41 ,732 15,901 4,053 0 61,686 242,372

1.739 6.780 41.197 0.548 0.000 50.264 11.609 4.423 1.1 28 0.000 17.160 67.424

(%) 2.6 10.1 61.1 0.8 0.0 74.5 17.2 6.6 1.7 0.0 25.5 100.0

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area ...... .. ....... . Conditioned Floor Area .... ...... ......... ....... .. ..

. ... ... 3594.8 m 2 3594.8 m2

Hourly Analysis Program vA .3

153

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - KSE_Building (Flat Rate)
13c_KSE(Kerr Hall South EastLRU
04/10/2010 -----------_._---------,

Air System Fans 6.9% Cooling 11.7%

2.4% Misc. Electric 10.5% Electric Equipment

1% Lights

.0% Pumps

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total Annual Cost 56,758 97,001 410,174 8,004 0 571,937 149,580 87,122 19,461 0 256,163 828,100
($/m')

Percent of Total 6.9 11.7 49.5 1.0 0.0 69.1 18.1 10.5 2.4 0.0 30.9 100.0
I

4.678 7.995 33.806 0.660 0.000 47.138 12.328 7.181 1.604 0.000 21.113 68.251

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area .................................................................................... 12133.2 m2 Conditioned Floor Area .......................................................................... 12133.2 m 2

Hourly AnalYSis Program v.4.3

154

Appendix F : Annual Component Costs of Rye rso n Univers ity Building
Annual Component Costs - KSE_Building (Flat Rate)
13c_KSE (Kerr Hall South EastL RU
04 /10/2010

Air System Fans 6.9% Cooling 11 .7%

2.4% Misc. Electric 10.5% Electric Equipment

8.1% Lights

.0% Pumps

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC SUb-Total Grand Total Annual Cost 56,758 97 ,001 4 10,174 8,004 0 ($/m2) 4.678 7.995 33. 806 0.660 0.000 Percent of Total 6.9 11 .7 49.5 1.0 0.0

571 ,937
149,580 87 ,122 19,461 0

47.138
12.328 7.181 1.604 0.000

69.1
18.1 10.5 2.4 0.0

256,163 828,100

21.113 68.251

30.9 100.0

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area . Gross Floor Area Conditioned Floor Area

... ...... 12133.2 m2 12133.2 m2

Hourly Analysis Program v.4.3

154

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - KSW_Building (Flat Rate)
13d_KSW(Kerr Hall South WestLRU

04/10/2010

3.0% Misc. Electric 19.2% Electric Equipment Cooling 14.9%

8% Lights Heating 1.4% Pumps

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans 1 Lights HVAC Sub-Total Annual Cost 27,915 82,483 159,788 7,886
($/m2)

Percent of Tota~ 5.0; 14.9l 30.61 1.41 0.0 52.0 25.81 19.2 3.0 0.0 48.0 100.0

2.703 7.987 16.440 0.764 0.000 27.894 13.830 10.319 1.623 0.000 25.773 53.666

a
288,072 142,833 106,570 16,763 0 266.166 554,238

Electric Equipment Misc. Electric

IMisc. Fuel Use
Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area ...................................... 10327.5 m' Conditioned Floor Area ............................. 10327.5 m2 Hourly Analysis Program v.4.3

155

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - KSW_Building (Flat Rate)
13d_KSW(Kerr Hall South WestLRU
04/10/2010

Air System Fans 5.0% Cooling 14.9%

3.0% Misc. Electric 19.2% Electric Equipment

25.8% Lights Heating 30.6% 1.4% Pumps

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total Annual Cost 27,915 ($/m2) 2.703 7.987 16.440 0.764 0.000 27.894 13.830 10.319 1.623 0.000 25.773 53.666 Percent of Total 5.0 14.9 30 .6 1.4 0.0 52.0 25 .8 19.2 3.0 0.0 48.0 100.0

132,483
169,788 7,886 0 288,072 142,833 106,570 16,763 0 266,166 554,238

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area . Gross Floor Area ........ ........ ...... ...... ......... 10327.5 m 2 Conditioned Floor Area .... .. .......... ........ ... 10327.5 m 2 Hourly Analysis Program v.4 .3

155

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs -RCC_Building (Flat Rate)
14_RCC_Central Chiller_RU 04/11/2010

Air System Fans 9.6% Cooling 5.4% 31.3% Electric Equipment

Heating

11.~-I"-_

Pumps Cooling Tower Fans 1

36.7% Lights

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total
I

Annual Cost

($/m2)

Percent of Total 9.6 5.4 11.8 4.0 1.2

!

22,337 12,539 27,403 9,261 2,852 74,393 85,607 73,040 0 0 156,647 233,039

2.055 1.153 2.521 0.852 0.262 6.643 7.875 6.719 0.000 0.000 14.593 21.437
I

:

31.9 36.7 31.3 0.0 0.0 68.1 100.0

Lights

~Electric Equipment
Misc. Electric
I

Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area .................................................................................... 10671.2 m' Conditioned Floor Area .......................................................................... 10871.2 m'

Hourly Analysis Program \/.4.3

156

----------- - --Appendix F : A1IDuai Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs -RCC_Building (Flat Rate)
14_RCC_Central Chiller_RU 04/11/2010

Air System Fans 9.6% Cooling 5.4% 31.3% Electric Equipment

Heating 11.

Pumps Cooling Tower Fans 1

36.7% Lights

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total Annual Cost 22,337 12,539 27,403 9,261 2,852 74,393 85,607 73,040 0 0 158,647 233,039 ($/m2) 2055 1.153 2.521 0.852 0.262 6.843 7.875 6.719 0.000 0.000 14.593 21.437 Percent of Total 9.6 5.4 11.8 4.0 1.2 31.9 36 .7 31.3 0.0 0.0 68.1 100.0

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area ....... .. .. .. .. ....... ............... ... .......... ...... .. ..... Conditioned Floor Area ............ .. .......... .. ..... ...... .... ................ .... .. ... .. .... 10871.2 m2 10871 .2 m2

Hourly Analysis Program v.4.3

156

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs -PIT_Building (Flat Rate)
15_PIT_PITMAN Building_RU 04/11/2010

Air System Fans 8.6%

13.1% Electric Equipment

Cooling 21

r--·:mO"/n Lights

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment
!

Annual Cost 5,014 12,474 12,510 3,267 0 33,265 17,550 7,685 0 0 25,235 58,500

($/m')

Percent of Total 8.6 21.3 21.4 5.6 0.0 56.9 30.0 13.1 0.0 0.0 43.1 100.0

i

2.315 5.760 5.776 1.509 0.000 15.359 8.103 3.548 0.000 0.000 11.652 27.011

i

Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area ...................................................................................... 2165.8 m2 Conditioned Floor Area .......... ................ ............ ................ .......... ...... ...... 2165.8 m2

Hourly Analysis Program v.4.3

157

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs -PIT_ Building (Flat Rate)
15_PIT_PITMAN Bui lding_RU
04 /11/2010

Air System Fans 8.6%

13.1% Electric Equipment

Cooling 21 0% Lights

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total Annual Cost 5,014 12,474 12, 510 3,267 0 33,265 17,550 7,685 0 0 25,235 58,500 (S/m2) 2.315 5.760 5.776 1.509 0.000 15.359 8.103 3.548 0.000 0.000 11.652 27.011 Percent of Total 8.6 21 .3 21.4 5.6 0.0 56 .9 30.0 13.1 0.0 0.0 43.1 100.0

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area .. .. .. ... .. .. ....................................... ... ....... .. .. .. . 2165.8 m2 Conditioned Floor Area ......... .. ... .. ..... .. ..... . .. ..... .. .... ........... .. .... ...... 2165.8 m 2

Hourly Analysis Program v.4 .3

157

Appendix F: Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - RBB_Building (Flat Rate)
16_RBB(Rogers Business BuildingLRU

04/1112010

Air System Fans 7.0% 23.5% Electric Equipment Cooling 15.7%

Heating 1

Lights

1. Annual Costs

I I
I

Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVACSub-Total lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use

Annual Cost 42,189 94,435 111,523 4,158 0 252,305 207,055 141,136

($/m2) 2.520 5,641 6.662 0.248 0.000 15.071 12.368 8.431 0.000 0.000 20.799

Percent of Total 7,0 15.7 18.6 0,7 0,0 42.0 34.5 23.5
I

I

i
I

a a
348,191 600,496

0.0
0.0 58.0 100.0

I
I

I

Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total

I

35.870

I
I

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area .................................................................................... 16740.7 m2 Conditioned Floor Area .......................................................................... 16740.7 m2

Hourly Analysis Program vA.3

158

Appendix F : Annual Component Costs of Ryerson University Building
Annual Component Costs - RBB_Building (Flat Rate)
16_RBB(Rogers Business BuildingLRU
04 /11/2010

Air System Fans 7.0% 23.5% Electric Equipment

Heating 18

1. Annual Costs Component Air System Fans Cooling Heating Pumps Cooling Tower Fans HVAC Sub-Total Lights Electric Equipment Misc. Electric Misc. Fuel Use Non-HVAC Sub-Total Grand Total Annual Cost 42 ,189 94,435 111,523 4,158
($/m2)

Percent of Total 7.0 15.7 18.6 0.7 0.0 42.0 34.5 23.5 00 0.0 58.0 100.0

2.520 5.641 6.662 0.248 0.000 15.071 12.368 8.431 0.000 0000 20.799 35.870

a
252,305 207,055 141,136 0

a
348,191 600,496

Note: Cost per unit floor area is based on the gross building floor area. Gross Floor Area . .. ....... .. ... ..... .. .. Conditioned Floor Area ..... .... .. .. .. .. . 16740.7 m2 16740.7 m2

Hourly Analysis Program v.4.3

158


