YOU ARE HERE
A review of way nding strategies for the Toronto Transit Commission

By Christine Young Bachelor of Science, McMaster University, 2010 A major research project presented to Ryerson University in partial ful llment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Planning in the program of Urban Development Toronto, Ontario, Canada 2017 © Christine Young, 2017

Acknowledgements A Major Research Project prepared for the School of Urban and Regional Planning. Thanks to my supervisor, Professor Nina-Marie Lister, for your support, guidance and direction. Thanks to my second reader, Kelsey Blackwell, for your feedback and direction. Finally, thanks to the school for the personal, academic and professional development I gained through the program.

Author's Declaration AUTHOR'S DECLARATION FOR ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF A MRP I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this MRP. This is a true copy of the MRP, including any required final revisions. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this MRP to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this MRP by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my MRP may be made electronically available to the public.

Table of Contents
01 Introduction7 1.1 Lost Underground 1.2 Demand for Wayfinding 1.3 Recent Efforts 1.4 Methods 2.1 Growing Trends 2.2 Competition 2.3 Sketching the Blueprint 2.4 New Doors 2.5 Process of Wayfinding for Riders 2.6 Planning and Communication  3.1 Wayfinding Problems Education Campaign Information Signs Station Information Multiple Languages 4.1 Implementation Strategies 4.2 Current Conditions 4.3 New Strategies Appendix A  Appendix B  8 10 11 12 16 18 20 22 24 26 30 32 34 36 38 42 43 45 46 47

02 Literature15

03 Wayfinding Strategies 29

04 Conclusion41

Sources48

5

01 Introduction
Barriers on the Toronto's Transit Commission (TTC) network are driving the need for design and wayfinding innovation. This brief introduction examines the increasing issues of wayfinding, attitude, flow and culture on public transit. Despite recent efforts, the TTC still need to continue updating wayfinding signs. Design and wayfinding solutions are a moderate intervention that can address these issues and improve overall travel experience. In the following sections, an overview of the methods provide the approaches and boundaries of this study that will look at different wayfinding strategies.

6

7

1.1 Lost Underground
There are many aspects that demand improvement on Toronto's public transit, but the feeling of being lost underground, which pose a large inconvenience, is in dire need of innovation. This report aims to address wayfinding, attitude, flow and culture without changing the level of service and station architecture (Beirao & Cabral, 2007).

WAYFINDING
Transit stations are part of an underground system, and it can be especially difficult to gain a sense of where you are within the station relative to the outside world. There are many platforms, hallways, underpasses and pathways. Without a wayfinding program it is easy to find yourself taking the long way or even the wrong train. The crowd and the physical environment are major challenges to overcome in the TTC transit stations. It is the first aspect of wayfinding which is done by a traveler navigating a setting. Thoughtful maps and sign programs help navigate space and fundamentally guide travelers the right direction. Easily read and recognizable signs at points where travelers need them removes the anxiety of traveling (Farr et al., 2014). A wayfinding strategy allows public transit to offer an easy, simple and viable experience. A standard set of signs allows customers to easily recognize, understand and become familiar with the surrounding (Dennis & Pontille, 2015). This study is centred on developing wayfinding strategies to remove the stress and frustration on public transit, and create efficiency in convoluted stations (Arthur & Passini, 1992).

ATTITUDE
Individual attitude regarding public transit ultimately determines mode choice. Those attached to personal vehicles often perceive negative barriers to public transit. Negative attitude often stem from lack of information and observation of service improvements. Observing long queues, for example, at bus stops from inside personal vehicles further feeds this negative perception (Beirão & Sarsfield, 2007). It is important to understand customers' perception towards both public transit and private vehicle. With this knowledge transportation planners can target specific service qualities to improve, thus changing the public's attitude regarding public transit. With wayfinding and designs, public transit can improve its image by shifting immediate concerns like bad waiting conditions and lack of information (Beirão & Sarsfield, 2007; Popuri et al., 2011).

FLOW
There are a number of physical and mental steps to overcome during the morning and evening rush. Public transit is divided by a series of segments including fare payment, waiting and travel time, entering, transferring and egressing stations (Beirão & Sarsfield, 2007, Frisken & Soberman, 2010) In addition, customers have to face crowds of people competing to board trains as well. Before entering, riders often have to wait for the crowd of people to exit to finally proceed through bi-directional turnstiles. `Too crowded' was reported one of the deterring reasons that commuters avoid public transportation (Beirão & Sarsfield, 2007). Wayfinding during peak times in an already crowded network is one of the main negative attributes of public transportation. This study will examine wayfinding and design strategies that will optimize the circulation and flow on public transit. The current situation has lead to a chaotic movement and circulation on platforms, hallways and concourse. By targeting the flow of people, transit can become a seamless and comfortable experience.

CULTURE
The culture of public transit comprises of the customers' conduct at stations and across the network including how riders interact with one another. In 2014, the TTC adopted some strategies to encourage good conduct across the network. Travelers see signs and hear announcements to promote or prevent certain activities. Blue seats, for example, on buses, streetcars and subways indicate priority seating for customers with disabilities, the elderly, or pregnant women. Customers also hear automated announcements that encourage customers to `stay clear of the doors.' Despite these efforts, old messages have become indistinct amid the disarray of public transit, thus signs are often ignored or have lost their effect. Transportation agencies across different cities have launched education campaigns to develop a friendly culture on public transit and remind customers of good manners.

8

9

1.2 Demand for Wayfinding
November 2014 at a town hall meeting, a number of attendees complained about the transit's signs and customer information. Customers found signs were difficult to understand as new signs evolved over the course of the TTC's lifetime. Users requested the "Stand right, walk left" signs around the escalators to be put back in place. In response, the TTC initiated projects that would address design and wayfinding in the city's public transit (TTC, 2013). The city's transit network requires investment to compete with alternate modes of transportation. Improving design and wayfinding is a moderate intervention that can make public transit more attractive and modern. This study reiterates the need for effective wayfinding and recommends strategies that could create a more comfortable and reliable experience for TTC riders. This report is divided between a literature, recommendation and an analysis section. The literature reveals the demand for wayfinding in different types of space, and the importance to maintain competition with private vehicles. The solution component reveals strategies that the TTC could adopt to improve experience on public transit. The report concludes with an analysis of the TTC's progress in achieving its wayfinding goals. In all, the report is centred on graphic communication solutions. Attitude, wayfinding, flow and culture on public transit could be addressed with clean and standard wayfinding signs. New programs would improve aesthetics inside stations and enhance public transit's overall image and navigation. In addition, designs and wayfinding programs introduce solutions that elevates public transit without changing the level of service and station architecture (Beirao & Cabral, 2007).

1.3 Recent Efforts
In the last few years, the TTC introduced a number of programs to improve transit experience and satisfaction. The TTC established a five-year Corporate Plan which outlines a vision until the year end of 2017. The strategic plan aims to address the system from customer satisfaction, affordable expansion to asset management (TTC, 2013). Since 2015, the TTC achieved a number of those targets to increase customer information and ease movement across the network. New features include (TTC 2015; TTC; 2016) · New fare gates at St. Clair, Summerhill and Main Street Station · Installing new customer information screens · Accepting PRESTO fare payments · Plans to replace stop markers at over 3000 transit stops · Increasing special constable's responsibility to manage traffic · New TTC systems maps and TTC's streetcar network maps · All door boarding on streetcars · Installation of blue seats to identify priority seats · New renovated platform and concourse at Union Station

Dundas Station

In addition, the TTC implemented signs across public transit to improve wayfinding and planning trips (TTC, 2013). The TTC completely updated its design manual,but looking closely, old signs are everywhere in a number of stations. Toronto's transit is suffering from old infrastructure and limited space, and the city is struggling to find new financial sources. The pipeline has hefty investment plans for Toronto's transportation infrastructure, but Frisken and Soberman (2010) argues that alone will not improve public transit entirely. Service quality is significantly lacking and becoming harder to find new solutions. Service quality should involve customers and employees in the planning process to change the culture surrounding public transit ( Soberman, 2010). In addition, rebuilding aging stations would rely on costly renovations and infrastructure. For this reason, this report explores modest solutions that could enhance public transit.

Bay Station

King Station

10

11

1.4 Methods
A review of secondary sources and a nonreactive qualitative approach is the basis for this study. The research focused on literature and solutions that would improve the overall public transit experience that would not require changes in the overall service and station architecture. This report is two-fold: a literature section discussing the process and need for wayfinding and a solution section including different designs. Academic and public sources helped inform this study's portfolio of best practice in wayfinding designs. Data were collected from government and transportation agencies to explore wayfinding goals and strategies applied in the industry. A range of design solutions were considered depending on their adaptability within the TTC network. Metro systems were examined based on similar transportation and urban conditions including significant traffic pressure and population growth. In all, the report involves secondary research that explain wayfinding and support the need for an effective map and sign program. Conclusions were also drawn from field observations and analysis with research methods rooted in William Neuman (2006) and design principles by Paul Arthur and Romedi Passini (1992). Neuman's guide in active and complete participation in the field allowed a greater understanding of the customer's experience. Assuming different roles, such as a child or an elderly, supplemented the findings and revealed different challenges of wayfinding on public transit. Gibson (2009) states methods in wayfinding is based on understanding the patterns of a setting and uncovering the `hidden logic'. "The hidden logic is the pattern of movement or spatial organization that characterizes a place and serves as a framework for the wayfinding system."
(Gibson, 2009, p.44)

With this principle in mind during site observations, various wayfinding factors were examined using Neuman's approaches in field research.
· Different environments (i.e. fare concourse, subway platform, entrances, exits, corridors) · Physical characteristic and circulation patterns · Points of view of different riders · Overlaps, parallels and contradictions in signs · People's experience or expected experience of a place · The process of wayfinding (Gibson, 2009;Neuman, 2006)

These basic aspects of wayfinding design guided the site research. Gaining perspective on the riders experience was the primary objective during observations.

The observed stations were situated on the yellow and green line and south of Bloor. These locations were chosen because they experience high volume, aging infrastructure and limited space which demand wayfinding solutions. Notes, diagrams and pictures were documented during two periods, February 9th and 10th 2017, between 10:00 AM and 3:00 PM. Unfortunately, these were the only times permitted by the TTC to take photographs and observations. A property permit was required to access platform and concourse areas on TTC property (Appendix A) and a certificate of insurance from Ryerson University (Appendix B).

Elements considered during site observations:
2 5 4

1 2

Density Height Location of sign Visibility

3 6

1

3 4

5 Legibility 6 Physical environment

12

13

02 Literature
Literature explored reveals recent trends and growth that demand attention be paid to improving the TTC's wayfinding network. To improve experience on public transit, stations and lines need to be examined separately and as connected system. Investing in the TTC's design and wayfinding strategy will enable public transit to compete with private vehicles. This presents an opportunity to collaborate with other municipal departments and the artistic community. In order to address challenges with wayfinding, attitude, flow and culture on public transit, a basic understanding of wayfinding is a prerequisite. The next sections outline the process of wayfinding for travellers and planners.

14

15

2.1 Growing Trends
There has been significant population growth and development across the Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area (GTHA). There is pressing need to invest in public transit with increasing development in downtown Toronto and flow from surrounding regions. In 2006, downtown Toronto was designated as an Urban Growth Centre by the province in the Growth Plan for the Greater Golden Horseshoe. The population today in the GTHA is over 6 million people (Metrolinx, 2008). Projections expect the population to grow up to 8.6 million people by 2031 (Metrolinx, 2008). The following pulses are putting pressure on the state of the TTC system (Ostler, 2014):
Population Development Jobs

Development in downtown Toronto is growing as well. Between 2008 and 2013, the following proposals were submitted to to the city (Ostler, 2014):
246
applications

446,000 jobs were reported in the Downtown core in 2012, Toronto's largest employment area. Studies also reported that job growth could increase from 5% to 21% by the year end of 2031 (Ostler, 2014).
Rail Corridor
Ro s

Those traveling downtown commute by vehicle, transit and walk or cycle.
public transit

34%

private vehicle

25%

walk or cycle

41%

77,000

ed a

le

residential units
Bathurst St

Va lle yR d

Why Downtown

2 million

square metre of commercial & institutional space

of all jobs in the city of Toronto are in the downtown core

33%

People chose downtown because:
Don River

Access to transit

Lake Ontario

Age Cohort

Close to work

Between 2016 and 2041, downtown Toronto's population is projected to grow 1.9 times the current population (City of Toronto, 2016)
475,000

There has been a shift in downtown's demographics. For several years, baby boomers exceeded the number of echo boomers in the city's Downtown. However, in 2011, the city's downtown saw a switch in the dominant age group. Echo boomers represent over 43% while baby boomers account for about 23% of the population (Ostler, 2014).

Trip Origins

Entertainment and nightlife

There is movement from every direction for jobs downtown. The origin of trips range from Downtown to outside the GTHA (Ostler, 2014):

Urban lifestyle

250,000

12%

55%
Rest of Toronto

32%
GTHA

1%
Outside of GTHA

Access to shops

43%
2016
16

23%
Baby boomers

Downtown

Ability to walk anywhere

2041

Echo boomers

(Ostler, 2014)
17

2.2 Competition

Public transit is being pushed by increasing growth, but also pulled by the preference for private vehicles. Vehicles maintain a competitive edge as they offers direct service. Private vehicles offer comfort, speed, convenience and individual freedom and as a result maintain attractiveness (Beirao & Cabral, 2007; Frisken & Soberman, 2010). The number of trips by private vehicle in the GTA increased by 56% between 1986 and 2006 (Metrolinx, 2008). Public transit, unfortunately, does not offer the same door-to-door route as private vehicles. Commutes on public transit are comprised of fare payment, waiting and travel time, entering, transferring and exiting stations. Commuters need to carefully plan their trips before taking transit, and not to mention seats are not guaranteed (Guo, 2011).

All major transit systems require commuters to transfer at least once. Transfers are a fundamental part of commuter's travel experience but are often overlooked (Guo & Wilson, 2011). Public transit is at significant disadvantage as transfers divide routes and prevent commuters to sit back and relax. In order to compete with private vehicles, services need to deliver an attractive and a friendly environment (Kepaptsoglou, et. al., 2013). Public transit needs to promote its image in order to become competitive and gain more riders (Beirao & Cabral, 2007). When considering locations where customers must transfer, planners need to consider each segment from walking, waiting and the physical environment that connect different lines. Each fragment requires unique solutions and implementation strategies (Guo & Wilson, 2011).

In all, a good pedestrian environment can promote public transit and discourage vehicle use (Guo, 2009). Effective wayfinding and signs have been argued to facilitate flow and movement of people. Standard colours, typeface and size creates a seamless wayfinding system that commuters can easily recognize and navigate. Consistent symbols, colour and language allows user to feel familiar and greater comfort while travelling by public transit (Denis & Pontille, 2015). Creative design and wayfinding solutions could also help traffic and rider's stress within Toronto's congested system. Transfers is a large weakness of public transit, so centering service planning at connection points would allow public transit to better compete with private vehicles. Effective design and wayfinding could eliminate the inconvenience where customers need to transfer, and make a more attractive environment. In all, design solution could target altogether, wayfinding, attitude, flow and culture providing a more comfortable and enjoyable transit.

18

19

2.3 Sketching the Blueprint
Before planning for design and wayfinding strategies, it is essential to understand the units that encompass public transit. Lines and nodes are the basic types of space that need to be considered in planning for transit (Rüetschi & Timpf, 2005). The network of bus, streetcar and train routes are the lines whiles nodes are connection areas between different lines. Together the nodes and lines sketch the blueprint for public transit. Walking, waiting, traveling, information availability, accessibility to information and overall ease of transfer are steps that contribute to the connectivity at nodes. Yudal and Ranjitkar (2012) describe that connections between lines should be a seamless and synchronized experience that allow riders to reach a destination effortlessly. Network information, including times and maps, is readily available on transit website or at service areas. However, information about connection areas is less accessible. The process of wayfinding within station relies on searching, following, exploring and matching information in a complicated setting including halls, platforms, underpasses, corridors, concourse. Therefore, gaining a sense of the layout can be difficult unless already familiar with the space (Rüetschi & Timpf, 2005; Arthur & Passini, 1992). In sum, lines and nodes differ considerably in scale and the rider's ability to navigate a route. Activities on both lines and nodes are an interconnected system, and any delays on the line can impact traffic across stations. A health emergency, as a result, not only slows service on lines, but also creates congestion on platform areas.

That said, lines and nodes need to be examined separately and together to plan for public transit (Rüetschi & Timpf, 2005). These issues on transit will not resolve themselves, and so important to provide the means, wayfinding, to create a effortless experience. Whether improving wayfinding or availability of service information, these tools must be used to improve the entire blueprint of public transit.

20

21

2.4 New Doors
Local Strategies
Design solutions to address attitude and overall transit also opens new doors for the TTC. Adding art and creative work within public transit allows the commute to become more enjoyable, and transforms a regular path into an interesting place of its own. This presents the TTC the opportunity to work with other city departments and organizations to collaborate on design and sign solutions. In the last year, the TTC introduced a number of programs to create a more enjoyable and interesting experience for Toronto commuters: · November 2016, the TTC worked with the famous, landmark retail store, Honest Ed's. The TTC decorated Bathurst station with the store's iconic bright red, yellow and blue discount signs. · We Move You posters and videos were released across the network. The campaign was a collaboration between the TTC and the National Ballet of Canada. Nine dancers were photographed dancing on the TTC's new streetcar and subway and at Union station. · The Art for Commuters is a another collaboration between the TTC and artists. A number of programs and artists are called upon to showcase local art and culture along the TTC platform. `Sketching the Line" was the most recent poster program on platforms and trains.

Comparator Cities
Other cities have also collaborated with different program to share art and culture within their transit system (Zerdoun, 2016). Public art on transit adds immeasurable value and has a two-fold effect: it add life and character when the art work includes elements of the community. This strategy also helps wayfinding by identifying a path or a node with unique and innovative artwork. Some examples include: · Chicago Transit Authority (CTA) transformed many pathways, platforms, stations into beautiful places. Chicago's portfolio includes Francisco Station where ordinary pathway was converted into an oriental rug to express the community's culture diversity. · New York's Metropolitan Transit Authority also has an established art and design department to enhance transit experience. Since the 1980's, MTA uncovered over 300 art work including the Tranquility design - twelve panels of stained glass, at Mount Vernon East Station. · Universidad de Chile, in Santiago installed a floor-to-ceiling mural by Mario Toral. It is titled Memoria Visual de una Nacion and it represents the history of Chile from the Spanish conquest to today (Zerdoun, 2016). The success of collaborating with local community and artist in other cities demonstrate the ability for the TTC to realize the same. Ordinary spaces can be transfomed into beautiful places making public transit an interesting and enjoyable experience rather than just a mean of transportation.

Bathurst Station transformation in tribute to the famous Honest Ed's (Reeve, 2017).

Francisco Station, CTA

Zones of Immersion art installation by Stuart Reid at Union Station.

Mount Vernon East, MTA

Photograph of the TTC's and the National Ballet's We Move You campaign (NBC, 2017)

Universidad Chile, Santiago Metro

22

23

2.5 Process of Wayfinding for Riders
Studies generally (Arthur & Passini, 1992; Denis & Pontille, 2015; Farr et al., 2014; Gibson, 2009; Guo, 2009; Guo, 2011; Guo & Wilson, 2011; Li et al., 2012) agree maps play an important role in communicating spatial information. To implement new design and wayfinding strategies, understanding the steps of wayfinding, importance and impacts of maps and information included is a prerequisite. The following elements explore the process of wayfinding for travelers on public transit, to gain perspective of the commuter's experience. In all, maps could be a planning tool to create efficiency within public transit networks (Guo, 2011). Scaling and symbols in maps can be revisited to minimize crowding on platforms and change travel patterns. Transit maps and signs complement each other and help customers navigate stations and the greater transit network.

STEPS IN WAYFINDING
Farr et. al. (2013) focused on the process of wayfinding in airports. The authors divided wayfinding into four steps namely orientation, route selection, route control and destination recognition. These steps require a person's cognitive mapping skills to navigate through human factors (i.e. spatial orientation, language, culture, gender, biology) and environmental factors (i.e. paths, nodes, landmarks, layout complexity, signs).

INFORMATION
Maps deliver four type of information including distortion, restoration, codification and cognition (Guo, 2011). Distorted information is simplified information to create a schematic map of transit lines. Restoration aims to include geographic features like roads and parks to help connect the rest of the city to transit lines. Codification represents important locations through symbols and colour. Finally, cognition is the perception users interpret form a transit map that helps understand the spatial context.
3 | Indirect entrance

IMPORTANCE OF MAPS
Research findings revealed that human factors have larger influence on wayfinding than environmental factors. Although planners have no control over a person's spatial orientation ability, the authors found environments can be designed to mitigate travel anxiety with clear pathways and quality visual communication (Farr et. al., 2013). Guo (2011) also argues that maps have a significant impact on the travel behaviour and path decision. When a path is drawn longer, a passenger will likely choose a shorter path (Guo, 2011).People also prefer routes with the fewest turns, and instead take a linear route despite being longer. Maps are important tool to reduce the anxiety of new and complicated surroundings.
| Random

IMPACT
Altogether, the different information provided within maps impact customer's decision on location, mode and path. Guo (2011) found that commuters rely more on maps than personal experience. Schematic maps drawn more or less direct can encourage users to take the apparent easiest path. Incorrect representation could ultimately direct traffic towards congested and overcrowded platforms (Guo, 2011). Guo (2011) also found transit maps reduce the use of buses as an alternative option because train are simple and easy to understand while bus maps are usually more complicated to interpret and plan a trip. Denis and Pontille (2015) also argue that signs can control pedestrian movement and create order.
v time w steps

1 | Front entrance

2 | Side entrance

Some entrances are clear and do not require wayfinding. The third entrance, however, is hidden and requires a sign to indicate right direction (Arthur & Passini, 1992).

| Ordered

x time y steps

City of London provides walking times and steps between each station to encourage riders to walk during peak hours on public transit. Random paths versus an ordered system (Arthur & Passini, 1992) are more difficult to navigate and require wayfinding at various points.

24

25

2.6 Planning and Communication
Wayfinding is the art and science of organizing and communicating spatial information. As previously discussed, wayfinding is the process of navigating and interpreting the layout to reach a person's destination. Using messages and diagrams wayfinding designers aim to provide relevant information at the times when travelers need it. There are two fundamental aspects that frame wayfinding design: spatial planning and environmental communication (Arthur and Passini, 1992) Spatial planning is the process of uncovering and understanding the organization within a space. The space is characterized by its site, size, content, function and circulation patterns. Steps in spatial planning include: · Identifying constituent spatial units · Grouping similar units into destination zones · Organizing and linking units and zones (Arthur and Passini, 1992) Spatial planning identifies the entrances, the exits, landmarks and major destinations and functions of a place. Understanding the content and organization allows planners to group similar units into destination zones. This approach creates order and simplicity within a large network. Imagine a campus, it is difficult to find a classroom without knowing first which building or department a student needs to be in. The steps of spatial planning aim to help visitors to easily create a mental map of the setting and find where they need to go. (Arthur and Passini, 1992) Environmental communication is the form in which information is conveyed for wayfinding including architectural, audible and graphic expression. This report focuses on the graphic expression for wayfinding information (Arthur and Passini, 1992). Basic rules of thumb regarding typography, pictographs, colour, layout and other components guide best practice in graphic design but, above all, people's psychological and behavioural patterns lays out the framework for wayfinding. Environmental communication provides the essential information to make and execute decisions along a path and to gain a sense of the layout (Arthur and Passini, 1992). There are a number of environmental characteristics that also need to be considered for communication. Brightness, density of people and height of ceilings, for example, can all interrupt the ability to navigate a setting. The form in which information is presented is important as well to ensure legibility and readability. People learn to recognize signs and remember their meaning after having seen it multiple times. This strategy relies on the use of consistent colours, location and structure of information (Arthur and Passini, 1992; Gibson, 2011). Spatial planning and environmental communication together sets the framework for wayfinding design. Gaining the perspective of a visitor is preeminent and complimentary in developing effective wayfinding strategies. With users at the centre of planning and design, wayfinding can enhance the experience of a place (Gibson, 2011) and create a comfortable experience. Creating a seamless experience is the inherent goal for wayfinding design.

26

27

03 Wayfinding Strategies
Wayfinding in the TTC is in dire need of innovation. This section reveals areas in the TTC network that are still under previous standard and that demand wayfinding. Following is a series of strategies that have been successfully adopted by other cities. This section uncovers the potential and purpose of each solution that could be introduced in public transportation.

28

29

3.1 Wayfinding Problems
Bloor Station Fair Concourse & Southbound and Northbound platform

TTC Network Problem areas at various stations

s re Fa

Co

ou nc

rse

2
d un bo rm rth tfo No Pla

N

1 3
nd ou hb rm ut tfo So Pla

5

4

1 | Dated signs that are often ignored or lost its e ect.

2 | Fair information is provided in the way of other customers to enter.

Broken signs are unproductive and unattractive.

Redundant signs used to repeat information.

Signs have not all been updated yet at various locations.

Summerhill

Rosedale
3 | Large pillars obstruct view and limit space on crowded platforms. 4 | Passengers stand disorderly waiting for the next train 5 | Sign is bulky and dated, and hardly visible from a distance.

Bloor Bay Wellesley

Signs are hardly visible with poorly lit signs.

Many signs are still under old wafinding standards.

Dundas Station Fair Concourse & Southbound --platform
So

College
1 2
res Fa Co

3
ou nc rse

4

ut Pl hb at ou fo nd rm

N

Dundas

Detailed information and maps are posted directly in the walk way.

Exit signs have not been updated yet at various locations.

1 | Detailed public information is provided directly in front of a walk way

n to Ea

Ce

nt

re

Queen

King

Signs are still under previous standards and especially wordy. Union A number of signs are cut o preventing customers to understand and read signs quickly.

2 | Signs hanging on angle prevent customers to understand and read signs quickly.

3 | Costumer information is segregated and lacks flow and communication

4 | Lack of simple design in a busy station creates a chaotic and confusing environment.

30

31

DESIGN SOLUTION A.

Education Campaign
Description

This strategy aims to inform and remind customers of proper conduct in order to provide a comfortable and enjoyable experience for everyone. An etiquette campaign could be launched across public transit on posters, banners, advertisement space and agency website.
Location

Victoria, Australia Public Transport Victoria introduced the Model Commuters campaign to showcase good commuters on transit including the `floor bagger',

the `patient boarder', the `seat offerer' and the `door clearer'. The campaign launched a new website and sign program to reach the public and kindly inform riders about good manners (PTV, 2017).

Chicago Transit Authority, Public Transport Victoria, Tokyo Metro
Goal

Improve attitude towards public transit and culture across the network.

Rendering of a sign on a train that could host an education campaign.

Tokyo, Japan Since 1974, Tokyo Metro releases new etiquette posters every year. The campaigns are friendly and fun posters including animations mimicking riders

on public transit. Tokyo Metro's strategy not only informs but entertains riders what not to do on public transit. The images above are from the 2013 education campaign (Tokyo Metro, 2017).

Chicago, Illinois A courtesy campaign aimed to remind riders of being considerate to everyone on transit.

Four of thirteen posters by the Chicago Transit Authority (CTA, 2017).

Tokyo, Japan Pictures above are from Tokyo Metro's more recent 2016 etiquette campaign. Above are four of a twelve

poster series focused on behaviour considered inconsiderate to everyone else. Small captions provide translation for English riders (Tokyo Metro, 2017).

32

33

DESIGN SOLUTION B.

Information Signs
Description

Location: Tongji University, Shanghai Simple graphics that reveal as pedestrians walk along the wall Different graphics can be seen walking left to right, and right to left activating the pathway.
(SEGD, 2016)

Creative regulation, direction and destination signs to help visitors know where they are and where they need go.
Location

London, New York City, Sydney and Shanghai
Goal

Cohen Bros. Realty parking lot, New York City The designer used a fun and everyday language to remind drivers to continue or slow down. Arrows were also painted to indicated correct direction. Rendering of stairs with arrows to direct flow on the TTC.
(SEGD, 2011)

Improve wayfinding and flow in crowded areas including hallways, underpasses, concourse and platforms.

Barangaroo Carpark, Sydney The parking lot was transformed into a vibrant and safe space. The designer used large scale icons to clearly indicate what parking level and where visitors can find the elevators.
(Brown, n.d.)

Stuttgart Trade Fair, Stuttgart The exhibition centre used large scale and universal icons that ca be seen from great distances and help identify where to go.
(Keane-Cowell, 2013)

City of London The city adopted a wayfinding strategy including new maps and signs to help visitors and residents find their way. north arrows were engrave to gain sense of direction.

University of technology, Sydney The university used lines on the floor to help navigate students and promote safe workspace.

(Brand Culture, 2010)

34

(SEGD, 2010)

35

DESIGN SOLUTION C.

Station Information
Description

Detailed information about station and nearby destinations to help inform riders the best and timely routes.
Location Purpose

x minutes y minutes z minutes

Bonn, London and Tokyo. To improve wayfinding and flow for commuters.

Rendering of a banner on trains where more information about the network and stations could be provided including a transit map with walking time between stations.

Shibuya Station, Tokyo Station layout with a street map as the base maps are available to the public. Tokyo also provides a zoomed-in map for each station exit allowing commuters to navigate to the nearest exit. (Tokyo Metro, 2017)

Haus der Bildung Bonn, Bonn The municipal library produced simple floor plans to help visitors navigate specific genres and make the building legible.
(SEGD, 2016)

London Underground, London Walking steps and times between stations are available to promote commuters to walk during peak times on public transit. (Transport for London, 2017)

36

37

DESIGN SOLUTION D.

Multiple Languages
Description

Making complicated and detailed information available in multiple languages to help navigate complicated environments.
Location Purpose

Welcome Bienvenue  

   

Brisbane, Shanghai Improve wayfinding and culture
Rendering of TTC website with messages provided in multiple languages.

The following transportation agency provide transit information in multiple languages:

7 55

Tokyo Metro English French Chinese Japanese Thai Spanish Korean

16

London Underground Arabic Bengali Chinese German Spanish French Greek Gujarati Macedonian Malay Maltese Norwegian Persian Polish Portuguese Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Hindi Italiano Polski Portuguese Punjabi Tamil Turkish Urdu Slovenian Spanish Swahili Swedish Thai Turkish Ukrainian Urdu Vietnamese Welsh Yidish

Metropolitan Transportation Authority English Afrikaans Albanian Arabic Amenian Azerbaijani Basque Belarusian Bulgarian Catalan Croatian Czech Danish Dutch Estonian Filipino Finnish French Galician Georgian Greek Haitian Creole Hebrew Hindi Hungarian Icelandic Indonesian Irish Italian Japanese Korean Latvian Lithuanian

Brisbane, Australia In order to welcome international visitors and residents, the city designed it pedestrian signage to accommodate up to five languages including Korean, Japanese, Traditional Chinese and Arabic at 33 location in the city centre.
(SEGD, 2014)

Tongji University, Shanghai Wayfinding in the university's studio space reserves space for Chinese characters and English translation.

(SEGD, 2014)

38

39

04 Conclusion
Design and wayfinding introduce innovative strategies for public transportation. Several ideas were introduced, but important to ensure strategies are indeed helping riders. This final section is an implementation strategy for the TTC to adopt wayfinding and design solutions, followed by an analysis of current conditions to conclude this study.

40

41

4.1 Implementation Strategies

4.2 Current Conditions

This project explores a variety of wayfinding strategies that could be adopted by the TTC to improve attitude, flow, culture and wayfinding processes. Some solutions received great response and have been awarded for its creativity and innovation in different locations. The success of these designs, however, may not carry out the same results within Toronto's public transit. At the end of the day, strategies should help wayfinding and flow between connections, and hopefully create a more comfortable and enjoyable transit experience. These proposed strategies can significantly impact the users, thus it is important to involve commuters in planning for wayfinding (Gibson, 2009). Conversations with the riders should be carried out throughout the process to gain insight on their experience. Engaging with riders at central locations and at various times of the day and week would allow planners to gain better understanding of the wayfinding process. Riders should also be involved in testing solutions to observe the public's response and the viability (Gibson, 2009).

City of Hamilton (2017) conducted a pilot sign survey to gain feedback from the public of the new city wayfinding signs.

Pilot studies are commonly used to test the content of wayfinding strategies. City of Edmonton, Metrolinx and the TTC evaluated new wayfinding standard at different locations to observe the reception. Pilot studies allow designers to talk to riders directly and gain feedback on new ideas. This method allows the designer to gauge the effectiveness of the wayfinding programs. In all, important to make sure new strategies are sensible within the surrounding context, and that TTC riders find them helpful. Pilot studies should aim for central locations and at various times of the day in order to reach the greater public. New design and wayfinding strategies should make the commute even more effortless and simple to navigate a complex environment.

In summary, the TTC has introduced some new technology and strategies to address challenges on public transit. The installation of the new PRESTO system certainly moves people faster with just tap to pay your fare. The Art for Commuters is also an excellent program connecting with local artists and enhancing the transit experience. Above all, the TTC developed a new design standard for wayfinding and signage, in 2014. A specific set of colours, font, pictograms, arrows and text were designed to apply across the network. In the Corporate Plan, the TTC aimed to have wayfinding updated by the year end of 2017. With less than a year left, the TTC have yet to update several signs across the network. However, signs under previous standards that yet need to be replaced pose challenges for commuters. Long directional messages on signs require a few seconds to read as opposed to an arrow that requires just a glance. These wordy signs are still seen in stations that cater to a large volume of traffic on a daily basis. Signs hanging diagonally not only make it hard to read but also make public transit appear neglected and less attractive. Cluster of information about the service and network is also placed at non-strategic locations. These eyesores prevent public transit to become a modern and desirable mean of transportation. In addition, wayfinding, attitude, flow and culture as result suffer on public transit.

Nonetheless, the TTC did significant and attractive transformation in new stations including Union Station. Consistent and new sets of signs were integrated with the renovation. Information about the local area including the CN tower, for example, is clearly identified at the entrance of the station. Wayfinding at Union station set a benchmark that the TTC should aim for every station. The TTC should be encouraged to continue implementing programs such as these to improve riders' experiences.

New wayfinding signs in the newly renovated Union station downtown Toronto.

42

43

4.3 New Strategies
Toronto's downtown core is experiencing tremendous population growth and development. These trending pulses are adding stress to the TTC's already crowded and underinvested transit system. However, this study aimed to introduce new design and wayfinding strategies that would not require changing the level of service or station architecture. The approach of this study has centred on providing a comfortable and enjoyable commute by addressing wayfinding, flow, attitude and culture. Creative and colourful strategies present the opportunity to integrate art and culture providing a more interesting experience rather than just a mean to reach a destination. Recommendation also included more information about the network and the station to help customers easily navigate convoluted spaces. This study has demonstrated the immense potential for wayfinding solutions to improve overall transit for riders of the TTC, thus enabling public transit to become an attractive mode of transportation in the face of mounting competition. By making directions and circulation easy, connections areas no longer need to be an inconvenience. Instead, public transit can become simple, comfortable, and an enjoyable commute.

44

45

Appendix A
Property Permit (to take photographs on TTC property)

Appendix B
Certificate of Insurance
5500 North Service Road, 9th Floor Burlington, Ontario, L7L 6W6 Telephone (905) 336-3366 Fax (905) 336-3373

CANADIAN UNIVERSITIES RECIPROCAL INSURANCE EXCHANGE CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE INSURED
Ryerson University 350 Victoria Street Toronto, ON, M5B 2K3

CERTIFICATE HOLDER
Toronto Transit Commission 1900 Yonge St. Toronto, ON, M4S 1Z2

Contact: Carrol Scanlan Title: Insurance Officer Tel: (416) 979-5000 x6259 Email: cscanlan@ryerson.ca Reference:

Contact: Title: Tel: Fax: Email:

Nature of Operations: Student filming on TTC property all year. - DATES: On-going

Certificate No: Issue Date:

63392 2017-01-01

This is to confirm that insurance as described herein is in full force and effect on behalf of the Named Insured and as more fully described in said policies and any endorsements thereto and is subject to all the terms, exclusions, limits and conditions of such policies. This certificate provides proof of insurance only where a limit is shown. Where indicated the Certificate Holder has been added as an Additional Insured but only with respect to liability arising out of the operations of the Named Insured. POLICY 1727L EFFECTIVE 2017-01-01 EXPIRY 2018-01-01 LIMIT $2,000,000 POLICY COMPREHENSIVE GENERAL LIABILITY Covering all premises and operations of the Named Insured including blanket contractual liability, professional and malpractice liability, cross liability, tenant's legal liability and employer's liability. The limit per occurrence is inclusive for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage. Certificate Holder as Additional Insured EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS ERRORS AND OMISSIONS Covering Errors and Omissions Liability and Professional Liability of the Named Insured on a claims made basis.

PROPERTY "All Risks" of direct physical loss or damage to property of the Named Insured and to property for which the Named Insured has agreed to be responsible. The limit per loss is inclusive for repair/replacement of buildings and contents, including the interests of lessors and/or mortgagees (Includes Excess Property where applicable). Certificate Holder as Additional Insured/Loss Payee (ATIMA) EXCESS PROPERTY "All Risks" of direct physical loss or damage to property of the Named Insured and to property for which the Named Insured has agreed to be responsible. The limit per loss is in excess of $5,000,000 and is inclusive for repair/replacement of buildings and contents, including the interests of lessors and/or mortgagees. Issued and signed on behalf of Subscribing Insurers.

CURIE undertakes to provide 30 days written notice to the Certificate Holder in the event of any material change and/or cancellation of the described policies.

Authorized Representative

46

47

Sources
Arthur, P. & Passini, R. (1992). Wayfinding: People Signs, and Architecture. Oakville, ON: McGraw Ryerson Limited. Beirão, G., & Sarsfield Cabral, J.A. (2007). Understanding attitudes towards public transport and private car: A qualitative study. Transportation Policy, 14, 478-489. Brand Culture. (2010). Graphic Ambient. Retrieved from http://graphicambient.com/2011/11/27/university-of-technology-sydney-australia/ Brown, S. (n.d). Barangaroo Carpark Wayfinding. Retrieved from http://there.com.au/work/BarangarooCarpark Chicago Transit Authority. (2007). Retrieved from http://www.transitchicago.com/ Chicago Transit Authority. (n.d.). CTA Public Art. City of Edmonton. (2017). Navigating a Changing Downtown. Retrieved from https://www.edmonton.ca/projects_plans/design_studies/wayfinding.aspx City of Toronto. (2016). Proposals Report: TOcore Planning Downtown. Denis, J., & Pontille, D. (2015). Material ordering and the care of things. Science, Technology, & Human Values, 40(3), 338-367. doi:10.1177/0162243914553129 Farr, A. C., Kleinschmidt, T., Johnson, S., Yarlagadda, Prasad K. D. V, & Mengersen, K. (2014). Investigating effective wayfinding in airports: A Bayesian network approach. Transport, 29(1), 90-99. Frisken, F. and Soberman, R. M. (2010). Residential and Civil Construction Alliance of Ontario, & Risk Analytica. (2010). Delivering transit service in the GTHA: Where we are is not where we want to end up RiskAnalytica. Gibson, D. (2009). The Wayfinding Handbook: Information Design for Public Places. New York, NY: Princeton Architectural Press. Guo, Z. (2009). Does the pedestrian environment affect the utility of walking? A case of path choice in downtown Boston. Transportation Research Part D, 14(5), 343-352. Guo, Z. (2011). Mind the map! the impact of transit maps on path choice in public transit. Transportation Research Part A, 45(7), 625-639. Guo, Z., & Wilson, N. H. M. (2011). Assessing the cost of transfer inconvenience in public transport systems: A case study of the London underground. Transportation Research Part A, 45(2), 91-104. 48

Keane-Cowell, S. (2013). Signs of the Times. Retrieved from https://www.architonic.com/en/story/simon-keane-cowell-signs-of-the-times/7000779 Kepaptsoglou, K., Karlaftis, M. G., & Gkountis, J. (2013). A fuzzy AHP model for assessing the condition of metro stations. KSCE Journal of Civil Engineering, 17(5), 1109¬1116. doi:10.1007/ s12205¬013¬0411¬0 Li, P., Hibino, H., Koyama, S., & Zheng, M. (2012). Tailoring Map Design Based on Map-Reading and Way-Finding Behaviour in Subway Stations. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 42, 466-476. Metrolinx. (2008). The Big Move: Transforming Transportation in the Greater Toronto Hamilton Area. Metropolitan Transportation Authority. (2017). Retrieved from http://www.mta.info/ National Ballet of Canada. (2017). We Move You. Retrieved from https://national.ballet.ca/Explore/We-Move-You Neuman, L. W. (2006). Social Research Methods: Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches (6th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson Education, Inc. Ostler, T. (2014). Downtown Toronto: Trends, Issues, Intensification. City of Toronto. Popuri, Y., Proussaloglou, K., Ayvalik, C., Koppelman, F., & Lee, A. (2011). Importance of traveler attitudes in the choice of public transportation to work: Findings from the regional transportation authority attitudinal survey. Transportation, 38(4), 643-661. doi:10.1007/s11116011-9336-y Public Transport Victoria. (2017). https://www.ptv.vic.gov.au/ Raveau, S., Guo, Z., Muñoz, J. C., & Wilson, N. H. M. (2014). A Behavioural Comparison of Route Choice on Metro Networks: Time, Transfers, Crowding, Topology and SocioDemographics. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 66, 185-195. Reeve, B. (2017). TTC selling Honest Ed's Signs from Bathurst Station. Retrieved from http:// www.blogto.com/city/2017/03/ttc-selling-honest-eds-signs-bathurst-station/ Rüetschi, U. & Timpf, S. (2005). Modelling Wayfinding in Public Transport: Network Space and Scene Space. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,3343, 24-41. Society for Experiential Graphic Design. (2010). Awards. Retrieved from https://segd.org/global-design-awards/2010-awards Society for Experiential Graphic Design. (2011). Awards. Retrieved from https://segd.org/global-design-awards/2011-awards Society for Experiential Graphic Design. (2014). Awards. Retrieved from 49

https://segd.org/global-design-awards/2014-awards Society for Experiential Graphic Design. (2016). Awards. Retrieved from https://segd.org/global-design-awards/2016-awards Tokyo Metro. (2017). Retrieve from http://www.tokyometro.jp/en/index.html Toronto Transit Commission (2013). Five-Year Corporate Plan 2013-2017. Toronto Transit Commission. (2015). 2015 Customer Charter. Retrieved from https://www.ttc. ca/Customer_Service/Customer_Charter/2015_charter.jsp Toronto Transit Commission. (2016). 2016 Customer Charter. Retrieve from https://www.ttc. ca/Customer_Service/Customer_Charter/2016_Charter.jsp Transport for London. (2017). Retrieved from https://tfl.gov.uk/ Society for Experiential Graphic Design. (2017). A Multidisciplinary Community Creating Experiences that Connect People to Place. Retrieved from https://segd.org/ Transport for London. (2017). Retrieved from https://tfl.gov.uk/ Yuval, H. & Ranjitkar, P. (2012). Modeling Public-Transit Connectivity with Spatial-of-Transfer Measurements. Journal of Transport Geography, 2, 137-147. Zerdoun, Catherine. (2016). Under Ground Subways and Metros of the World. Richmond Hill, On: Firefly Books.

50

51

52

