Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2007

A novel digital modulation scheme for multilevel cascaded H-bridge inverters in high power AC drives
Mouzhi Dong
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Electrical and Computer Engineering Commons Recommended Citation
Dong, Mouzhi, "A novel digital modulation scheme for multilevel cascaded H-bridge inverters in high power AC drives" (2007). Theses and dissertations. Paper 159.

This Thesis Project is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

A Novel Digital Modulation Scheme for Multilevel Cascaded H-hridge Inverters in High Power AC Drives

by
MouzhiDong

A project presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Engineering in the Program of Electrical and Computer Engineering

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2007 ©(Mouzhi Dong) 2007
Pl~OPERTY

OF LIBRARY

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this project. .

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this project to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

( Signature ) I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this project by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholar research.

( Signature )

ii

BORROWER'S PAGE
Ryerson University requires the signatures of all persons using or photocopying this project. Please sign below, and give address and date.

Name

Address

Signature

Date

iii

A Novel Digital Modulation Scheme for Multilevel Cascaded H-hridge Inverters in High Power AC Drives Master of Engineering

2007
Mouzhi Dong Electrical and Computer Engineering Ryerson University, Canada

ABSTRACT
The multilevel cascaded H-bridge (CHB) inverters are widely used in megawatt variable speed drives, where the voltage level normally varies from seven to thirteen and the number of active switching devices used in the inverter is in the range of 36 to 72. The design of a simple modulation scheme for such inverters with superior harmonic performance is a challenging task. This project presents a novel digital multilevel modulation (DMM) scheme for multilevel CHB inverters. This scheme is very simple, flexible and easy to implement. To generate gate signals for all the active switches in the inverter, the scheme needs only to calculate a three-phase sine function once followed by a number of subtractions in each sampling period. In this project, the principle of the proposed modulation scheme is elaborated and its harmonic performance is analyzed. Comparisons are carried out between the DMM scheme and carrier based modulation schemes including phase-shifted and level-shifted
iv

modulations. It is demonstrated that the harmonic performance of the DMM scheme is on par with the best of carrier based modulation techniques. On the inverter side, line-to-line voltage THD of inverter output for the proposed modulation scheme is as low as IPD modulation scheme. On the line side, line current THD is as low as phase-shifted modulation scheme because of balanced power consumption in each power cell. Under the condition of device switching frequency unchanged, a new algorithm is developed to combine the advantages from both phase-shifted and IPD modulation schemes and conquer the drawback of both schemes. The simulation result shows that new modulation scheme has almost same line-to-line voltage harmonic spectrum from light to rated load with balanced power cells.

v


