MULTIRESOL UTION AL CHARACTERIZATION AND MITIGATION OF GNSS SIGNAL FOR ROBUST POSITIONING

by

Hossein Araln B. Eng. Electrical and COlnputer Engineering Ryerson University, Toronto, 2005

~lohan1mad

A thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirement for the degree of l\Iaster of Applied Science in the Program of Electrical and Computer Engineering Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2007 © l\Iohammad Hossein Aram

PROf'fRTY OF RYERSON IJi'liVESiITY lL£AA1n

Author's Declaration
I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Signature

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Signature

ii

Instructions on Borrowers
Ryerson University requires the signatures of all persons using or photocopying this thesis. Please sign below, and give address and date.

III

~Iohammad

Hossein Aram, M. A. Sc., Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ryerson University, Toronto, 2007.

Abstract

\Yhile the use of wavelet filtering on applications such as audio and video is knov.:n, in this research. wavelet filters are applied as a practical tool to improve positioning accuracy of a navigatioll-grade receiver in challenging environments. A single, stationary recel\,'er operating
OIl

the L1 frequency, and collecting data in 15-minute segments, was used to

obtain pseudoranges which were then used to compute positions. The magnitudes of these pseudoranges are often overstated due to multipath.
~Iultipath

mitigation was applied to

these signals using a hvo-stage wavelet filter. The first stage operates in the pseudorange domain to remove bias error and the second stage operates in the position domain to minimize the effect of the low velocities that existed among the stationary positions. This filtering had a marked effect of reducing positioning scatter (variance). To measure the effect of this filtering, several statistical moments (before and after filtering), were compared. Throughout datasets studied, the unfiltered position scatters tend to be markedly non-Gaussian shov"ing extreme effects of skew and kurtosis in addition to high variance. The position scatters after filtering tend to be highly Gaussian with far lower degrees of skew and kurtosis. In this study, the results obtained from the data sets sho'Ned significant improvement, less than 1.5 m with a probability of 96.5%, in standard deviation of the estimated positions.

iv

Acknowledgments
I would like to express my deep appreciation to my advisors, Dr. Sri Krishnan and Dr. Alagan Anpalagan, for their guidance and for providing excellent research opportunities during my studies. Thank you Dr. l(rishnan and Dr. Anpalagan. I would also like to thank l\Ir. Bern Grush and 1\1r. Aiden 1\Iorrison for their help and support during summer 2005. The author would like to acknowledge Ontario Graduate Scholarship (OGS) program for their financial support as \vell.

Thank you.

l\Iohammad Hossein Aram

v

Contents

1 Introduction
1.1 1.2 Global Positioning System (GPS) Overview GPS Architecture . . . 1.2.1 1.2.2 1.2.3 1.3 1.4 1.5 Space Segment Control Segment User Segment .

1

2
3 3
5

5 6
6 7

Objective of the Thesis !-.Iain Contribution of the Thesis. Organization of the Thesis . . . .

2 GPS Signal Structure and Characteristics
2.1 Computing a Position in 3-D . . . . . . . . 2.1.1 2.1.2 2.1.3 2.2 Determining a Position on a Plane Determining a Position on Three Dimensional Space Position Calculations

8
8
9
9

10
13 13 14 15

GPS Signal Structure . . . . 2.2.1 Fundamentals of Spread Spectrum Signaling

2.3

GPS Signal (CIA Code) Characteristics

2.3.1
2.3.2 2.3.3 2.4

CIA Code Generation . . . . . .
Auto and Cross Correlation of the CIA Codes The Transmitted Satellite Signals

16
18 19

Error Sources . . . . . . . . . . . vi

2.4.1 2.4.2 2.5 2.6

Received Signals

.....

20

?\Iultipath Error ?\Iodeling
~lethods

21

Current ?\Iultipath ?\Iitigation

26
27 29

Related Work . . '.' . . . . ..

3 Wavelet Analysis of CPS Signal
3.1 \Vavelet Analysis Overview . . . 3.1.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 ?\I nltilevel Representation of a Function.

29
33

Discrete \Vavelet Transform (DWT) . Filter Banks De-noising. 3.4.1 3.4.2 Noise Reduction I\IoJel . Threshold Selection .

35
36 38

39
11
42

3.5 3.6

COllventional Thresholding . The Proposed Thresholding l\Iethod . 3.6.1 ?\lodeling the Data ....

44

16

3.7

Chapter Summary

47
49
49 49

4 :Multipath Mitigation Strategies
4.1 Proposed Algorithm 4.1.1 4.1.2 4.1.3 4.2 4.3 Introduction. Entropy . . . Norm of the Entropies

50
52

Generating Synthetic Signal . Applying the Proposed Algorithm on the Real GPS Data

54

57
59

5 Results and Discussions
5.1 5.2 5.3 Experimental Setup .. Residual (Signal) Modeling Performance Analysis . . . .
Vll

59
61 63

5.3.1 5.3.2 5.4 6

Wavelet Analysis on Residuals, Thresholding. \Vavelet Analysis on Computed Positions . ................ .

63 66
74
76 77 78

Chapter Summary

Conclusions

A
Bibliography

viii

List of Figures
1.1 1.2 1.3 2.1 2.2
2.3

GPS Satellites Orbiting the Earth,taken from [6]. . . Detailed GPS Transmitted Signal, Cj A on L1 Band. Block Diagram of the Proposed Algorithm. Positioning on 2 Dimensional Plane . . . . . Positioning
011

2

4
6

9

3 Dimensional Space, taken from [6].

10 16 17 17 18 23 25 25 29 30 31 32 33 35 37 38 39

Cj A Code Generation, taken from [8].

2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9

The First 1023 Cj A (PRK6) Code. . . Auto and Cross correlation of the Cj A Code (PRK6 and PRN7). GPS Transmitted Signal, Cj A on L1 Band. Generated I\Iultipath Signals. . ...... .

The Effect of Rayleigh Channel on the GPS Signals .. Bit Error Rate of Rayleigh Channel.

A Typical Wavelet (db2) . . . . . . . .
Constant Resolution of a Windowed Signal (STFT) .. The \Viudowed Fourier Trcmsform of the Raw Signal Using a Sliding \Vindow. One Representation of a Time-Frequency Tile for the \Vavelet Transform. Scalogram of the Signal. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Daubechies (db2) Scaling and Corresponding Wavelet Functions. . A Typical Block Diagram of \Vavelet Analysis. A Three level \Vavelet Decomposition. ..

Illustration of Soft and Hard Thresholding ix

3.10 Soft and Hard Thresholding of the real GPS Data 3.11 A Typical Residual Data to Be Analyzed. 3.12 Thresholding the \\'avelet Coefficients Based on Donoho's Equation. 3.13 Thn~sho1ding the Wavelet Coefficients Ba.'if'd on Donoho's Equation. 3.14 \Vavelet Analysis of a GPS Data. . . . . . . . . . 3.15 Soft and Hard Thresholding of the real GPS Data 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 Entropies Corresponding to Each of the Satellites. Entropies Corresponding to the \\'hole Data Set .. Average of Entropies Corresponding to Each Satellites Average of Entropies Corresponding to Each Locations Norm of the Entropies . . . . . . . . . Normalized Entropy of the Locations. Synthetic l\Iultipath Signal. . . . . . Normalized Rl\IS Value of the Distortion .. \\'avelet Analysis of a GPS Data.

40 43 43 44 44 48 51 52 53 53 55
vv
r-r-

56 57 58 58 59 60 60 62 64

4.10 \\'avelet Analysis of a GPS Data. 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 Data Collection Setup. . . . . . . The Four Locations Where Data Was Collected. Easting and North Errors of the Second Location, from Right-side of Fig. 5.2. Typical Code-Carrier Data. ........................ .

Comparison of the Positions Precision Resulted from Eqs. 3.22 and 3.35. Comparison of the Positions Precision Resulted from Eqs. 3.22 and 3.35, Another Location.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

64 66 67 68 69

5.7 5.8 5.9

Improvement and Degradation of the Standard Deviation of 29 Data Sets. Effect of Leveling on the Scatter Points, 1eve1=2. . . . . . . . . . . Norm and Cumulative Distribution Function (cdf) Improvements.

5.10 Effect of Leveling on the Scatter Points, levcl= 10. . . . . . . . . .

x

5.11 Norm of the Standard Devifttion Improvements, Level=lO. . . . . . . . 5.12 Finftl Norm and Cumulative Distrihution Function (cdf) Improvements. 5.13 Kurtosis of the \Vhole Dftta Sets. 5.14 Ske\vness of the \Vhble Data Sets. 5.15 Actual Computed Positions of a Location. 5.16 A Location in Down Town Toronto. . . . . 5.17 Block Diagram of the Proposed Positioning. A.1 C/ A Code Phase Assignment, taken from [2].

69 70 71 72 72 73 74

77

xi

List of Tables
4.1 5.1 Entropies of the Example. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Comparison of the
Snorm

54

for the Location Sho\vn in Fig. 5.6.

65

xii

Chapter 1 Introduction
The Global Positioning system (GPS) is a satellite based system which was initially developed for military purposes to track targets by the U.S. Department of Defense (000); but beyond its original uses, the GPS has proved to be an asset in variety of civilian applications as well. Flight, marine, land navigations, logistics, asset location, survey, construction, animal husbandry, and recreation are just a few to name for the GPS applications. One of the GPS usage is to pinpoint a location on the Earth. One's position could be reported \"ith an accuracy up to 300 m, as if the user was in the right place or anywhere on a circle of radius 300 m. Interestingly, this huge difference comes from a tiny time error as low as 1 Ii s. Eliminating this tiny error has been of the interest for many years. Estimating a signal that is corrupted by noise has been the focus of many researchers for practical as well as theoretical reasons. The problem is to recover the original signal from the noisy data. \Ve \vant the recovered signal to be as close as possible to the original signal, retaining most of its important properties (e.g. smoothness). Traditional denoising schemes are based on linear methods, where the most common choice is the 'Wiener filtering. Recently, nonlinear methods, especially those based on wavelets have become increasingly popular [1]. The application of wavelets in signal processing especially in the area of Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) has been of interest for many years. \Vavelets are applied to the GNSS signal, i.e. GPS (Global Positioning System), to denoise or mitigate multipath error which in turn helps to decrease the standard deviation of the computed positions.

1

1.1

Global Positioning System (GPS) Overview

2

CPS is a line-of-sight, all weather, world-wide continuously available satellite-based Radio Frequency (RF) positioning system, providing three-dimensional position, velocity, and time capability to end-users with an appropriate receiver. The system may be vie\ved as consisting of space (the actual satellites), control (management of satellite operations), and user segments. The user segment includes all aspects of the equipment required for civil and military use of the system. The full operational constellation of CPS
\~.:as

declared in April

1995 with the baseline CPS system being specified for 24 satellites. However, the system rnrwntly employs more satellites than spcdfi(xl in the nominal constellation, and at the time of writing, the CPS constellation consists of 29 Block II/HA/IIR satellites (US :0l"aval Observatory, 2006). All the satellites are inclined at 55° to the equator and are orbiting the Earth every 11 hours and 58 minutes at a height of 20180 km on six different orbital planes [2]. These satellites are orientated in such a \vay that from any place on the Earth, at any time, at least four satellites are available for navigational purposes as shO\vn in Fig. 1.1. As the demand for

Figure 1.1: GPS Satellites Orbiting the Earth,taken from [6J.

the use of CPS is increasing, the higher performance and accuracy are required. Although the degree of accuracy is highly application dependent (like life threatening applications), the fundamental aspects of positioning remain unchanged. CPS uses pseudoranges, derived from the broadcast satellite signals, to locate a user's position. The pseudorange is measured

3 either by travel time of the coded signal and multiplying it by its velocity or by measuring the phase of the signaL In both cases the clocks of the receiver and the satellite are employed. Since these clocks are never perfectly synchronized, instead of true ranges, pseudoranges are obtained where the synchronization error (delloted as clock error) is taken into account [3]. GPS offers two kinds of services. the Precise Positioning Service (PPS) and the Standard Positioning Service (SPS). PPS includes a feature, called Anti-Spoofing (AS), and can be accessed only by DoD-authorized users equipped with appropriate encryption keys. However, SPS is open to all civil users and is used in this research.

1.2

GPS Architecture

The all \veather global system consists of three segments: · the space segment, consisting of satellites which broadcast signals · the control segment, steering the whole system · the user segment, including the many types of receivers.

1.2.1

Space Segment

The space segment of the system includes the constellation of GPS satellites. These space vehicles (SVs) transmit radio signals from space to the users. Each satellite has four atomic clocks on-board, but only one of them is being used to generate the fundamental L-band frequency of 10.23 11Hz. From this fundamental frequency two other carrier frequencies are derived. The L1 and L2 frequencies are generated by multiplying the fundamental frequency by 154 and 120 respectively [5]. · L1=1575.42 MHz, A=19 em · L2=1227.60 MHz, A=24.4 cm Fig. 1.2 shows detailed block diagram of the transmitted signal. The minimum signal

4
x 154
1575
4~MHZ

Antenna

L 1 carner
BPSK

102'3'V1HZ

Data

Figure 1.2: Detailed CPS Transmitted Signal, C/ A on L1 Band.

strength received on Earth is approximately -158 dBW to -160 dBW [6]. Every SV transmits its exact position and its precise on board clock time to the Earth at rate of Ll frequency.

Navigation Message
The navigation message is a continuous stream of data transmitted at 50 bps, as illustrated in Fig. 1.2. Each satellite relays the following information to Earth: · system time and clock correction values · its own highly accurate orbital data (ephemeris) · approximate orbital data for all other satellites (almanac) · system health (the whole satellite system is \vorking properly or not) The navigation message is needed to calculate the current position of the satellites and to determine signal transit times. The Cj A (coarse acquisition) code is a bi-phase coded signal which changes the carrier phase between 0 and
7r

at a rate of 1.023 :t\IHz. The navigation

data bit is also bi-phase code, but its rate is only 50 Hz, or each data bit is 20 ms long. Since the Cj A code is 1 ms, there are 20 Cj A codes in one data bit. Thus, in one data bit all 20

Cj A codes have the same phase.

1.2.2

Control Segment

5

The control system consists of a master control station, monitor stations, and ground control satiations. The main operational tasks of the control segment are [3, 6]: · observing the movement of the satellites and computing orbital data (ephemeris) · monitoring the satellite clocks and predicting their behavior · synchronizing on hoard satellite time · relaying precise orbital data received from satellites in communication · relaying the approximate orbital data of all satellites (almanac) · checking the satellite health and clock errors. The control segment is also responsible for SA (selective availability) to degrade the system's positional accuracy for civil use.

1.2.3

User Segment

User segment includes user hardware and processing software for positioning, navigation, and timing applications. Today, GPS receivers are routinely being used to conduct all types of land and geodetic control surveys. Nowadays, most of the receivers can provide a good position approximation (less than 15 m horizontally) in an open sky, which most of the time is not the case. In an urban area such as downtown Toronto, the accuracy and precision of the computed positions will decrease mainly due to multipath error. The multipath could cause an error in the order of hundreds of meter horizontally. GPS receivers track and decode the signals from the satellites. A CPS receiver computes the location of the satellites based on their ephemeris and al;o measures the distance to the satellites based on the travel time of the radio signals. The receiver then deduces its own location based on a simple mathematical principle called trilateration in three-dimensional space. Accurate timing is the key to measuring distance to satellites. Atomic clocks carried

6 on board the satellites are synchronized. In order to use inexpensive quartz oscillators, the

.'mrements receivers can utilize an extra satellite range measurement. With the distance mea. from at least four satellites, not only can the receiver calculate its position, but the receiver can also remove its clock bias (refer to chapter 2 for more details ).

1.3

Objective of the Thesis

l'Iultipath mitigation of the CPS signals both in terms of theory and application have been of the interest for many years. In this thesis we developed an algorithm which post-processes the signals and positions, from an inexpensive receiver operating only on Ll frequency, to decrease the standard deviation of the computed positions. 'Wavelet analysis was used in two different stages to mitigate the effect of multipath and noise associated with the received data. Fig. 1.3 shows the block diagram of the proposed algorithm.

Figure 1.3: Block Diagram of the Proposed Algorithm.

1.4

Main Contribution of the Thesis

The blocks which are shaded in Fig. 1.3 are the author's main contributions, which are broken down to: · study of CPS system and signal in details · investigate wavelets for CPS multipath and signal processing; the discussion is necessary to build background for the proposed threshold value · propose a novel threshold value based on eigenvalues of the wavelet coefficients · develop adaptive filter level selection procedure

7

· to identify and eliminate low velocities that exist among computed positions · do performance evaluation using real data, and validation of the proposed algorithm

1.5

Organization of the Thesis

This thesis is organized in six chapters. In Chapter 1 we review at basics of the CPS. ?\lore specifically the CPS architecture is reviewed. CPS signal structure and characteristics are discussed in Chapter 2. In this chapter we study positioning, Cj A code, and CPS errors. Chapter 3 is about \vavelets. An introductory part on wavelets is presented first, ami then we analyze noise reduction and filtering procedures. rvlultipath mitigation strategies are discussed in Chapter 4. In this chapter entropy and proposed algorithm are discussed in details. Chapter.5 is 3..'1signed to the results, and finally, Chapter 6 is the conclusion of the thesis.

Chapter 2 GPS Signal Structllre and Characteristics
The accuracy and precision of the computed positions in a receiver mainly depend on the location of the user. If the location is in an urban canyon area (such as downtmvn Toronto), the distance bet\veen the user and the satellites play an important rule in calculating the coordinates. The distance is calculated from the basic equation of velocity (i.e., speed of the light) times the traveling time. Therefore, the main source of error is hidden in the time. The transmitted signals from SVs will be affected by the channel characteristics which are mainly the atmospheric errors, including tropospheric and ionospheric delays, and multipath error. All these errors, plus the other sources of errors such as receiver clock drift, or thermal noises will show themselves as timing errors, which will consequently be converted to the ranging errors.

2.1

Computing a Position in 3-D
signal transit time and knowing the distance to a satellite are still not enough to

~leasuring

calculate one's position in three dimensional plane. To achieve this, four independent transit time measurements are required. That is, four different satellites are needed to locate a recei ver (user).

8

9

2.1.1

Determining a Position on a Plane

\Vith only one satellite in view, the 'user has the pseudorange value of P. Then, the position of the user \-vill be on the circumference of a circle having radius P. This radius is at least 20000 km long; therefore, imagine where could the user be on the circle. To narrow down the search, the user could use two pseudoranges (P l , P 2 ) from two SVs. In this case, the position of the user is where the two circles of the radius P 1 and P2 intersect. Obviously, there are two intersection points in that case, but the point above the satellites will be ignored as shown in Fig. 2.1.

X.Axis

Figure 2.1: Positioning on 2 Dimensional Plane.

2.1.2

Determining a Position on Three Dimensional Space

\Vhile two satellites are sufficient to locate a receiver in two dimensional plane (with latitude and longitude), a position has to be determined in three dimensional space (with latitude,longitude, and height). Therefore, a third satellite is needed to fully position a user. With three pseudoranges, the position of the user will be on the surface of a sphere, which results from the intersection of the three spheres as illustrated in Fig. 2.2. It was stated [3] that three pseudoranges are needed to compute a position. This is true provided that there is no timing errors. In other words, the atomic clock on-board and the receiver clock need to be synchronized. However, this is not the case. There is no synchronization between

10

~--

......

-

Figure 2.2: Positioning on 3 Dimensional Space, taken from [6].

a receiver and satellite clocks. Even if the error difference between the receiver clock and the transmit time is 1 ps, it produces a position error of 300 m. To overcome this problem the timing error is considered to be an unknown; consequently, there are four unknowns (longitude, latitude, hight, and time error) to be solved in a 3-D positioning.

2.1.3

Position Calculations

In order for a GPS receiver to determine its position, it has to receive time signals from
four different satellites to calculate signal transit times
~tl

to

~t4.

The range of the user

from the four satellites Rb R 2 , R 3 , and R4 can be determined with the help of signal transit times,
~tl

to

~t4'

between the four satellites and the receiver. Since the locations of the four

satellites are known, as mentioned in section 1.2.1, the user co-ordinates can be calculated [6]. Due to the atomic clocks on-board, the time at which the satellite signal is transmitted is known precisely. All satellite clocks are synchronized based on universal time co-ordinates (UTC) [2]. In contrast, the receiver clock is not synchronized to UTC and is therefore, slower or faster by
~to.

The sign of ~to is positive when the user clock is faster and negative
~to

otherwise. The resultant time error

causes inaccuracies in the measurement of signal

transit time and the distance R (true range of.the satellite from user) [6],
~tmeas'Ured = ~t

+ ~to => P S R =
PSR

~tmeas'Ured · c
(~t

(2.1) (2.2)
(2.3)

=

+ ~to) . c

P S R = R + ~to . c => P S R = R + r,

11 where tlt is signal transit time from satellite to receiver, tlto is the resultant time error, which is the difference between sat,ellite and receiver clock plus the time delay due to errors (such as multipath), c is the speed of the light, and PSR represents the pseudorange. In Eq. (2.3) the error distance r is the distance dne to the resultant time error main contributions in this thesis is to derive approximate value for r. Since the X, Y, Z coordinates of the SVs are known to users, the true distance R can be calculated as: (2.4) where Xs; is the X coordinate of the known satellite and Xu, is the user coordinate (unknown). The subscripts si and ui in X 8 , and Xu, are the index values. Eq. (2.1) is a general equation representing a distance. It could be used in a stationary or a dynamic mode. Since the number of satellites must be at least four to fully locate a user position, the indexing i is from 1 to 4. By replacing Eq. (2.4) in Eq. (2.3), the resultant pseudoranges will have the form of Eq. (2.5). (2.5) Eq. (2.5) represents a set of non-linear equations with four unknowns. One method to solve the system of non-linear equations is to linearize them first. The Taylor series is a known method to be used for this problem. The general form of the Taylor series is as follows:
!:lt~.

One of the

f(x) = f(xo)

+ -,-.!:lx + 1.

j' (xo)

f" (XO)2

, 2.

.!:lx +

j''' (xO)3
3.

,

.tlx + ...

,

(2.6)

where tlx is the error or deviation from the true value of x (tlx = x - xo) and xo is an initial or guessing value. The same principle is used to approximate a solution for the above mentioned non-linear system. However, as the value of error decreases at the high order of Taylor series in navigation applications, it is sufficient to accept the Taylor series up to its first order for our purpose [2].

l' (xo) J(x) = J(xo) + -l!-·tlx

(2.7)

12 Eq. (2.7) is the simplified version of the Taylor series to be used to solve the llon-linear system of equations expressed in Eq. (2.5). Therefore, the unknown terms Xu" Yu" and Zu, in the Eq. (2.5) can be replaced with the initial values of [2, 5]: Xu, = Xg + ~x
Yu , = Yg

+ ~y

ZUi = Zg

+ ~z

(2.8)

where the Xg is an initial or guessing value for the X coordinate of the user. Consequently, Eq. (2.4) will be transformed to Eq. (2.9). (2.9) where
R9i

is the guessing distance between a user and a satellite. By applying the Taylor

series on Eq. (2.9), the pseucloranges expressed in Eq. (2.5) \vill be transformed to Eq.
(2.10),

P RS· = R . +
I

g,

D(R ) D(R ) D(R ) g, .~x + g, .~y + g, .~z ax iJy oz

+ c.~t 0

(2.10)

where, 8(Rg,) Dx Xg - X s.
Rgi

(2.11)

Therefore, Eq. (2.12) is a final represclltatioll of the pscudoranges. (2.12) Now, we can solve the linear system of equations with the unknowns [2,5].
~x, ~y, ~z,

and

~to

(2.13)

~ ~~]
[

=

6. t o

Xg-X.! Rg Xg- "2 R X g-_ "I Rg } X g - "I R g4

Yg-Y,! Yg- "2 Rgf-; Yg- "3 Rg ?, Yg- "4 R g4

Zg-Z.! Zg- "2 Ry~ Zg- "3 R gZ Zg- "4
R 94

-1

13

!< Yk .

R9y'

R9Z

C C C

[ PSR, - Rg,
. PSR2 PSR3 PSR4 -

]

Rg2 Rg3 Rg4

(2.14)

C

The solutions of the unknowns are used to update the initial positions X g , Yg, and Zg in accordance with Eq. (2.15).

X neWi = X 01dg

+ ~x + 6.y
(2.15)

Ynewi = Y01dg

In case there is no solution to the system of the equations, we could use another satellite data. For example, in case we have six satellites in view, we could replace PSR5 and the PSR 1 and PSR2 . The estimated values X newil Ynewil and
Znew,

PS~

with

can now be entered into

the set of equations given by Eq. (2~14) using normal iterative process until error components

6.x, !;).y, and

!;)'z

are smaller than the desired error value (Le., 10 cm) [6]. Usually, three to

five iterations would be sufficient to get an error less than 10 em [3].

2.2

G PS Signal Structure

Because GPS signal falls into the category of signals known as spread spectrum signaling, the fundamentals of spread spectrum signaling are introduced next._ The chapter continues with a detailed description of the GPS signal structure for civil coarse acquisition (el A code) signal.

2.2.1

Fundamentals of Spread Spectrum Signaling

Spread spectrum signaling in its most fundamental form is a method of taking a data signal

D(t) of bandwidth Bd that is modulated on a sinusoidal carrier to form d(t), and then
spreading its bandwidth to a much larger value B s, where Bs

> > Bd · The bandwidth

spreding can be accomplished by multiplying the data modulated carrier by a wide bandwidth

spreading waveform s(t) [2J. The binary data bit stream D(t) with values D = ±1 and clock rate on a carrier of power Pd to form the narrow bandwidth signal:

14

h is first modulated

d(t) = D(th!2PdCOS(Wdt).

(2.16)

This narrow bandwidth signal of bandwidth Bd is then spread in bandwidth by a binary pseudorandom signal s(t), where s(t) = ±1 and has a clock rate data bit rate, i.e.

Ie

that greatly exceeds the

Ie > > h

[2J.

The spread spectrum signal then has the following form:

so(t) = s(t)d(t) = s(t)D(t)y'2Pdcos(Wdt),
where the spreading signal is as follows:

(2.17)

s(t) =

L
n=-oo

00

Snp(t - nTe),

(2.18)

and p(t) is a rectangular unit pulse over the interval (0, Te = 1/ Ie), and Sn is a random or pseudorandom sequence Sn = ±1 [2].

2.3
ILl

GPS Signal (CIA Code) Characteristics
hz

As mentioned previously, each GPS satellite transmits signals on two L-band frequencies of at 1575.42 MHz and at 1227.60 MHz. The signal can be split into three parts.

The first part is the carriers which are the carrier waves with

hI

or

hz

frequency. The

second part of the signal is the navigation data. The navigation data provides the means for the receiver to determine the location of the satellite at the time of signal transmission. The navigation message, which contains inforf!1ation about the satellites, G PS time, clock behavior, and system status, is modulated on both the Ll and L2 carriers at a chip rate of 50 bits per second (bps) with a bit duration of 20 ms. These information are transmitted to all satellites from the ground stations in the GPS Control Segment. The third part, spreading sequence, was briefly explained in section 2.2.1.

15 Each satellite has two unique spreading sequences or codes. The first one is the coarse acquisition (CIA) pseudorandom noise (PRN) code sequence modulating the L1 carrier phase, and the other one is the encrypted precision code (P(Y)) sequence modulating both the L1 and L2 carrier phases. L1 is Binary-Phase Shift Key (BPSK) modulated with a pseudo random noise 1.023 MHz code known as the Coarse/Acquisition (CIA) code. This CIA code sequence repeats every millisecond. The transmitted PRN code sequence is actually the modulo-2 addition of the 50 Hz navigation message and the CIA code [5].

2.3.1

CIA Code Generation

The signal transmitted from satellite k can be described as [2, 4]:

Sk(t)

=

J2Pc(C k (t) EEl Dk(t»cos(21fJLlt)

+ V2PPLl(pk(t) ttl Dk(t»sin(21f fLlt)
+V2PPL2(p k(t)
@

Dk(t»sin(21fJL2t)

(2.19)

where Pc, PPLl, and PPL2 are the powers of signals with CjA code, Ck is the CIA code sequence assigned to satellite number k, pk is the P(Y) code sequence assigned to satellite number k, Dk is the navigation data sequence, and fLl and h2 are the carrier frequencies of L1 and L2 respectively. The spreading sequences used as CIA codes in GPS belong to a unique set of sequences. They are often referred to as Gold codes. They are also referred to as pseudo-random noise sequences or simply PRN sequences because of their characteristics. The generation of the Gold codes is sketched in Fig. 2.3. As illustrated in there, the CIA code generator contains two shift registers known as Gland G2. Each of these shift registers has ten states generating sequences of length 1023 chip. The two resulting 1023 chip long' sequences are modulo-2 added to generate a 1023 chip long Cj A code. For every 1023rd chip, the shift registers are reset with all ones, making the code to start over. G 1 always has a feed back configuration with the following polynomial. [2]: (2.20)

16

G,

H-t=:-----t-....;;;..--l-t-}----

GotdCode

ClAcode
XG,(I)

1kHz

1--_ _

50Hz

Figure 2.3: C/ A Code Generation, taken from [8].

which states that the registers three and ten are inputs to the XOR gate and the output of the gate goes back into the register one. In the same way, the G2 register has the following polynomial [2]: (2.21) The G1 always supplies its output, but the G2 supplies two of its states to a modulo-2 adder to generate its output. The selection of states for the modulo-2 adder is called the phase selection. Fig. A.1 (given in Appendix A) shows the combination of the phase selections for each C/A code. It also shows the first 10 chips of each code in octal representation. Fig. 2.4 shows a sample generated (with Matlab) CIA ~ode (PRN 6).

2.3.2

Auto and Cross Correlation of the C/ A Codes

The most important characteristics of the CIA codes are their correlation properties. Based on the design of the Gold codes, all the CIA codes are nearly uncorrelated with themselves,

17

0.5

,
I
!

-0.5

'0.2

..

' - - .'-.
0.008

'-0.012 0.014

0.016

0.4

0.6
ttme(ms)

0.8

a

0.002

0.004

0.008

o.ot

bme(ms)

(a) Generated Cj A Code (PRN 6).

(b) Partial (Zoomed) Part of the Cj A Code.

Figure 2.4: The First 1023 Cj A (PRN6) Code. except at zero lag, and nearly uncorrelated Witll each other. Fig. 2.5(a) shows high correlaAutocorrelatIOn at the PRN6ICA Code, Transmrtted Cross Correlation betwe6n PRN6 and PRN7

0.9

0.9 0.8
0.7

08
0.7

lO.6

~

.~ 0.5

s

S0.4
0.2
0.2

u 0.3

200

400

600

800

800

1000

Lags

(a) Auto-correlation of the C/ A Code (PRN 6). (b) Cross-correlation between PRN6 and PRN7.

Figure 2.5: Auto and Cross correlation of the Cj A Code (PRN6 and PRN7). tion at zero lag when correlating with the same Cj A code, while Fig. 2.5(b) illustrates low correlation when correlating with another Cj A code (PRN6 and PRN7). Correlation property of the C/ A codes is used in receivers to find out which satellite is being tracked. The principle is that receivers generate their own PRNs and try to match them with the received signals. Therefore, the high value of correlation at zero lag makes it easy to find out when two similar codes are perfectly aligned.

2.3.3

The Transmitted Satellite Signals

18

As shown in Fig. 2.6, the transmitted satellite signal (on Ll, C/ A code) consists of Llcarrier, navigation data, and the C/ A ranging code. The description of the navigation data is mentioned in sections 1.2.1 and 2.3. The transmitted signal undergoes changes on the way
Multiplier Carrier frequency generator 1575.42 MHz L 1 carrier Transmitted } - - - - - . sate lIite signal (BPSK)

PRN code generator 1.023 MHz

Data generator (C/A code) 50 Bit/sec Data

Exdusive-or

Figure 2.6: GPS Transmitted Signal, Cj A on 11 Band.

to a receiver on the Earth. These changes take place in the space (mainly passing through the troposphere and ionosphere layers) and on the Earth (equipment and multipath errors). Therefore, the GPS signal incurs losses during its propagation from the satellite to the Earth.

Signal Power
The line-of-sight CPS signals received by users are -160 dB\V in strength [2]. The dimension dB\V denotes the ratio of power relative to 1 Watt. A value of -160 dB\V corresponds to -130 dBm, which denotes power with respect to 1 m \V. The GPS signals are not to exceed the internationally agreed power values set to avoid interference with other users and systems [10]. The noise power of the broadcast GPS signal is:

Np = kTB,

(2.22)

where Np is the noise power in \Vatt, k is the Boltzmans constant (1.38066xlO- 23 J/K), T is the equivalent noise temperature (nominally 273 K), and B is the bandwidth in units of Hz. Within Ll C/ A main lobes of a 2.046 l\IHz bandwidth, which contains about 90% of

19 the signal power, the noise power is approximately -141 dBW. In poor signal conditions the power of the satellite signal is even further decreased. Metals and concrete Ilear the receiver result in up to a 20 dB loss or more; plywood sheets may lead to a 3 dB loss; drywall to a loss of about 1 dB; trees typically bring about a loss of 5 to 8 dB and up to 20 dB or even more, depending on the tree size and density of foliage [10]. Thus, the amount of signal attenuation depends on the structure of the material, its density, and how much material the signal passes through.

2.4

Error Sources

Error sources affecting the GPS signals can be categorized in four groups as follows:
1. Satellite originated errors: including hard"vare delay, speed of the light, ephemeris, and

clock errors. · Although each satellite has four atomic clocks on-board, a time error of just 10 ns creates an error of 3m. · The position of a satellite is generally known only to within approximately 1 to 5m. · The signals from satellite to the user travel at the speed of light. This slows down when traveling through the Ionosphere and Troposphere layers of the atmosphere, therefore, speed of the light can not considered to be constant. 2. Ionospheric and Tropospheric delays · A major source of bias error is the delay of the GPS carrier signals as they pass through the layer of charged ions and free electrons known as the ionosphere. Varying in density and thickness as it rises and falls ( 50 to 500 km) due to solar pressure and geomagnetic effects, the ionosphere layer can delay the GPS signals (code) by as much as 300 ns (100 m) [2].

20

· GPS signal delays through the troposphere, the layer of atmosphere usually associated with changes in weather (from ground level up to 8 to 13 km), are subject to local conditions and are difficult to model. 3. Geometric effect of the satellites · Satellite geometry is the constellation of the satellites in the sky. If the four SV's needed to compute a position are close to each other, the accuracy and precision deteriorates and visa versa. 4. Receiver errors: including hardware delay, system noise, clock, and multipath errors. · Among the receiver errors, multipath is the most difficult one to mitigate, since it is very hard to model it. 1lultipath interference, caused by local reflections of the GPS signal that mix with the desired signal, introduces varying bias errors in the order of nanoseconds.

2.4.1

Received Signals

The quality of the received signals, by a GPS receiver, highly depend on the environment where the receiver's antenna is placed, since GPS signals can arrive at the receiver via multiple paths. Although signal degradation caused by troposphere and ionosphere delays have the same degree of importance as the multipath error, the emphasis is on multipath mitigation in this thesis. The transit time of a signal from a satellite to a receiver can be measured as the amount of shift required to align the C/ A code replica generated at the receiver with the signal received from the satellite. The received signal is identified and aligned \vith the receiver clock generated signal through the exploitation of the autocorrelation properties of the PRN codes. 1lultiplying the transit time by the speed of light results in the measured satellite-touser range. Timing errors between the receiver clock and the satellite clock from system time cause the observed range to differ from the geometric distance corresponding to the instants of transmission and reception of the satellite signal [10]. Therefore, the measured range is

21 called the pseudorEmge. In addition to the clocks causing the pseudorange to differ from the

geometric range, the pseudorange measurement contains various other error components as mentioned above. The effect of some of these errors or biases are taken into account and corrected hy the receiver, like the effect of the receiver dock drift, which is included as an unknown in the calculation of the position, or the effect of the ionosphere, "vhich is mitigated using ionospheric models. However, the effect of multipath, \vhich is to delay the line-of-sight signal by some amount, is difficult to mitigate. r..lultipnt h disturbance is largely
illflllcn('(~d

by the receiver's antenna environment since satellite signals can arrive at a CPS receiver via multiple paths due to reflections from nearby trees, terrain, buildings, and vehicles. For the CPS Cj A signal, this error can range from a few meters up to more than 100 m, depending on the scenario [2].

2.4.2

Multipath Error Modeling

A multipath transmission takes place when a transmitted signal arrives at the receiver by two or more paths of different delays. In radio links, a signal can be received by direct path between the transmitting and the receiving antenna and also by reflections from other objects such as hills or buildings, and so on [11]. In each of these cases, the transmission channel can be represented as several channels in parallel, each with different relative attenuation and a different time delay. A simplified version of a direct GPS signal, Eq. (2.19), can be expressed as:
(2.23)

where A is amplitude, P(t) is the pseudo-code, and

We

is the carrier frequency of the trans-

mitted signal. The reflected signals could be modeled as:

Sm(t) =

L GkAP(t - 6k)sin(wc t + (h),
k=l

m

k = 1, ... , Tn

(2.24)

where m represents the number of reflected signals, Ok is the attenuation factor, 6k is the delayed time, and Ok is the phase shift caused by the reflection of the signal from any physical

22 object. Therefore, the received CPS signal, S(t) in Eq. (2.25), is a superposition of the direct plus the reflected signals. (2.25)

S(t) = AP(t)sin(wct ) +

L akAP(t - 6 )sin(w t + Ok)
k
c

m

k=l

At the receiver, these multipath waves with randomly distributed amplitudes and phases combine to give a resultant signal. Therefore, a receiver at one location may have a signal that is much different from the signal at another location only a short distance a\vay because of the change in the phase relationship among the incoming radio \vaves. This situation causes significant fluctuations in the signal amplitude. This phenomenon of random fluctuations in the received signal level is termed as fading [11]. If it is assumed that there is
llO

direct path

or line of sight (LOS) component, which is the case in most of the urban canyon areas, the received signal, S(t), can be expressed as:

S(t) =

L akcos(wc t + Ok)'
k

m

(2.26)

When there is relative motion between the transmitter and the receiver, Eq. (2.26) must be modified to include the effects of motion induced frequency and phase shifts. The
kth

reflected wave with amplitude ak and phase Ok arrive at the receiver from an angle (k relative to the direction of motion of antenna or the transmitter. The Doppler shift of this wave is given by: (2.27) where v is the velocity of the mobile, c is the speed of the light, and (k is uniformly distributed over [0,271"]. Therefore, the received signal now can be shown as:

S(t) =

L akcos(wc t +
k=l

m

Wd k

t + Ok)'

(2.28)

Obviously, in case of stationary process the value of Wd k will be zero. Figs. 2.7(a) and 2.7(b) show the generated received signals when the number of paths is simulated to be one and

23
signal before aoo after drslOl1lOn signal before aoo after d"lorOOn

"I

I
~v \111\ ~WN:iIII \!WJ#~hI
I

-1

-4

\0
lime Ins)

15

10
bme Ins)

15

20

( a)

011(' .\d(kd Pal h.

(11)

T (>l1

Addl'd Paths.

Figure 2. 7 : CCllcmted \Illltipath Sigllab.

tpn l'l'sr)('ctiw'h'. III Fig. 2.7. tile darker color

\\'(1.\'f'

(constHllt alllplitude) is the direct a.nd
\\'c\\T

ulHlistortcd t rClW:lllli tt('d signal. \\·hilp t he more oscillaton-

is t he corm ptC'd signal with

random ampli t udes and pllases (resultant of tilt> lluritipaths signal) . In order to observp the effect of the multipn,th more closely, two C / A cod('s (PRX6 H .nd
pnx~)

\\-ere gellerat('cl. These

t\\'()

signals

\\,(':1'('

the11

SE llt

through

<l

Ra.yleigh chamlcl to

observe the effect. of multipaths. In this regard, Rayleigh fading is first discussed.

Rayleigh Distribution
The Ra.yleigh distributioll usually arises whe11 a two dimensional vector which ha,'j its two orthogonal cOlllPonents nonn(\.ll~· awl independc11th' d ist ributed. The distributioll lIlay also arise in the case of randolIl complex numbers whose real a.ud imaginary components are normall.\' (lnd illdepenclcntly distributed. The absolute \'alue of these numbers will then be Rayleigh distributed. The Rayleigh densit.\, function is chamcterizecl b,v the PDF givell ill
Eq. (2.29) [11].
,.~o

T

< ()

(2.29 )

R
rv

rv

Rayleigh(li) is a Rayleigh distribution if R =

J X2 +

24

y2 \vhere X and Yare both

N(O, li 2 ), and are two independent normal distributions.

Rayleigh Fading
In practice, we encounter channels whose transmission characteristics vary with time. The time variations of the channel properties arise because of semi-periodic and random changes in the propagation characteristics of the medium. Hence, the effective channel transfer

function varies semi-periodically and randomly, causing random attenuation of the signal. This phenomenon is known as fading [11]. Rayleigh fading is a statistical model for the effect of a propagation environment on a radio signal, such as that used by wireless devices. It assumes that the power of a signal that has passed through such a transmission medium (also called a communications channel) will vary randomly, or fade, according to a Rayleigh distribution. It is a reasonable model for tropospheric and ionospheric signal propagation as well as the effect of heavily built-up urban environments on radio signals. Rayleigh fading is most applicable when there is no line of sight between the transmitter and receiver. If there is a line of sight, Rician fading is more applicable. In other words, Rayleigh fading is a reasonable model when there are many objects in the environment that scatter the radio signal before it arrives at the receiver. The requirement that there will be many scatterers present means that Rayleigh fading can be a useful model in heavily built-up city centers where there is no line of sight between the transmitter and receiver and many buildings and other objects attenuate, reflect, refract and diffract the signal. In order to observe how Rayleigh fading is affecting the transmitted signal, two real C/ A code were simulated and passed through the Rayleigh channel as illustrated in Fig. 2.8. In Fig. 2.8(a), the darker color represents the transmitted signal, and the lighter color shows the received signal. The resulting bit error rate (BER), is plotted and shown in Fig. 2.9. The lower curve in Fig. 2.9 represents the BER of the transmitted signal before fading. As expected, the received signal (after fading) has a higher BER due to the distortions. To

25
,
:~~$~ttool
12 12

II

,

1-

I

~

0.8

I-I

'I
o8t

06-

06~

0.4 ~

I
02 -

J
,
0.105

"'I
02 f

-,
0115

-,
0135

01 -

-O~ 1

,
013 01'

011

0 12

0 125
IImI {IltS)

0 1.. 5

015

-0~1,

0105

011

0 115

0.12

0125
ltt11$(ms)

0.13

0135

0. 14

0.145

o i5

(a ) PR:'\ / C.\ Code :'\ ulltl wr 6.

(b) PR 1\"/ CA

CO ([(> ~ \llllh <:' r

0.

F igure 2.8: The Effect of Rayleigh Channel on the GPS Signals.
gCW-'l'<lt e F ig . 2.0. the a uth or Ilsed seqlle ll ce ofbill il.ry nUlllb e ni pass illg through t he R avlcigh

d

dl H.ll11el (us ing "rayleighcll1l,ll"" :\Ia t lab fUll(' t io ll) \\"itho ut HllV s ig llHI cOl1lbilling techniques. This is just t o illus tra t e ho\\" ll1ultip ilth could d egrade the BER.
BER over a Rayleigh Fading Channel

-5

10

15

20

Figure 2.9: Bit Error Rate of Rayleigh Cha llnel.

2.5

Current Multipath Mitigation Methods

26

Currently, various mitigation techniques are available that help to minimize the effect of the errors contributing in position computations in the GPS world. Depending on the nature of applications, any of the following techniques could be applied. Generally, multipath mitigation could be categorized into two methods of hardware and software mitigation techniques. In terms of hardware improvements, antenna based mitigation methods, which are ba.'-;ed on improving the antenna gain pattern by choke rings, are very common. The elimination of multipath signals is possible by selecting an antenna that takes advantage of the signal polarization, The transmitted G PS signals are right handed circularly polarized, whereas the reflected signals are left handed polarized. A choke ring consists of se\'eral concentric thin \\'alls, or rings, around the center where the antenna element is located. These rings haw no effect on direct signal. but from the reflected signals the rings create two so-called primary and secondary waws. The objective of the choke ring is for the primary anel secondary reflected signals to subst antially cancel each other, and the direct signal remains as the dominant signal. Csing narrow correlator spacing and extending the multipath estimation dda.v lock loop is another approach to reduce the effect of multipath, In terms of software mitigation. signal and data processing have been used by lllany researchers, Exploring the signal-to-noise ration, using multiple reference stations. smoothing carrier phase. and applying different tilters are just a few to name. Software mitigation has been improYing so that many researchers have changed their approaches from the traditional denoising schemes, which are mainly based on \Viener filtering. to nOll-linear methods, especially those based on \\'a\'elets have become increasingly popular. The application of \\'awlets in signal processing especially in the area of global navigation :-;atellite system (G:'\SS) has been of interest for many years. \Yawlets are applied to the G:'\SS signal (i.e., GPS), to denoise and mitigate multipath errors ,,'hich in turn helps to decrease the standard deviation of the computed positions. In the next section, some of the related \\'ark done by other scholars on wawlet analysis are discussed.

2.6

Related Work

27

The use of wavelet analysis on CPS signals has proved to be an effective way of mitigating multipath. Satirapod and Rizos [12] applied wavelet decomposition technique on dOllbledifferenced residuals to extract multipath signals from CPS observations using data collected by three dual frequency receivers. Their approach wuuld not be applicable all data collected from single antenna receivers (sHch as data used in this thesis), since there is no second antenna to form the double-differenced signal. Furthermore, in their experiment setup, they had access to a station which was considered to be multipath free (open sky), \vhile in our case there was no open sky data available. In [12], the majority of the multipaths data came from a concrete wall close to the second recciver, which could be considered as a fixed multipath. \Yhereas, the collected data for this thesis work is from street levels as opposed to [12] where their experimcnt was carried out on top of a building. In street level, the kind of multipath a receiver recei\-es varies \vith time while it is constant on a roof. Zhang and Bartone [13] applied both wavelet filtering and Waveslllooth techniques to mitigate IIlllltipath on dual frequency measurements as well. They used L1 and L2 frequencies to form ionosphere free code and carrier phase measurements, and then applied adaptive wavelet filtering on ion-free datil,. Their approach is also not useful v,·hen using a receiver \vhich is not capable of receiving L2-band data, which is the case for almost all the inexpensive receivers (at the time of \vriting the thesis). Xia and Liu [14] applied wavelet transform to douhle differential phase observations to mitigate phase multipath in GPS relative positioning. Applying their method also requirs access to the L2-band data. Furthermore, in all the cases mentioned above ([12]-[14]), there is no indication of threshold selection and how the threshold value could affect the results. The value of the threshold has a significant impact on the signal smoothing process. In [12]-[14], there is no actual positioning after multipath extraction. While goal of multipath reduction is to increase the position precision. Whereas, in this thesis the experiment was carried out based on actual positioning, and at the end the degradation or improvement are clearly expressed in terms of some statistical quantities such as standard deviation, Kurtosis,

28
and skev\:ness of the positions. In this thesis, \vavelet analysis technique is applied to a set of data taken from a single stationary n:ceiver operating on L1 frequency. Since the focus of this thesis is on multipath mitigation by means of multi-resolutional analysis, the next chapter gi yes an overview on wavelets.

Chapter 3 Wavelet Analysis of GPS Signal
3.1 Wavelet Analysis Overview

Although wavelet analysis goes back to 1930s, the development of the technique for various applications ill engineering and the sciellces began in 19808. In that relatively short time, the wavelet analysis has been adopted to a variety of applications, from fingerprint compression, coding (audio and video), and classification to imprmwl processing of CPS data [15]. Almost all the signals generated by pieces of equipment snch as receivers carry some kind of noises, or they are biased by lIlultipath in their measurement. One of the best tool available to process the data is wavelet. The fundamental behind wavelet analysis is to break up the ::;ignal into different frequencies and investigate each component in terms of its scale. As oppose to sinusoidal waves, vvhich are considered to be big waves(infinite duration), wavelets are small \vaves. In other words, wavelets are finite in duratioll. \Vhere sinusoids are smooth and predictable, wavelets tend to be irregular and asymmetric. Fig. 3.1 shows

Figure 3.1: A Typical \Vavclct (db2).

29

30 a typical wavelet known as db2. \Vavelets are analysis tools mainly used for image or time
series analysis. 7j;( t) is considered to be a wavelet function if the following conditions are met [16]. (3.1 ) (3.2) Eq. (3.1) tell us that the average value ofthe wavelet has to be zero, and Eq. (3.2) represent unit energy property of the wavelets. As Fourier analysis is to break up a signal into sine waves of various frequencies, wavelet analysis breaks up a signal into shifted and scaled versions of the wavelet. Generally speaking there are two kinds of \vavelets.
1. Continuous \vavelet transform (C\VT)

2. Discrete wavelet transform (D\VT)

Continuous wavelet transform (CWT)
\Vavelet transform is a tool that cuts up data or function into different frequency components, and then studies each component with a resolution matched to its scale [17]. III signal analysis, the wavelet transform allmvs us to view a time history in terms of its frequency components. In this respect the wavelet transform performs in much the same way as

the Fourier transform [18]. The Fourier transform extracts from the signal details of the

--'"

time

(a) Raw Signal

(b) Fixed Tiling

Figure 3.2: Constant Resolution of a Windowed Signal (STFT).

fl eqnellC\'

CO ll tC'llt

hu t loses all in forl1l(1,tioll

OIl

31 tht, loca t ion of (l pmticuli:u fr cC[ucnc\' wit h ill

t he signal. T ime localizatioll must then be achieved by first \vindol\'ing t he signal. (-t Ile! theIl
bl'

tc'lkillg its

Four iC'r

tL:msfmll1. T he' problc lll Il it ll \\'l11clo\\'in.e; is t ha,t the slice of tlw signal

t hat is

ex t r acte d

is a l\\'(:)'I 's t he sam C' lengt h, TIm :,; , t h e ti llie slice (!lumher of data poin ts)
CO Ill PO Ill'Il t

llsed to rcsolw' a high fr ecp ICIlC\'

is t he sa me as t hE'

11ll1ll1l C I

llsed to rc::io lve

i-L

low

fre qut'llC\' co mp onent [18]. F ig. 3,2 shol\'s t itE:: cons tant resolutioll of tht: \\'illclO\\'cc! signal T he \\'illclO\\' Fo miN t rallsform (\\ 'FT) . also kllO\\'l1 a~ short t ime FOlll'icr t ransform (ST FT). of a t illl E' fUllctioll f(t) is defined as [16]:
(3 .:3)
\\' \ Wl t'

fl ( /) is Cl

P'; l\'(-,ll

\I'illd u\\' f\lllct ioll sMis[\'illg 0
!C)\\'PiIS:-i

<

J Ih(L )12 eli
ti lll e

< x , III pradi cc . the
shol\'n ill

windo\\' f Ullct ioll fl ( t) is llsualh- a. (ST FT) .
11I H!!::; H

fUllction [16], T hc -' Sllnrt-Til1lC' Fourit'r Tr;llIs fm 11 I

siglla l into a, t 1,m -di IllCllS iull't1 ft met iotl of

HUe! frcq uC' llC,v

(1;0

F ig , 3 .2. T hr' STFT lE' prt'S ellts
'be.. S ignal

a S(l1t of C()ll1 pl()llli ~c Il c t\I, 'C'C' ll

th e time (lIld

fr('qU Cll C\'

h,l;o8d

Specrog/OlTl . t iJJe Raw Sigral

2 f'
or
-2

l

' , ~'/.

, ,I "

J.

:r ,--_~ ' ~~~------', ---'
o
t ()()

I

~

"

,I

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

50

100

150 fllOO

100

250

300

(a) Rei-II vH lue CPS Residual Sin'nal

(b) S p ectl'OO'ralll o f the Sigllal

F ig ure 3.3: T hc \\'iIlClo\\'ccl F lIlicr T rall Sfol'lll of t he Raw S iglla l USili g a S liding \\,iliJoW.

views of R sigllal. it provides some informa tion about hoth when aml at I'\'!tat frequ e ncie::; F L
signa.l event occur::;,
H OW(N ~ r, oll e

C<'t.ll only oht aill this info rrm tion with lilllitecl precision ,

32 and that precision is determined by the size of the window as shown in Fig. 3.3. A short window will produce an excellent time resolution, but a poor frequency resolution. A long window will produce the opposite. In contrast to windowed Fourier transform, the wavelet adapts the width of its time-slice according to the frequency components being extracted. In other words, the resolution is high for high frequency components and low for low frequency components, because \vavelet uses short windows at high frequency and long window at low frequency as shown in Fig. 3.4. In \vavelet analysis the scale that the data is looked at plays a special role. \Vavelet

Figure 3.4: One Represcntation of a Time-Frequcncy Tile for the 'Vavclet Transform.

algorithm process data at different scales or resolutions. If one looks at a signal with a large window, the gross features will be noticed. Similarly, if one looks at a signal with a small window, the small features will be noticed [19]. According to the definition of the inner product, the CWT can be thought of as an inner product of the original signal \vith scaled, shifted versions of the basis wavelet function 1/;( t)

[15],

< x, Wa,b >= CvVT(a, b) =
where:

J

x(t)1/;(t)dt

(3.4)

Wab= , -1/;(-) Va a

1

t- b

(3.5)

In which "a" represents the scale (dilation) and "b" is the time-shift (translation) parameter. Therefore, the wavelet transform of a continuous (analog) signal x{t} is known as C\VT which

33 is defin ed as :

CWT(a , b)

=

1 Va

f' x
-;x:

J:(t) . - a -

(t-b )dt
= 1. 2. 3. 4. 5

(3 .6)

Fig . 3.5 shO\\·s the scn.logUl.lll (CWT) of the sig net! \\'ith the sca les froIll 1 to 5. T he wavelet
Absolute Values of CWT( a.b) Coefficients for a

4

100

200

300

400 500 600 time (or space) b

700

800

Figure 3.5 : Scalogralll of tiL(' Sigllal.

fUllct ions han; tillle-\\'iclt hs aclapted to their frequcnc.\' such t hat high frequency a re

WU TO\\'.
" ZO Olll

\\'hile low fr equen('\" (Ire lllHCh wider. As a. result. t he wR.n .'let tnmSfOrlll is bet.t er to ill" on \'cr:- short liH~d high freqllE'nc,\' phellomenon. such as transients [17].

3.1.1

Multilevel Representation of a F\lnction

III orcl er to develop a, multilevel represcntL1tioll of n fun ction in L2(R), a sequence of embedded subspa.ccs Vi is needed sHeh th at

[18]:
(3.7)

... cV- 1 CVo CV 1 C V 2 c ... CL2(R)
with the following properties: · The emhedded subspaccs a.re related by a sCeding law

(3,8)

34 · Each subspace is spanned by integer translates of a single function g(x) such that:

g(:r:) E Vo

¢:>

g(x + 1) E Vo

(3.9)

Therefore, a scaling function <b( x) E Vo is needed such that its integer translates {4>( x - k), k E Z} form a Riesz basis for the space Vo. Then 4>(2x - k) form a basis for the space VI' Thus: Vo = span {4>(x - k),k E Z} V I = span {4>(2x - k), k E Z} (3.10) (3.11)

Since the space Vo lies within the space VI, then Vo can be expressed in terms of the basis functions of VI:
00

4>(x) =

L
k=-oo

ak4>(2x - k)

(3.12)

Eq. (3.12) is known as dilation or scaling function. The constant coefficients ak are called filter coefficients, and it is often the case that only a finite number of these are non-zero [18]. The filter coefficients are derived by imposing certain conditions on the scaling function. One of these conditions is that scaling function and its translations should form an orthonormal set i.e.:

1:

4>(x)4>(x + l)dx = 60.1
1 1=0 0 otherwise

IE Z

(3.13)

80,1

={

A wavelet, 1j.;(x), is orthogonal to the scaling function, 4>(x), and is defined by:

1j.;(x) =

L
k=-oo

00

(-1)k aN _1 _k4>(2x - k)

(3.14)

where N is an even integer. This definition satisfies orthogonality since from Eqs.{3.12) and (3.14) we have:

(4)(x),1j.;(x)) =

1f
00

ak4>(2x - k)

f
1=-00

(-1)laN _1_ 14>(2x -l)dx
00

(3.15) (3.16)

-OOk=-oo

'* (4)(x) , ljJ(x)) ="2 L
k=-Xl

1

(-1)kakaN_l_k = 0

35
The sets of coefficients {ad and {(-I)k aN _ 1_k} are said to form a pair of quadraturE mi'TTOr

filter [18]. Fig. 3.6 shows Daubechies (db2) scaling function and its corresponding wavelet.

(a) db2 Scaling Function.

(b) db2 Wavelet Function

Figure 3.6: Daubechies (db2) Scaling and Corresponding Wavelet Functions.

3.2

Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT)

The time series signals are sampled and discretized in case we are working with C\VT. In other words, the wavelet series are simply a sampled version of the C\VT, and the amount of information it provides is highly redundant as far as the reconstruction of the original signal is concerned. This redundancy requires a significant amount of time and memory. On the other hand, D\VT provides sufficient information both for analysis and synthesis of the original data with a significant reduction in time and memory. D\VT can provide filter bank structure which is amicable for hardware implementation. In D\VT, the scaling and shifting variables are discretized so that wavelet coefficients can be described by two integers, m and

n [15]. Thus, the D\VT is given as: 1 DWT(rn, n) = . f(iffi
v u,o

L x[kJ4J[ao n m

kJ

(3.17)

k

where x[k] is a signal or a digitized version of an analog signal with sample index k, and ¢[nJ is the wavelet. 'Vith different choices of m we obtain a geometric scaling: 1, l/ao, l/a5, .... It is found in practice that the most convenient value of ao is 2. This analysis method then consists of decomposing a signal into components at several frequency levels that are related

36
by powers of two (a dyadic scale) [15]. Let X be the observed time series and for convenience assume N is integer multiple of 2].

Let w be N X N orthonormal D\VT matrix and W be the vector of D\VT coefficients [16].

X<=>W

The D\VT can be looked at as the multiresolutional decomposition of a sequence. It takes a length N sequence x(n) as input and generates a length N sequence as the output. The output has N /2 values at the highest resolution and N/ 4 values at the next resolution, and so
011,

that is the frequency resolution is low at the high frequencies and high at the low

frequencies, whereas the time resolution is high at the higher frequencies and low at the lower frequencies.

3.3

Filter Banks

The idea is the same as it is in DWT. A time-scale representation of a digital signal is obtained using digital filtering techniques. To process the data, we look into the low and high frequency contents of the signal. In case of working with stationary data, the Fourier analysis is sufficient, whereas working with a time varying data the Fourier analysis won't be a suitable tool since Fourier is not able to show the time localization. Fourier basis functions are localized in frequency but not in time. Small frequency changes in the Fourier transform will produce changes everywhere in the time domain. \Vavelets are local in both frequency (scale) via dilations and in time via translation. This localization makes wavelet transform a suitable tool for time varying signals. It is well known that the computational complexity ofthe fast Fourier transform is 0 (nlog2 (n)), while for discrete wavelet transform the computational complexity goes down to O(n) [21]. For many signals, the low frequency content is the most important part. Considering the

37 human voice, if one removes the high frequency components, the voice sounds different, but you can still tell what's being said. However, if you remove enough of the low frequency components, you hear gibberish. In wavelet analysis we often speak of approximation and
details. The approximations are the high-scale, low frequency components of the signal. The

details are the low-scale, high frequency components [22]. Fig. 3.7 shows a typical data analysis by wavelet.

I raw data I

--+ Iwavelet decomposition 1--+ Ithresholding I --+ I wavelet reconstruction I --+ I filtered data I
Figure 3.1: A Typical Block Diagram of Wavelet Analysis.

Filtering Process
The data ,vith coarse resolution contaius information about lower-frequency components and retains the main features of the original signal. The data with finer resolution retains information about the higher-frequency components. The filtering approach to multi-resolutional wavelet transform is to form a series of half band filters that divide a spectrum into a high frequency band and a low frequency band. It is formulated on a scaling function or low-pass filter and a wavelet function or high-pass filter.
~Iultiresolutional

analysis builds a pyramidal

structure that requires an iterative application of scaling and wavelet functions to low pass and highpass filters, respectively [15]. Theses filters initially act on the entire signal band at the high frequencies (small scale) first and gradually reduce the signal band at each stage as shown in Fig. 3.8. Therefore, filtering process begin ,,,ith passing the raw data through a few high-pass filters (ht) and their complementary low-pass filters (gt). Fig. 3.8 shows a three level wavelet decomposition. First the raw data passes through a high and low pass filter (here filters of db2 type). This decomposition divides the raw signal into level one approximation (al) and detail (dl). Then in turn level one approximation will be passed through the same filtering to construct the level two approximation (a2) and detail (d2). This process can be iterated to a suitable

:~ ~
200 400 600

Raw da ta

:38

80J

I
. 1
d1

o ' ··
-0 5
,-t

~

j4
200

.

14.
MIl

41 ¥
600

4'

----::=-----::=--=:::---=:-'
80J

1

d2

F igu re 3. 8 :. T ll roo [c'vol \\-,,1 \'r lct Dl'C'o tll[1 os it inll.

nUlllh c r of lew+ ;

h 8 S(' r1 OI L

t he

lI(-l t lll C

o f t h e s ig mll . T h E' s ig nal rC'-collst nl c ti rm .

i ll

tllis

CelS f' _

Rt'CO lls t r ucted S iglla l= a3

+ d3 + d2 + dl

3.4

De-noising

III \I.-avdet dC(,Olllpositiull \\-h Cll detclib an:' slJlalL the,' lllight hE' ullli tted \\- itlIout :-) ltl X-itdllt ia lhaffect ing the o rigin a l s ignal. Thus , the idea of thres holding \\-cwelet coeffi cient s is a.
\ \"eLy

of

clealling out ·-ullimportant"· d etails cOlls id e red to he no ise [21 ]. Therefo re. d elloitiillg refcrs

to m a nipulation of wavelet coeffi cients for noise reduction in \\'hich coefficient values below
a carefulh- select eel tllrcs ho ld level
Hr C '

re placed Iw 7.e ro 8fte r \\'!licl t a n illvc rse tra.lJ sform of

1I1Ou ified coeffi ciellts is Llsed to recovcr dcltoiseu s ignal. i\IathcI Ilat ic: ally. t hresholcli llg can abo b e described by a transformation of th e wa velet coefficient s ill whi ch t rallsfol'ltl m at rix i.' cL di ago lli:d llla t rix with cl em ents (] o r 1

[2:3] .

Ze ro elclIlents forc es t hp. correspondin g coeffi c ie nt
\\-hil~

I>elo\v a g ive n thresholcl to he set to ze ro
coeffi cients b:y the giYen thres hold.

ut he rs co n e::; polldillg to one . reduce ' tit

The two applOach es which a 1' . considcTf'd fill' d e no ising ar e hani a ncl soft th resholdillg.

39 · In hard thresholding only those wavelet coefficients with absolute values below or at the threshold level are affected. They are replaced by zero and others are kept unchanged as shown in Fig. 3.9. Hard Thresholding:

W Tn = W { W Tn = 0

if if

IWI > th IWI < th

where Wand W Tn are the wavelet coefficient before and after thresholding respectively. · In soft thresholding coefficients above threshold level arc also modified where they are reduced by the amount of threshold! as shown in Figs. 3.9 and 3.10. Soft Thresholding:

WTn = sign(W)(IWI - th) if { W Tn = 0 if

IlVI > th IWI < th
Soft

Original

Hard

0.5 0 -0.5
-1

0.5 0 -0.5 0 0.5
-1

0.5 0 -0.5 0 0.5
-1

0

0.5

1

Figure 3.9: Illustration of Soft and Hard Thresholding

3.4.1

Noise Reduction Model

A basic model used to analysis the noise content of a signal is shown in Eq. (3.18). X(k) = S(k)

+ O'N(k),

k = 1,2, .. " n

(3.18)

In Eq. (3.18), X(k) is the measurements (known to us), S(k) is the true values of the signal (unknown),
0'

is the noise level (unknown), N(k) is the noise components (unknown), and

1 Donoho refers to soft thresholding as 'shrinkage' Dince it can be proved that reduction in coefficient amplitudes by soft thresholding, also results in a reduction of the signal level thus a 'shrinkage' [23].

Original

40
Hard Soft

30 20 10 0 -10 -20 -30 10 20 30

30 20

15 10 5
r---'

j
~

10 0 -10 -20 ~~ -30

O~
-5 -10 -15 -20

~

10

20

30

10

20

30

Figure 3.10: Soft and Hard Thresholding of the real CPS Data

n is the signal length. Under an orthogonal decomposition, each coefficient is decomposed
into component attributed to the true signal values ,sen), and to noise as follows [23]:

i
or in a vector form

=

1,2, ... , n

where C, U, and D are the vector representation of empirical (observed) wavelet coefficients, true coefficient values and noise content of the coefficients respectively. It is assumed that cocfficicnts at the high frequency details provick a good estimate of the noise content of the signal [23].

Standard Deviation and Threshold Level Estimation
In noise reduction under Gaussian white noise, the estimation of standard deviation in Eq. (3.18), is used to determine a suitable threshold.
0',

An estimate of the standard

deviation at the dl level (details at the level one coefficients) is then used to determine a suitable threshold level for coefficient thresholding at all levels [23]. This approach is global thresholding which is applied to all detail coefficients. The justification for this approach

41 is that at the high frequency dl level, only a few large amplitude coefficients carry much of the signal information and a large portion of the coefficients attribute to insignificant information and considered to be noise. In case of non-\vhite (colored) noise, we still impose white noise mOfiel on the coefficients, however. threshold levels are considered to be level (scale) dependent [23]. Gaussian \vhite noise model is used on detail coefficients \vhere

standard deviation and threshold levels are evaluated for each level separately.

3.4.2

Threshold Selection

The quality of the signal estimation is investigated by the risk function. A risk function (or loss function) is mainly the variance of the estimation error, i.e. the difference between the estimated value and the actual unknown value. The risk function is dcfincu as follows:

R(8,
\vhere 8 and

8) = Ell (8 - 8)11

2

(3.19)

8 are the actual and the estimated

values of a signal respectively. I\Iinimizing

the risk function results in an estimate of the variance of the signal [23]. Since the noise component is assumed to be zero mean Gaussian. the difference (8 - 8) is a measure of an error. Therefore, Eq. (3.19) is a measure of the energy of the noise, i.e. 2]N(k)]2. One best estimate is obtained using minimax rule [23, 24],

minmax R(8,

8)

= infs sup (8 - S)

(3.20)

where inf and sup represent the infimum emd supremum respectively. In analysis the infimum or greatest lower bound of a set S of real numbers is denoted by inf(S) and is defined to be the biggest real number that is smaller than or equal to every number in S. The supremum or least upper bound of a set S of real numbers is denoted by sup(S) and is defined to be the smallest real number that is greater than or equal to every number in S. Based on orthogonal decomposition, minimization of the risk function at the signal level as defined hy Eq. (3.19), ean equivalently he defined at the coefficient level as shown below [23]: (3.21)

where

6

42 is the estimate of the true coefficient values. Accordingly, minimization of the risk

function at the coefficient level results equivalently in estimating the true vale of the signal. Under the assumption of i.i.d. for the wavelet coefficients and Gaussian white noise, [24] obtained a solution which minimizes the maximum risk,

th= .;nv'2Iog (n)

CT

(3.22)

where th is the threshold value, and n is the length of the signal. In Donoho's estimator, Eq. (3.22), the only unknown is the value of the (3.22) is the main challenge when using it. There are two general methods for estimating the
CT CT.

Therefore, estimation of the

CT

in Eq.

in Eq. (3.22). As mentioned in section

3.4.1, the standard deviation at the d1 level (details at the level one coefficients) is used to determine a suitable threshold level for coefficient thresholding at all levels. This approach is glohal thresholding which is applied to all detail coefficients. The second method to estimate the standard deviation,
CT,

is to apply Eq. (3.23) [23],

2

CT

=

------~~~

median(lcl)
0.6745

(3.23)

where c is the wavelet coefficients. For level dependent thresholding, thresholds are rescaled at each level to arrive at a new estimate corresponding to the standard deviation of wavelet coefficients at that level.

3.5

Conventional Thresholding

So far the value of the threshold was based on an estimation value which in turn depends heavily on the standard deviation
CT.

The noise level could change with time as it depends

on the channel. For example in case of GPS, most of the received signals contain multipaths which could be caused due to any obstructions. Fig. 3.11 shows a typical real GPS data. Figure 3.12 illustrates the soft and hard thresholding based on Donoho (Eq. (3.22)). Fig. 3.12(a) was plotted based on the noise level of the dl coefficients, while Fig. 3.12{b)

~1 3
6 ,
- ' 00 - '00

g
~

2

,

!J
:1

I,

-,
j.

,

1;, '

r "

',.
j.

,'.

,

. '1'
I I

-300

I

~,.

\

L

.
,...

1 . 't,'

..'i ""
"
\

-500

-600
- 700

hi
' 00
200 300

j
'00
500

-.00L--~~-~~-~~-~~--'

600

700

800

o

100

200

300

-400

soo

600

700

eoo

iOO

b.,... II)

IImI (.\

(a) A Salllplp o f Good Dala.

( b) A Sam pIp of Bad Dat a

Figure 3.1 1: A Typical RC'sidllal Ditta to Bc Allalyzed.

20

'0

"I '.
"

-,

- 15~~
15 20 25 30 35

- ,.~~

-:r

'0

IS

20

25

30

"
Oil

(a) T ltrl,,.,lto ldillg thl' Good Da t a. Based slcl(cll).

Oil

(b) T itresholdillg litE' Good Data. Ba.s ed Eq. (3 .2:3) .

F igure 3.1 2 : Thresholding the \Va.vdet Coefficients Based on Donoho's Equ atiull .

\\'as plotted

bi'l~c d

Oil

the Eq(3.23). A silllple visual inspectioll cOllfirms that there is no

significant Jiffcrcncc iJctwccn Fig3.12( a) and F ig,3.12(b) . In both c'.Ujes sincr t he noise levels were low, the difference between the original and the thresholded coefficients are almost zero. In some signal processill?; such
H~

CPS data. tlw repeti tion of suddpll changes of the data.
(usuall~:

especia.lly from zero to a high value

above 200 (m)), \vhich a.cts like spike. is an

indication of error ill meaSlll'l'IllCllt as shown in Fig. 3.11(b). The threshold \'alue obtained by [21 1] WOld b e suitH,ble for such date". In other words , we need a criteria that sets a liIl1it for data to be
tlSP(l.

As shown in Fig. 3.H, ill processing a data biased by high nlllitipath

values, the reconstructed signal has artifacts \vhen applyillg Donoho's estimator, which ill

:t
3000 2000
3000

:r
'000 1000

1000

I

-"OI! hO",

O~ t--~'--~'~ O ---'~ 5 --~'-0---2'----~--~~

00'

0'---0:--,---,~O-----:,~,----:'":--0---,: " :--- 30,----:'35

I ::1

(a) Thrpslto ldiIlg; I h(" Bad Dal il. Baspd UIl std(dl ) .

(b ) Thrt';; ltuldiIlg the Bael Da ta. Baspd
E q. (3.2:3).

(Jll

Figure 3.1 3: Thresholding the Wavelet Coeffici ents Based on Donoho's Equatioll. t llm crca tes \\TOIlg rcs ul ts. III t Itt' IlPxt sectioll \\"(' illt rod lIce
(l

Ile\\' threshold valuc hased

Oil

"'"
&00
50()

""'I

r
U
'00
200 100

l

700
600
50(}

~
,

'00

'00
100

300
200
100

200

'00

II
HlO

'00

soo

600

700

800

200

100

'00

soo

&00

700

800

(a ) l1l'c(lllstmclioIl of I Itt' data. Ip\"t:'1-2. dh,!.

(1)) l1('cOIlslrtlctiUIl
AllHl~-sis

or t ltl' data.

Ip\·t'/-!. db7.

Figure 3.14: \\-Hvcict eigenvalue which will enable

of a CPS Oa t H.

liS

to investigate the signal more c.:losel.\-.

3 .6

The Proposed Thresholding Method
<L

\ \ 'e a.re looking for an upper-bound t hreshold vnIue tha.t ignorE'S t he high sharp cha ngEs ill

data set and reduces the coefficients by some amounts tha.t represents the effect of the biased values , since the effect of multipath could be seen as time delay or extra distan ces t ha.t t he signal goes through. Therefore , the added distHllces have to be estimated nnll COw:icqucntly

45 subtracted from the corrupted data. In order to estimate the changes, we need a criteria

which shows the dispersiveness of the data. Eigenvalue is a good candidate to be considered. In the following sections the eigenvalue criteria is analyzed first, and then the answer to the question why eigenvalue is chosen to be the new threshold value is discussed. Generalized Eigenvalue Problem Given two N X N matrices A and B, determining the scalars Ai (eigenvalues) and Xi (eigenvectors) such that:
(3.24)

or equivalently determine the scalars Ai such that:
(3.25)

is known as generalized eigenvalue problem. The concept of the eigenvalues: Eigenvalues parameterize the dynamical properties of a system (it is like an amplification factor). Therefore, the general state of the system can be expressed as a linear combination of eigenvectors. Since the data we are \\:orking with is usually an f.\,f X N matrix, the concept of eigenvalue problem becomes a singular value decomposition issue. Singular Values Decomposition Suppose D is an M
X

N matrix, then there exists a factorization of the form:

D

= U:EV·

(3.26)

where U is an M X M unitary matrix, :E is an M X N matrix with nonnegative numbers on the diagonal and zeros off the diagonal, and V· denotes the conjugate transpose of V, an N X N unitary matrix. Such a factorization is called a singular value decomposition of

D.
The matrix :E contains the singular values, which can be thought of as scalar gain control,

46

by \vhich each corresponding input is multiplied to give a corresponding output. Now, in order to observe how a received signal is related to its eigenvalue we need to obtain a relationship between the received data and its eigenvalue. Therefore, we start with modeling the data, which is described in the next section.

3.6.1

Modeling the Data
X

\Ve assume there exists N transmitters and M receivers (or channels) with a full M

N

channel matrix H in between. Therefore, the data received at the M elements can be modeled as:
y=Hx+n,

(3.27)
(j2,

where M parallel channels are A\VGN with a noise level of from the input data x.

and y is the received data

Based on the singular value decomposition, one can decompose Has: (3.28) and, (3.29) where U, and V are the eigenvectors, and drn
~

0 are the M singular values (eigenvalues)

of H. By substituting Eq. (3.28) in Eq. (3.27), (3.30) and multiplying both sides by U H
:

=> UHy =

UHU~VHx

+ UHn

(3.31) (3.32) (3.33) (3.34)

=> UHU = 1M => UHy

= ~VHx + UHn => fj = ~x + it

where

ii =

UHy and

x = VHx.

47

Eq. (3.31) shows how the values of the transmitted signals could be affected by the eigenvalues. The matrix
~

can be thought of as scalar gain control, by which each corresponding

input is multiplied to give a corresponding output. Therefore, the eigenvalues in the received data are representing the extreme deviation and model the dispersiveness that exists among the data. Consequently, the eigenvalue is considered to be the upper-bound threshold value used in soft thresholding of the wavelet coefficients. Soft Thresholding:
Crn = sgn(C)(ICI - th) { Crn = 0

if if

ICI > th Ici < th

where:
sgn(C) = {

~-1

C>o
C=O C < 0

and
th = eig(C)

(3.35)

In the above equations Crn represents the modified coefficients after filtering and C represents the coefficients before thresholding, Fig. 3.15 shows the soft and hard thresholding of the coefficients based on the new threshold value. Clearly the difference bet,\'een the hard and soft thresholding is distinguishable.

3.7

Chapter Summary

In this chapter wavelet analysis was investigated with the focus on a new thresholding system. Although the thresholding by Donoho's equation is a possibility, there are signals which Eq. (3.22) will not be applicable. The estimation of the noise level in Eq. (3.22) is a major draw back. The value of the noise level in data might be low but the bias value caused by multipath could be very high, In these cases the value of
(j

will not be the correct value

1 8
30
-original ha rd soft

20

10

0

- 10

-20

-30

r
5 10 15 20 25 30 35
\\'E'

Figure 3.15: Soft cllld Hard T ltr('sllOld ill g of t h(' rca l C P S Data

to he chosell

<:-IS H

t h reshold \'a lue. III o ur st udv

proposed a l1e\\'

th re~ hol d n tlll ( ' b a~ecl

on C'igC'nvalllC' of thC' \nlvdet c()C'ffkirmts . EigC'nval llc paralllC'terizt's tlte dnl<:-lIll ical prop l'rt ics

of a sys tem (it is li ke <'I n ;ullp lificatioll f;tet m). III other \vords. eigcll\'alu E' rep rCSE'll tCi th('
ex t rettle' d C '\'ia t ioll an d Illoclcl::; tilt' disP E 'rsiH' Il(,SS t ha t ex is ts aIllong tlte delta. cOl1sidered to he t hl' ll pper-ho ulld t hr('s hold \',tillE' .
Thi~

nt/ up i:-.

Chapter 4 Multipath Mitigation Strategies
As we discussed previously in Chapter 2 (section 2.6), there are different methods \,.,.hich enable us to mitigate multipath. However, they are not suitable if a user is using a single frequency receiver. The work presented in this thesis is based on an autonomous and Ll frequency receiver. Therefore, we looked for another approach to reduce the effect of multipath. In previous chapter, we introduced wavelet analysis as a strong tool for de-noising and multipath estimation. In this chapter, \ve will discuss other elements which we need to complete our process.

4.1
4.1.1

Proposed Algorithm
Introduction

In wavelet analysis, there are two major challenges which could affect the analysis. First, it is the level of filtering, and the last is the value of the threshold which was discussed in Chapter 3. Basically, by looking at each level, the amount of low and high frequencies are emerged. In each level we decide how much of a frequency is needed and what should be disregarded. In other words, we decide how much of a low frequency or high frequency has to be filtered. The number of levels is highly depended on the desired application. Since multi path behavior is considered to be randomly distributed, we look for a criteria which could express the randomness. In GPS analysis, Entropy could be considered as a criteria to adaptively select a level for filtering the data.

49

4.1.2

Entropy

50

The concept of entropy in information theory describes how much randomness (or alternatively "uncertainty") there is in a signal or in a random event. An alternative way to look at this is to talk about how much information is carried by the signal. As a system gets more random, its entropy goes up. Entropy of a system increases as the system becomes more disordered. The base of the logarithm determines the units. \Vhen we use the base 2 the units are in bits (base 10 gives digits and the base of the natural logarithms e gives nits). Information is always a measure of the decrease of ullcertainty at a receiver. Shannon defines entropy in terms of a discrete random event X, \vith possible states (or outcomes) Xl."X n as: (4.1) where P(Xi) is the probability of the
ith

outcome of X.

In GPS concept, the randomness or entropy of a signal could be related to the signal distortion. In this chapter, the relationship between the distortion or multipath and entropy is investigated to show a multi path classification. This classification \vill be used to detect the amount of multipath carried out by a signal and consequently this value will be used to set a number for the levels in \vavelet analysis (more details are discussed in Chapter 5). It could be shO\vn that the higher is the entropy value of a signal, the higher is thc effcct of multipath on the signal. Fig 4.1 shows value of the entropies for a data set. The data set used to plot the Fig. 4.1 has seven satellites available for processing. As shown in Fig. 4.1, each satellite exhibits a different entropy per satellite, meaning that the condition or channels used to received the signals were different at the given time. Since the atmospheric and hardware errors could be considered constant for the 15 minutes of data collection time, the difference is considered to be caused by different amount of multipaths affecting each signals separately. The data collection for the same place "vas repeated on different days to see how multipath is behaving in terms of entropy value. A data set consists of eight days of data collection is presented in Fig. 4.2. Entropies of each day for each satellites were computed

51
4

3.5
3

o

o

w

,.. a. g <:

2.5

o

o

2
1.5

0.5

o

o
1

OL-----~-----L------~----~----~----~

2

3

4

5

6

7

Number of Satellites

Figure 4.1: Entropies Corresponding to Each of the Satellites.

and plotted as shown in Fig. 4.2. For example, data set number one (the one marked with plus sign) has eight satellites in view, therefore, there are eight entropies calculated for each satellite. If we follow the markers for each satellite, it could be concluded that the amount of multipath affecting each signal is different in each day. For instance, consider satellite number two. On the first day of measurement, the entropy was calculated to be 3.7, while on the day of eight, it was computed to be 2.5. In another words, on the day of eight, we had a better condition (less multipath) while collecting the data. All these entropies, shown in Fig. 4.2, have to be averaged in order to have a clear picture. The simplest method is to average the entropies of each satellite as shown in Fig. 4.3. Therefore, for each satellite there is one entropy. The same procedure was carried out on three different locations as well. Fig. 4.4 shows the averaged entropies for each location. The averaged values were normalized to show the comparison. In Fig. 4.4, the location with averaged entropy of one (red dot) exhibits the highest multipath environment. Although the computed entropies will be used to classify them, there is another element

52
5 4.5 4

0 0

+
0

+
3.

0

"
~
(I

13

>.

~ x
2. 2 1.5

"
(I

0

g
+

*

* x
0

UJ

g c:

a.

i

W

a
x

o

"
(I

0

data1 data2 data3 data4 data5 data6 data7 data8

~

0

+

*

+

* o
0.5
1
2
(I

o

O~--~----~----~----~--~~--~~---L----~

3

4 5 6 Number of Satellites

"
7

+
8
9

Figure 4.2: Entropies Corresponding to the Whole Data Set.

that has to be looked at before simply taking the average of the entropies. This element is the number of satellites available to be processed by the receiver. Although we may have a high multipath situation, there could be more that 6 satellites in view. The more SV's are available to the receiver, the better the precision of the computed positions will show. Therefore, both the entropy and the number of satellites must be taken into account while classifying them. To classify a location based on the effect of muitipath, the norm of the entropies are considered for further processing.

4.1.3

Norm of the Entropies

Each data set used in this thesis is in a matrix form of M X N, where rv'I rows represent the real value data, and the N columns indicate the number of satellite available during the data collection. Therefore, for each data set there are N entropies corresponding to each

53
3.8 3.6 3.4
<11
Q)

o

'0. o ~ 3.2

w

'0

~

3

'i

o

~ 2.8

£ 2.6
2.4

o
o

o

o

2.2 '--_ _L -_ _' - -_ _' - -_ _' - - _ - - - ' ' - _ - - - - ' ' - - _ - - - ' 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Number of Satellites

Figure 4.3: Average of Entropies Corresponding to Each Satellites

*
0.98

T -building
Bridge Gerrard

*

o

· ·

Pitman

rg
'0.

0.96

w 0.94
(I)

C

2

-= '0
~

0.92 0.9

i!!
0(

0>

~

·
o

0.88 0.86 _ _ _ _ _-'-_ _ _ _......._ _ _ _--'-_ _ _ _- - l
Locations

Figure 4.4: Average of Entropies Corresponding to Each Locations

54

satellite. The higher is the value of N , the better condition we have in terms of position calculation. Consequently, in addition to entropy, the number of satellites play an important rule in deciding how multipath is effecting the data set. To contribute both the entropy and the number of SV's in an adaptive level selection, the p-norm (Eq. (4.2)) of each data set is calculated.
(4.2)

where Ei is the entropy of each Sv's, and p is the total number of satellites used for that data set. For example, 900x7 data set has seven entropies and one Ep. Table 4.1 shows the computed entropies using Eq. (4.1) for the mentioned example. SV E
1 2.85 2 2.88
3 3.52
4 5.31 5 5.71

Table 4.1: Entropies of the Example.

Ep

yt2.85 5 + 2.88 5

+ 3.525 + 5.315 + 5.71 5 = 6.46

Fig. 4.5 shows the norm of the entropies for the same location as Fig. 4.2, computed for the whole data set. The norm of the entropies for four locations were computed. Since for each location we have a few measurements from different days, the mean value of the Ep's were taken and then normalized as shown in Fig. 4.6. In Fig. 4.6, each dot represents a location in down-town Toronto. The red dot illustrates the location with the highest multipath. The adaptive level selection is then based on this classification. For high value of multipath the level is chosen to be 10, while for the low multipath area the level is selected to be 2. Before working with real data sets, which is the subject of the next chapter, a synthetic data set was generated, using Matlab, to test the proposed algorithm.

4.2

Generating Synthetic Signal

A simulated direct-signal (line-of-sight) could be defined as:
Y = cos(wct ),
. (4.3)

55
6
Q

5
(
(~

(

0

q

(

o

1

2

3

4 5 Number of Data Sets

6

7

8

Figure 4.5: Norm of the Entropies.

*
0.95 0.9
· ·

o
i;: ~
~

T -building Bridge Gerrard Pitman

Ji 11
~

0.85

0.8 0.75 0.7 0.65L-------'------'--------'----....J
Locations

z

o

*

·

Figure 4.6: Normalized Entropy of the Locations.

where

We

is the carrier frequency considered to be 1575.42 MHz (same as the Ll-band

frequency). A multipath signal could be generated by adding random amplitudes and phases

;")6

to the di rect-signal. as t lte lillc-ot'-s ig ht sign al is p;-lss ing t h ro llg h rL RrL\'kigh/ nici;-11l c1tan nf'l , F i.e;-1. 7 s hO\\'s the ge nerated Illult ipath sigtwls where t he more uscillclt OtT \\'Cl\'('t'Ol'lIlS m e the'
Sl9nal bElo,e and after dislortioo
SIgnal before and after distortm

s[

J
2'

I

J,~I'Nv'~N~\\! N1~ NifWMW
-2" ·

-4~

J
10

t5

20

to
lroe (ns)

t5

20

orne (ns)

(eL ) Olle' Pat h ,\ddl'd

t ()

th e D in'ct -Si;.o;lIrt l.

( Il)

T P ll

Paths ,\ ddE,d to fllP D irpct-Sii';llal.

Figure 4.7: S.m th ct ic

~[ 1l1 ti patl l

Sig nal.

d istorted s ign als. S ince t he I'lIllOlll lt of distolt ioll ;-Hlded t o t ill:' line-o[-::;igh t signal is kll()\\' Il . tlte p roposed a lgor ithm co uld lJP tested wit h tlte d is tortvd s ig n a ls. ('st inlate tite HIllOUll t of cl istort ion illtw d u(' ed in t h e cl irl'd -::;ig ll u i. T he goal here is t o Since t ilE' li ne-of-sight

sig n al is a si mp le cos fll llctlo n . t he alllo unt ()f d istorl iu ll i ' co m p ll ted b\, sllbtulCt ing thc' Ol' igina.l s ig llHI from t he disto r t ed one. T h eil t he R \ IS \ al uf? of t h e difFer 'll ce i::; calc ulat ed hased
OIL

E q . (1.1) .

RMS =

( 1. 1)

wh ere .. is t he s ig na l ICllgt h awl Sraw is the ti lle-of-sight clata. The amo u llt of tllu lt ip Clt lt i.. t h ell e~ t imat e d hy passing t hp. distorted signa l.
S di s t O'l.t ed.

throug h the \\'avelet fi lter a lgo-

rit hm. T h e es ti m ated rC\IS \'a lllf'S a re t h en compa red wit h tht' t r l!(~ R\IS \'Cline::; , <t.'i s how u ill Fig. cl ,8 . In F ig. -10. 8, t lw red (l ight e r )
'0101'

represen ts t lw tl'llf' R:' IS values \\'hile t he dar ker

CUl'\'e illustrates t he cs tinmted one. Fig . 1.8 is a ll ind icat io n t h a t t lte proposed a lgorit h m i.. op era.tiug proper1\' since t h e t m e \'ai lles aud t it e ~t iIll H t ed \'al lleS a re a lmos t overlapped.

57
True Values

-

Estrmaled Values

09

08

0.7

10
Number of Path

Figure 4.8: ::\onllalizcd fL\IS Va lu c of tIl(' D isto rt ioll.

4.3

A pplying the Proposed Algorithm on the Real GPS Data

To observe th e effect of t he proposed threshold value along wi t h t he \nwt' lC't leve l ~e l e C't i o n , res idual::; of t he delta
~et

\H're passed t hro ugh t he \\'cLH'let "llla h'sis t uol. FoUl'

~ alllpl e~

of t he

filt ered data are shown in F ig. 4.9 and F ig. 4.10. F ig. 4.9(a) and 1.9(1) ) are rep resell tillg two
~a m p l e~

of t he bad clata t) inc(' t hev

CHlT\'

spi kes such as

~ig n a ls

\\'it h high am pli t udcs . T hC'sc

tq) e of sign(l ls degrade the positioning a nd must I w ignored d m ing t he position calcula.t iOlls .

As shown in F ig. 4.9, the filtered data is com puted to be zero, mealli!lg t hat t ile sH.te lli te will !lot be used in posit iolling. Alt hough t here a re mO lllent::; which t he values of t he d a.ta is rca.')olla ble to be used . for exam ple in F ig. ,1. 9( b) satelli te if more t han
fOUl

aWHll d

200 (s) , it is safe r not to use t he

SV 's are rwailable.

O n t he other hanel, \\'hell t he d ata is good t he c lllah 'sis approximates t he distortion H .t) shO\vn in Figs. 4.10( a ) and 4.10(b) . In these figures, the red (lighter) color represents t he dat a before filt ering and t he darker one illustrates th e dat a aft er being filt ered.

,:)8

30r-~--------~--~--~--~----~

20 '
10 f

'~l
-1 50

-50 "
I

-60\
-70

a

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

' 800

900

~:L r ________~__~__~____~__~,__~ a
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
~me( s )

900

bme(s)

(;1) Srllllpi,' o f Bad Data . PR :\G.

( h ) Salllp tl' ()f Bad Oata. Pfl.:'\'Q .

F igure 4.9: \\';l\'c!ct

Ilal,\'sis of a CPS Data.

-5 ~-~

a

100

200

300

400

" , 500 800 700

_~:L[____~.__~__-',__~_____~_L,
800 900

__

...J

a

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

time(s)

U me(S)

(a) SaJ llpt t' of Good Data . PR:-JIO .

(h ) Samp le of Coud Oata.PR f'{0.

Figure 4.10: Wavelet Aua l,\'si::; of n. CPS Da ta,

Chapter 5 Results and Discussions
5.1 E xperiment al S etup
Oil

To evaluat.e the effect of the new thresh old value and the \,"avelet len'l selec tioll cu la ted
po~itiow;.

the ('al-

29 d ata sets I,\"ere collE'c tecl in dm\"lltO\\"1l T oro ll to . III t his ex perimell t d ata,

collect ioll CctlliPl1l(" llt co nsis ted of: ll-hlox T)'I-LPl.J eval u ation ki t with ll-(,C' llte r A \, T AR IS soft\\"[Lre a nd ,I la pt o p . A ll etcti vc ant e Il na ,,"as 1ll000Illtecl on a port a l lie Cln te llwl t ha t was lIlOllllt (llll' lllct<:>r ;.1,l>o\·e thc groulld. \\" c did !lo t wo e
(Il l

cx tC lIl a.1 groulld pla.ll e' [25j. F ig.
\ H I.')

5.1

~ ho\\":)

t h(' rccl' iwr se t ll p u~('cl to collect d ata.. T h e dat a

collected in four different

F igure 5.1: Data Collect ioll Set\lp.

regiOns , each exhibiting different amount of rnul t ipaths in t erms of low to high d egree of rnultipath. Fig. 5.2 shows the fom ch()~en lo cations . The circle in each photo illus tra tes the loci'tt ion of t he receiver. Although ill all four lo ca tions the 59
p()~i t ion~

of t he receiver or t he

Figure 5.2: T it . Fo m Loc nt ions W lt ere Da ta \\'a s Co llec tcd .

clllt ClllU:L \\-, IS sta ti oll H1T fo r a h ou t 1-"5 lll inu tes. t he amo u ll t of lllu it ip a t lts a lld ('ollseq uC'nt h t he coordi nat es of t he
l I S( T \\'i1Ci

cha ngillg \\-ith t im e as if t he

IICi E T

\\-<:1::;

in tllotioll _ F ig _ .J .:3

80 60
40

'~'

.· ' {

20
E ~
Cl C

~

~ - 20
-40

o · \ .... :\.~'. l'" .. _.~ ~ :r~.:..... ":.~. ~~.: "~ :
!.

~ ·· '":-.t. ". . '.'.. "c: ":

,='.

I

·

. t,'L , .OJ

~'Y;1.fJ; '.~"r..
l. . . ".
~'

·~ .'

........ i:'.

~"

: . .
·

·

:'. '!''fo "" '. .

-60 -80

.,

....
- 40 -20

o

20

40

Easting (m)

Figure 5.3: Eas tillg alld :\Torth E rrors of t he Secolld Locat ioll . from R ight-side of F ig . 0.2 .

s how::; t he m en t io lled fact that even t llO lIgh the user i::; in s t at ionary p osi tioll . the comp u ted coo rdin ates a re not COllstallt. III F ig . 5.3 each clo t rep resents a. pos itio n whi ch is tlo rt tl a li 7.ed

61 to (0,0) coordinate, and the confidence ellipse is plotted based on 30'. In this thesis a ne\v algorithm as discussed in Chapters 3 and 4 are designed to reduce the scatter points, in another words, the algorithm minimize the effect of the multipath errors and reduces the standard deviation of the computed positions.

5.2

Residual (Signal) Modeling

In order for a CPS receiver to determine its position, it has to receive time signals from at least four different satellites [2]. Then pseudoranges, from code (Ycode(t») and carrier phase

(YphaBe(t»), of the user from the satellites can be determined with the help of signal transmit
times bebveen the satellites and the receiver [2]. These pseudoranges are computed from both pseudo random code (PRN) and carrier phase information as: (5.1) \",here c is the speed of the light, t is the CPS true time, tr(t) is the reception time, r is the total signal travel time, tB (t - r) is the transmission time from a satellite, and
p

is the

error added to the measurements. Considering the atmospheric effect including ionospheric delay dian, and tropospheric delay d trop along \vith multipath delay
dm~

on the received

signals, Eq. (5.1) can be broken down with more detailed components [2].

Ycode(t) = pet, t - r)

+ c[dr(t) + dB(t -

r)]

(5.2)

Here, p( t, t - r) is the geometric distance between the satellite and the observing point, dB and d r are the satellite and receiver equipment delay respectively, and dtr(t) is the reception time. Eq. (5.3) shows a representation of the carrier phase measurements [2],

YphaBe(t) +c[dtr(t) - dtB(t -

= pet, t - r) + C[dr(t) + dB(t - r)] + d trop r)] + dian + .\[¢r(tO) - ¢B(tO )] + AN + dm~ + cP'

(5.3)

where dr(t), dB(t), ¢r(tO ), and ¢B(tO) are the carrier phase equipment delays and the initial phases of the receiver and satellite carrier signal respectively, A is the wavelength and N is

62
an integer representing the carrier phase ambiguity. The resultant time error caused by the error sources creates inaccuracies in the measurement. Among the errors multipath creates an incremental time delay, causing the respective pseudoranges (Ycode(t») to be incorrect [6]. The input data to be analyzed is a set of residuals (i.e. code minus carrier) given by Eq. (5.4).

yet) = Ycode(t) - Yphase(t)

=* yet) = 2d ian + dm; - >"N

(5.4)

\Yhen such a difference is performed, all common errors such as satellite clock error, tropospheric error, and receiver clock error are eliminated. \Vhat remains is predominantly twice the ionospheric error, the pseudorange multipath error, and the carrier phase ambiguity. The carrier phase multipath
(8m~)

is ignored since its value is very small compared

to pseudorange multipath. The ambiguity term could be seen as a bias value \vhich is removed by taking the mean value of the observations and subtracting the mean from the data. Therefore, the remaining values represent the iOllosphere plus the multipath errors. To approximate the multipath error, wavelet analysis tool is applied to the remaining surn. Fig. 5.4 illustrates two typical CPS residuals. Fig. 5.4(a) shows 900 seconds of a normal

-50

I
~

-100

.e " -150
-200

-2

-250
-4

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

100

200

300

400

SOO

600

700

800

tlme(s)

tlma (5)

(a) Sample of Good Data.

(b) Sample of Bad Data.

Figure 5.4: Typical Code-Carrier Data.

data, while Fig. 5.4(b) contains high values of multipath. The high amplitudes (spikes or transients like) indicate that data carries strong multipath signals. An approach to mitigate

63 this strong multipath is by using a time varying approach such as wavelet analysis. This is discussed in the next section.

5.3

Performance Analysis

To evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithm three statistical elements namely standard deviation, kurtosis, and skewness of both raw and filtered positions are computed, and then they are compared to sho\',," the degree of improvements or degradations. In that reganl, the two major characteristics of a multi-resolutional analysis, thresholding and number of levels, are separately discussed.

5.3.1

Wavelet Analysis on Residuals, Thresholding

In order to be consistent with the signal modeling approach proposed by Donoho [24], Eq. (5.4) can be simplified to a standard non-parametric regression problem as:

i = 1,2, ... , k,

(5.5)

where y(t i ) represents the code minus carrier signal (from the measurement), X(ti) is the signal we wish to approximate, and
ni

is considered to be noise added to the system. As

shown in Fig. 3.7, the raw data, y(ti), is decomposed by wavelet filtering to details and approximations. Thresholding is then applied to the coefficients to keep the approximations and disregard the insignificants. Donoho [24] showed that such wavelet estimators with a properly chosen threshold value have various important optimality properties. The choice of the thresholding value, therefore, becomes a crucial step in the estimation procedure. The observables pseudorange and carrier phase information were obtained from the receiver, and then residuals were computed as expressed in Eq. (5.4). These residuals data were filtered with both Donoho's estimator Eq. (3.22), and the proposed threshold value estimation Eq. (3.35) to mitigate the effect of mllitipaths on the pseudoranges and consequently have a better precisions on the computed positions. Figs.5.5 and 5.6 show two samples of the computed positions. The lighter (red) dots represent the positions from the raw data

G'l
(data without fi lt ering) , and the clarker clots show the fina l posit ions afte r d ata Ita:.; heell fi lt.ered . The dar ker dob in Fig . .5.5(a) show the fi ltered positiol1s
(LS

Eq . (3 .22) was lIsed to

t hreshold the \\'avelet coeffi cient·. O bvio usly in F ig. 5.5(a) , the fin al posit ions have a llluch
great er sta.llcl (\.rd d ev iat ioll compared to t he
ULW

p os itic)Ils (t ile lighter dOb) .

III ord er to

I]
'50 100

2OO r - - --

- r - -- - - -

'00

I

50

I
..

50

I

i"

Ot

~

;;

i"

z

a

a

- '50~

_ _ _ _~_ -150 " 00 - 50 50
EasUng 1m)

- '50

-~:l
-------~-----50 -250 -200 - '50 - '00 -;;0

-250 -200

EasUng 1m)

(il ) T lil'l'sltuldillg In' [ct· :3. 22 .

(Ii ) Th reshulding h\· Eq . :3.:3.) .
R l'~ ltl tcd f WIIl

F igu re 5.5: COlll[>Hris(J1l () f t ile P(Jsitioll s P recis ioll

E qs . :3 .22 a lld :3 .:3,').

200

'

200 >

-100
- 40-20 0 20 40 E a sting (m) - 40-20 0 20 40 Easling (m)

((I) T lt rE's ltuldill,Q; hy Eq. J .22.

(11) T h n:'sli(Jld illp;

h~' [C[ .

J .J:).

Figure 5.6: C om pari SOIl of the Posi t iolls Prec isioll Res ul ted frotn E qs . 3.22 a lld 3.35. A ll ot her Loca.t ioll.

q \la llt it\ t he resul ts . the nor m of the sta nclRnl dev ia.t ioll of the IO llgitudes alld latitudes of

65 the positions are taken as expressed in Eq. (5.6).
Snorrn

= y'std(longitudes)2

+ std(latitudes)2

(5.6)

The lov,,'er the value of The
Snorrn

Snorrn,

the lower the data is scattered (lower standard deviation).

of the Fig. 5.5(a) is calculated to be 102 (Ill) for the filtered data, whereas the

raw data has the value of 79 (m), meaning that there is no improvement in this case. This shows that the
Snorrn

of the positions has increased by 29%. The

Snorrn

of the Fig. 5.5(b),

for the filtered data is computed to be 62 (m) which implied that with our filtering the
Snorrn

of the positions for that location has improved by 21%. Tabel (5.1) represents the
Snorrn

comparison of the

for Figs. 5.6(a) and 5.6(b).

Fig. 5.7 shows the norm of the standard deviations for the 29 data sets. In Fig. 5.7, the Donoho Estimator Raw Data Filtered Data 46 58 The Proposed Raw Filtered Data 46 32

Snorrn

(m)

Table 5.1: Comparison of the Snorrn for the Location Shown in Fig. 5.6.

lighter color (grey) represents the raw data, ".. hile the darker bars represent the filtered data. As illustrated in Fig. 5.7(a), there are improvement and degradation \vhen the threshold value is set to the Donoho's estimator, Eq. (3.22). It could be observed that there are cases that standard deviation of the filtered data is higher than the original data (the data not being filtered). vVhile using the eigenvalue as the threshold value, we observe that there is no degradation over the raw data. As shown in Fig. 5. 7(b), there are a few cases that both raw and filtered data have the same standard deviation. This could be from the fact that these data sets carry very low amount of errors. This is an indication that the proposed algorithm is operating properly. If the presence of multipath is negligible, meaning that the effect of line-of-sight signals arc much stronger that the multipaths, the algorithm does not affect the data, while by applying the Donoho's estimator as the threshold value, the results are changing regardless of the density of the errors. In another words, when multipaths are present in a data set, the algorithm detects them by properly thresholding the signals, and

66
160 _ 140 160 _ 140

§.

,g
.~

c

§.
120 100
c ~ 120

o

~

'i
o
100 80 60

" ~
Q

~

80 60 40 20

iii
Q

~ ~

:;

'0

:;

~

'0
~ 40
20

E

10

15 20 Number of Data Sets

25

~~

10

~

15 20 Number of Data Sets

~

25

I

'I I

(a) By Thresholding Using Donoho's Estimator.

(b) By Thresholding Using Eigenvalue.

Figure 5.7: Improvement and Degradation of the Standard Deviation of 29 Data Sets.

then mitigates them through multi-resolution analysis which adaptively select the number of levels necessary to extract the errors. Furthermore, comparing the Figs5. 7( a) and 5. 7(b) by each corresponding data sets thresholded by Donoho's estimator and eigenvalue, we observe that in all cases standard deviation resulted from eigenvalue thresholding is less than what is obtained when Eq. (3.22) is used.

5.3.2

Wavelet Analysis on Computed Positions

Although the work in this thesis is based on stationary receiver/antenna, as shown in Fig. 5.3, the coordinates of a location does not stay constant. One way to decrease the deviations was to mitigate the errors on the pseudoranges as illustrated in Fig. 5.7(b). To further decrease the standard deviation of the computed positions and lowering the virtual motion (velocity) that exists among the coordinates, a second stage multi-resolutional analysis is applied on the calculated positions.

67
The Effect of Levels on Standard Deviation
As t he t h reshold pl ays all im po rt a nt rule in wclVelet fil t ering, t lte Hu m! wr of levels de t erm ines the resolu tion of the fi ltered dat a. w hi ch is a nother maj ()r c:I1 i:u adr ristics of t he lllultirrsol u tioIl ;-lIla h-sis . T he lligh flequeIlcies in a s ig llal coulc! he cO llsicll'lt'c1 a;; nui::-;l' Hdded t o t he s ig nal B\· selecting higher le \'els, b I'L':i icall.\· \\'e are t n 'illg t o l em ove marc of t lte high frequencies in each le \'els . T he coordinat es of a locat ion co uld o e sec n a.s Ic)\\' fr e qu e ll ci (~s (illformatioll ). a lld t lt (~
g cl[lS

t hat L 'x ist hct\\'ccn t he p oints are cOll::-;idered to h e hi gh fr pqncllcies . III t Cl"lns of ph\'sical ltlCc1lli llg . t he::;e gaps rr ::;Plllhk tit(, velocit\· of nati o n.
cL,,)
( \.ll

o hj ect ltlov illg ra ndo ml\' \\'it hon t
(l

Hm '

desti-

::; hO\\"ll ill F ig . 3.3. Sincc the ohj ccti \'C of pos itio llillg is to haw

\'ClY

10\\'

stalld a rd lo cat iotls

deviation (less than 2 m) , wavel t filt ering is used on the pos itioll poill ts . T he
red ::: raw . black= re sults

::-;(llIl P

re d=raw. black=resulls

2 00

200 150
150
100

I
c: E
to:
0
OJ

100 50 0 -50 -1 00 -150 - 200 - 100
Easting (m)

z

-100

G

-1 5<:4 c., o--::2~D~ 0 --::2~0~4 0,.-J
E a sling (rn )

(el) SHlllU LocatiOIl

Wi

Fig.

·) . 0 .

(il ) Sa llle Locat ioll

<1<;

F ig . .J.G.

Figur e 5 .8: EffC'('t. of Levding on t he Sca tter Points , lcvC'! = 2.

as shown in Figs,5.5 and 5.6 , a re selected t o b E' fi ltered with the different numb er of levels. F ig. 5. 8 5hO\\'s the scatter changes. T he d eviat ions seell ill sta nd a rd devi ations arc ill ustrated ill F ig. 5.0 (a). T n have
,t

qui ck n.c('pss to th e ..l.mOllllt of cha nges, cumulative distributioll

fUllc t ion (cdf) of the stanrl a.rd d ev iat iolls an~ plott ed a.') s howlI ill F ig . 5.9(b). III Fig. 5.9(b). t he dott ed line represents the celf of t he raw d a t a , while t he so lid li lle shows t lte celf of the filt ered data. The higher the gap b etween the d otted line and the ::-;olid lille , the be tter arc

68
P(
x~a)

16 0 140 120
100

I_Filtered L~Raw II

0.95 0.9 0.85 0.8 0.75 0.7

0 0

065

0
20
I

I

I

~

0.6

~ )
10

}
20 25

\

0.55

15 Number of Data Sets

05

20

30

40 50 60 70 Norm of the Standard Deviations (m)

80

90

(a) Standard Deviation Improvements/Degradation

(b) cdf Improvements.

Figure 5.9: Norm anu Cumulative Distribution Function (cu£) Improvements.

the results. For example, we are looking for norm of the standard deviation to be 55 m. There are two choices to be considered, as shmvn in Fig. 5.9(b). 'Without filtering the data, we have 58% chance to hit the target (55 Ill), while with filtering the data the probability goes higher to 75%. Since the object of this thesis is to obtain a standard deviation of less than 2 m for 95% of the time, the number of levels was increased to 10. Fig. 5.10 shows the same locations as before (Fig. 5.5) to have a visual comparison between the levels and the scattering points. \Ve observe that there is a noteable difference between the scatter points from level 2 to 10. By a simple visual inspection we can observe that the standard deviation has improved significantly to the point that the objective of the proposed research work has been reached. The total improvements are plotted and shown in Fig. 5.11. As mentioned before, in the bar plots, the raw data is presented by a lighter color (grey) while the results are the darker ones. Since the results are very small compared to the raw data, the zoomed version of the results are shown in Fig. 5.12(a). The cdf of the results are shmvn in Fig. 5.12(b). As shown in Fig. 5.12(b), with a probability of about 96.55%, the norm of the standard deviation "vill be less than 1.5 m. In another words, there is only one case that shows the norm
t~

be 2.2

69
rsd= raw . b lack=res ult

2 00 150

2 00 15 0 100

:§:
g>

100 50

~ z

a
-5 0 - 100 - 15 0 -20 0 - 10 0
E as tin g (m)
-15 0 L....~~~-----"

0

- 4 0-2 0

0

20 4 0

E as ti n g (m)

(1))

S,llll (,

L(>(lt io ll

I\.~

f ig. .J .G.

Figure 5.10: Effect of Level ing on t h Sca tter P oints , level = lO.

160 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 0

I
0

ro :;
<J)

c: Q

"E
u c
C1l

Ui

co
Ql

-£

'0

0 z

E

5

10

15
Number of Data Sets

20

25

1
Lcvcl= lO.

Fig ure 5.11 :

l\O l'lll

uf thc St andard Dcviat ion

I lllp rovClll C' Il tS ,

1t1 ,

and the

l'Ps t

of the da t a se t.s show

i:l ll OllIl

of lrss

t Itall

l.,s

ltl.

In addi tioll to t he standard deviation , t\\·o other statist ical elemell ts namely Kurt osis and
Ske\\TleSS of t he da ta sets \\'ere cOlllPu ted to invest igate the clistrilmtecl scatter poillts .

70
2.5,-----~-~---~--~--~-____,

P( 'Sa)

1- Fi~ered 1
Data

I

~
o

0.9

.2
~ o 1.5
iii

g 08
.2

c

<1 c

] 0.7
'6

~

i

06

'5
~

E

(J

0.5

0.4 0.2
1

·

,

0.4

1 12 Norm of the Stardard Deviations (m)

0.6

0.8

14

1.6

(a) Zoomed Version of the Filtered Data.

(b) cdf Improvements.

Figure 5.12: Final Norm and Cumulativc Distribution Function (cdf) Improvcments.

Kurtosis of a data set is computed to observe how outlier-prone a distribution is. In probability theory and statistics, kurtosis is a measure of the "peakness" of the probability distribution of a real-valued random variable. Higher kurtosis means more of the variance is due to infrequent extreme deviations, as opposed to frequent modestly-sized deviations. For example, the kurtosis of the normal distribution is 3. Distributions that are more outlierprone than the normal distribution have kurtosis greater than 3; distributions that are less outlier-prone have kurtosis less than 3 [22]. The kurtosis of a distribution is defined as:

k

=

_E_{X __I-L_)_4
0'4

(5.7)

where I-L is the mean of x, 0' is the standard deviation of x, and E(.) represents the expected value of the quantity (.). Some definitions of kurtosis subtract 3 from the computed value, so that the normal distribution has kurtosis of O. As shown in Fig. 5.13, about 95% of the raw data shows a norm Kurtosis of greater than 3, while the results are 100% below 3. The average value of the Kurtosis is calculated to be 2.8 m. This value indicates that the filtered data distribution could be considered as normal distribution. The last statistical elements to be computed is Skewness of the data.
Sk~wness

71
Norm of the Kurtosis
20r----,----------,---~-~-~-_

Norm of the Kurtosis

18
16 14 12 10 1.5 2.5

1

,111 11\] o

10

h\l\\ltltl~illl
15 20 25
Number of Data Sets

0.5

O~~~~~~~L~~~~~~-~~

30

o

10

15
Number of Data Sels

20

25

30

(a) Kurtosis of the Data Sets.

(b) Kurtosis of the Results, Zoomed

Figure 5.13: Kurtosis of the \Vholc Data Sets.

is a measure of the asymmetry of the data around the sample mean. If skewness is negative, the data are spread out more to the left of the mean than to the right. If skewness is positive, the data are spread out more to the right. The skewness of the normal distribution (or any perfectly symmetric distribution) is zero [22]. The skewness of a distribution is defined as:
y=

(5.8)

As shO\vn in Fig. 5.14, while the norm of Skewness of the raw data (lighter color) is varied from data I::)ct to data set, the skcwncss of thc filtcrcd data is almost constant. The variation makes it difficult to calibrate the computed positions in terms of accuracy of the coordinates as in case of raw data. \Vhen the data sets are exhibiting a uniform skewness, this feature enables us to calibrate the algorithm in case the computed coordinates show deviation from the true coordinates. At the end, coordinates of two locations in down town Toronto were mapped to compare the raw and filtered positions, as shown in Figs.5.15 and 5.16. In these figures, the blue dots (darker color) are the raw coordinates, and the lighter color dots represent the positions after being filtered. Fig. 5.15(b) shows the zoomed version of the Fig. 5.15(a) to illustrate the tightness of the results compared to the raw data. As noted

72
Norm of tile Skewness
3.5,--~--~--,_-___,_---.--~

Norm of Ihe Skewness

0.8 ,----,-----r--~,_-___,_--_,_-___, 0.7

2.5

0.6 0.5

:::
~

2

j

0.4 1.5 0.3 0.2 0.1
°OLLLL~~~~10~UUL1L5LLLL2~0~~~25UULLU30

~

10

15
Number of Data Sets

20

25

30

Number of Oala Sets

(a) Skewness of the Data Sets.

(b) Skewness of the Results, Zoomed

Figure 5.14: Skewness of the Whole Data Sets.

in Fig. 5.15(b), the maximum deviation for this location is about 2 m. Fig. 5.16 illustrates another location, \vhich exhibits a much less standard deviation comparing with the raw data (blue color). In Fig. 5.16(a), the desired position is shown by a dark square. Fig.

':)

0

50 100 150 200

90

0

JO

00

100 110

(leY

cP

0

.6

..p..~ 1x=304.25. y=119.14
120
'(;-00

sCY .,:;
::

05

'U
1

.FS;.1i" I ~

250 300 350 400
Ryerson
~Ur"llvers.ty

130 140

~:)
"\

oJ,Oo

\n~
t
(lI))

&1

I x=306.11, z=121.041

c'~
:' r->

,,
\

:9 c16

p

~J.~'J'~ ~ '$1 o ·
C

°C~6:r

,cj~)
0

~Q; §
,

v

;;,

t
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450

150 280
290

0:)\:\ ') "0(;
300

o"cq,O
330

?alJi

310

320

(a) Final Positions, Raw and Filtered.

(b) Zoomed Positions.

Figure 5.15: Actual Computed Positions of a Location.

5.16(b) shows the estimated positions before (darker color) and after (lighter color) filtering,

73 and Fig. 5.16(c) is the zoomed version of Fig. 5.16(b). The deviation in this ca..se is about

0.4 m.

Ryerson University

,
j

100 150 200 250
l

I

l

l

·
!,

o '!..
'3

\

~ ..

',t.

\
C
300
S(\ua'1I

·

l
tll

<!1

'?

?,
C).

<e

350

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

450

(a) True Location.
' ~G?'" . ijJ'o

Ryerson UI1N.I.,ty

5O~S'
100
<,.-

·
I

,

~

'\
I,
\

150

~~4 J~"
'~~ ~~
"
,}

139 140 141 142

J:

,l,

'.

'~',. ~ ~ ~ \
~"

200

I

£

i;;
250

\

o .:)

~~

1
·

~

't

143

0

~JD ,0
()

·
0 0 0

l'I

'!!

C
300
~aI'

-;

'~ "<>

,

o""~
'!!
0

"'~\\:
;

144
0

~

0 0
0

0 0 0 0

~

145

't

0

0

'z

" '!!
450

146 147

350

)
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400

228

230

232

234

236

238

240

(b) Scatter Positions.

(c) Zoomed Positions.

Figure 5.16: A Location in Down Town Toronto.

5.4

Chapter Summary

74

Fig. 5.17 provides a graphical illustration of the techniques used in this v;ork. Basically, four or more satellites signals will be received by a receiver, and from them residuals (code minus carrier) will be made as the input to the proposed algorithm (filter 1 in Fig. 5.17). These residual will be filtered to estimate the signal distortions and subsequently their values will be subtracted from the measurements (pseudoranges) to construct the estimated ranges. These ranges will be then used to compute the positions. Although these positions show improvements compared to the unfiltered (lata, their standard deviation in this stage is not below 2 m, and it is in the range of 20 m to 80 m. To achieve the desired standard deviation, \vhich is 1.5 m or less for about 95% of the time, the computed positions are filtered (filter 2 in Fig. 5.17) to finalize the coordinate of the user. The final positions achieved from the proposed algorithm shmvs with a probability of 96.5%, the norm of the standard deviation to be less than 1.5 m. In addition to lowering the standard deviation, the proposed algorithm affected the data distribution at the end. Although the focus of the thesis is not to gaussify the data distribution, we see that the outputs are normally distributed as shown in Fig. 5.13. Normally distributed data is a very well known feature \vhich helps in data modeling, estimation and prediction. The achievement

L-~~~~::==::---'~~:L--~~~--J::::::dr4L-----------==:;R=.=~--r-----r-~ r
4

Residuals

Filter 1

1 - -.....

::1

PR - d,

I ~ ; ;:~~:

Figure 5.17: Block Diagram of the Proposed Positioning.

obtained in this work is significant. We have the outputs of an expensive receiver/antenna

75 from an inexpensive (about $500) receiver. Having a low cost GPS system with high precision
opens doors to the public and industrial sectors. It is sure to offer numerous, significant and affordable solutions. \Ye see beneficial sport/recreational applications, business solutions, child safety, and traffic control applications just to mention a few.

Chapter 6
Conclusions
Beside harchvare improvements to acquire more accuracy and precision on computed positions from a GPS w('eiver, different soft.,Yare solutions have been employed to post-process data to decrease the standard deviation of the positions. To mitigate errors which cause deviations from the true value of the calculated coordinates, ,vavelet analysis has been used by many researchers on data extracted from dual frequency (L1 and L2 bands) receivers, and without investigating the effect of the levels and threshold value on the positions. In all the previous works, the scholars were working with multiple high cost receivers. In our study, we post-process the data from an inexpensive receiver based solely on L1 frequency. The proposed algorithm characterizes multipath error by employing eigenvalues and entropy of the data, and then mitigates the effect of multipath by applying multi-resolution analysis on the data. The algorithm proceeds with first, decomposing the data into different levels based on entropy. Then, two different methods of computing a threshold value are selected to filter the wavelet coefficients. In the first method of thresholding, Donoho's estimator [24] is used, as most of the previous works in this area are based on. For the second method, the new threshold based on singular value data decomposition is proposed. The results obtained from 29 data sets collected from downtown Toronto showed significant improvement in standard deviation of the estimated positions (less than 1.5 m with probability of 96.5%) when the new threshold value along with the level selection criteria applied on the data sets.

76

Appendix A

~a("lIi .. ·

m
1

LI':-'
I'I~N
~igll ..,l

Cod ... ·

(tl(I('

I'ha,p
S('lc·c:titJlJ

I ).. Ia"
l hip'

H ..,( lIlehi",

NUIllI ... r
Nu.uht'r 2 3

Octal

NUlnht'r

(L2)

2 3

Z+ 6 3+ 7
·H-i! 5+ 9

:.
Ii
R

I ~~II 11,20 17111
17~4

4 6 7 8 9 III II 12
13
l-l

.t
5

"

6 7
K

1+9 2+10 I J- 8

2+ <)
3+10 ZI- 3 3+4
'>-f· 6 Ii-i 17

9
10

17 18 139 1411 1-11
Z:il

II:B
14~5

1131 14;'4 lliHi
1~1I4

II 12
13

2:;2

254
2:i;;
2':-,1)

15 16 17 IX 19 20 ZI
U

1-1 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
22

7+8

8+ ~)
~)+lO

2:;7 25R
41,~J

1+4 2+- ;;
3+.. 6

23

24 25
2b

23 24 25 26
27

27

2R 29
30

31 32

28 29 30 31 32 33 3-1
35

36 37

H-7 :;+8 Gf 9 [.j- 3 41 6 5+ 7 6+8 7+-9 8+10 If 6 2+7 3+'8 4+9 5·110 -I 1·10 ].j- 7 2+8 4+111

HO -171 -172 H3 47-1
:i09

512
5U

514 515 :;16
R59

81>0 X()I
RGZ

flo3
950

947 9-18
~J5()

1642 175U 1764 1772 1775 1776 115(, l-Ili7 1633 1715 17-1f) 17G3 1063 1706 17-13 17fH 1770 177-1 1127 1-153 I()Z5 1712 1745 1713 1134 14:;6 1713

Figure A.I: Cj A Code Phase Assignment, taken from [2]-

77

Bibliography
[1] B. Jun Yoon, P. P. Vaidyanathan, "\Vavelet Ba..sed Denoising by Customized Thresholding", Vol. 2, p.p. 925-928, in Proceedings of IEEE, ICASSP (International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing) 2004. [2] B. \V. Parkinson, J. J. Spilker, Global Positioning System: Theory and Applications, Vol. 1, American Institute of Aeronautics, 1996. [3] B. Hofmann-\Vellenhof, H. Lichtenegger, J. Collins, GPS Theory and Practice, Fifth Revised Edition, Springer-Verlag Wien New York, 2001. [4] P. ~Iisra, P. Enge, "Global Positioning System: Signals, ~Ieasurements, and Performance", Ganga-Jamuna Press, 2001. [5] A. El-Rabbany, "Advanced Satellite Positioning", Unpublished Lecture Notes, Department of Civil Engineering, Ryerson University, 2006.

[6J J. Zogg, "GPS Basics, Introduction to the System Application Overview", u-blox Corporation, www.telecom.fh-htwchur.chjzoggjDateien, (last accessed on: December 25, 2006).

[7J G. Xie, "Optimal On-Airport

~lonitoring

of the Integrity of GPS-Based Landing Sys-

tem" , A Doctor of Philosophy Dissertation, Stanford University, 2004.

[8J D. Plausinaitis, "Code Generation and Carrier Generation", Aalborg University,
http://kom.aau.dk/1'V dpljcoursesjmmlL slides. pdf, (last accessed on: December 25, 2006).
78

79 [9] P. H. Dana, "Global Positioning System (GPS) Overview", Killwer Academic Publishers, Bostom, 1997. [10] H. Kuusniemi, "User-Level Reliability and Quality :t\Ionitoring in Satellite-Based Personal Navigation", Thesis for the Degree of Doctor of Technology, Tampere University of Technology, 2005. [11] B. P. Lathi, Modern Digital and Analog Communication Systems, Third Edition, Oxford University Press, 1998. [12] C. Satirapod, C. Rizos, "Multipath :t\Iitigation by \Vavelet Analysis for GPS Base Station Applications", Survey Review, Vol. 38, No. 295, 2003. [13] Y. Zhang, C. Bartone, "Real-time :t\Iultipath :t\Iitigation with \Vavesmooth Technique using \Vavelets", ION G;,rSS 17th International Technical :t\Ieeting of the Satellite Division, pp. 1181-1193, September 2004. [14] L. Xia, J. Liu, "Approach for .:\Iultipath Reduction Using Wavelet Algorithm", The Institute of Navigation (ION), International Technical 1Ieeting, pp. 2134-2143, Salt Lake City, Utah, 2001. [15] N. EI-Sheimy, A. Osman, S. Nassar, A. Noureldin, "\Vavelet 1Iultiresolution Analysis", GPS \Vorld, 2003. [16] C. S. Burrus, R. A. Gopinath, \\'avelet and \Vavelet Transforms, Rice University, Prentice-Hall Inc. 1998. [17] 1. Daubechies, "Ten Lectures on \Vavelets", CB11S-NSF Regional Conference Series, Capital City Press, 1992. [18] J. R. \Villiams, K. Amaratunga, "Introduction to \Vavelets in Engineering" , Intelligent Engineering Systems Laboratory, 11assachusetts Institute of Technology, USA, 2000.

80 [19J V. B. Gundersen, "Multivariate signal Analysis-Empirical :Modeling of Drilling Riser", Telemark Institute of Technology, 1998. [20] J. ~Iorlet, "Sampling Theory and Wave Propagation", NATO ASI Series, SpringerVerlag, VoLl, 233-261, 1983. [21] B. Vidakovic, P. ~Iueller, "\Vavelet, A Tutorial Introduction", Duke University, 1991. [22] The
~Iath\Vorks,

Inc.

http://www.mathworks.com/access/helpdesk/help/

tech-

doc/matlab.shtml, (last accessed on: December 25, 2006). [23] H. Ahmadi, "Wavelets: Principles and Applications in Signal Processing", University of Tehran, Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Lecture Notes, 2004. [24] D. 1. Donoho, "De-noising by Soft-Thresholding", IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 41, pp. 613-627,
~Iay

1995.

[25] }'I. Aram, B. Li, S. Krishnan, A. Anpalagan, "Improving Position Estimates from a Stationary GNSS Receiver Using Wavelets and Clustering", in Proceedings of IEEE CCECE, 2006. [26] 1\1. Aram, A. El-Rabbany" S. Krishnan, A. Anpalagan, "Single Frequency l\Iultipath 1\Iitigation Based On Wavelet Analysis" , The Journal of:K avigation, The Royal Institute of Navigation, Vol, 60, Journal and Article number NAV414, 2007. [27] F. Abramovich, T. Sapatinas, B.\V. Silverman, "Wavelet Thresholding via a Bayesian Approach", Royal Statistical Society, 1998. [28] K. J. Balakrishnan, N. A. Touba, "Relationship Betvveen Entropy and Test Data Compression", in Proceedings of IEEE, Vol. 26, NO.2, pp. 386-394, 2007. [29] M. Shiga, Y. Yokota, "An Optimal Entropy Estimator for Discrete Random Variables", in Proceedings ofIEEE, International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, Vol. 2, pp. 1280-1285, 2005.

81 [30] J. T. Ho, P. J. Smith, "A Quick Simulation 11ethod for Fading Communications Channels using a Novel Eigenvalue Importance Sampling Technique", in Proceedings of IEEE, Vehicular Technology Conference, Vol. I, pp. 449-453, 2002. [31] R. Everson, S. Roberts, "Inferring the Eigenvalues of Covariance 11atrices from Limited, Noisy Data", in Proceedings of IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, Vol. 48, pp. 2083-2091, 2000.


