The Transformation of The Marble Faun: A case study of the extra-illustrated volumes of The Marble Faun published by Tauchnitz
by
Andreane Balconi A thesis presented to Ryerson University and George Eastman House International Museum of Photography and Film in partial fulfillment of the requirements of the degree of Master of Arts in the program of Photographic Preservation and Collections Management

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2011 ©Andreane Balconi

Declarations
I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis or dissertation. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis or dissertation to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

t··

.-

iii

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis or dissertation by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I

11

Abstract
This thesis explores the use and development of the photographically illustrated novel from a souvenir to a mass-market publication. An examination of three volumes of the Tauchnitz printing of Nathaniel Hawthorne's The Marble Faun details how tourists and booksellers adapted the novel through the addition of albumen prints to create a unique souvenir. By 1889, the technological advances in the printing process, the demands of tourism and the photographic selections from the Tauchnitz volumes made it possible for Houghton, Mifflin and Company to publish an illustrated copy of The Marble Faun containing photogravure prints. Like the European title of the book - Transformation or , the Romance ofMonte Beni - this paper demonstrates how the Tauchnitz touristproduced souvenir copies of the novel evolved into a mass-market product.

111

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my thesis advisors. Robert Burley and Vid Ingelevic5, for being 50 patient and helpful while I struggled through this thesis. I would also like to thank Paul and Karen Meyer for all their support and for every time they have bailed me out (both figuratively and literally). Finally I would like to thank Mary Lee Meyer-Balconi for being so understanding and helping me out all throughout this process.

iv

Table of Contents
Declarations Abstract Acknowledgements List of Illustrations List of Appendices Introduction Literature survey Hawthome and The Marble Faun Travel and Photography Publishing and Photography Comvarison Conclusion Appendix 1
Summary description of books

ii

iii

iv vi vii 1 3 8 14 19 25 45
49
49

Appendix 2
Book 1: 1860 Edition (Volume 1) and 1889 Edition (Volume 1) Book 2: 1860 Edition (Volume 2), Book 3: 1860 Edition (Volume 2) and 1889 Edition (Volume 2)
~~~3

50
51 56

M
61

Selected image comparisons

Bibliography
Hawthorne and The Marble Faun Analysis of the extra-illustrated Tauchnitz editions Publishing and Photography Travel and Photography

75
75 76 76 78

v

List of Illustrations
Fig. 1 Pubblico passaggio del pincio Fontana del mose (6717) Fig. 2 Fountain of Moses, Pincian Garden Fig. 3 Cover of Volume I of the Tauchnitz 1860s printing Fig. 4 [Old Man sitting by a cross on the side of the road] Fig. 5 [Two hands holding each other and sitting on a dark cushion] Fig. 6 [Ruined Roman aqueduct with people on horses in the field surrounding it] Fig. 7 Castel S. Angelo e Fiume Fig. 8 [Castle S. Angelo] Fig. 9 Castle of Saint Angelo Fig. 10 [Statue of a Pope (Pope Julius the Third)] Fig. 11 [Close up of statue of the Pope] Fig. 12 Statue ofPope Julius III Fig. 13 S. Pietro Fig. 14 [Saint Peter's] Fig. 15 Saint Peter's Fig. 16 [A castle tower with a road separating it and a wall] Fig. 17 [Road with ruins] Fig. 18 Cecilia Metella's Tomb Fig. 19 Galleria Barberini Ritratto di Beatrice Cenci (7323) Fig. 20 Guido's Beatrice Cenci Fig. 21 [Confessional] Fig. 22 [Confessional with priest inside] Fig. 23 [Painting of three women on a balcony in traditional costume] Fig. 24 [Painting of a parade through the streets with people watching from balconies and windows] 13 13 26 29 29 29 33 33 33 35 35 35 35 35 35 37 37 37 38 38 40 40 41 41

vi

List of Appendices
Appendix 1: Summary description of books Appendix 2: Listing of photographs in books Appendix 3: Selected comparison images

49
50 61

Vll

Introduction
This thesis will examine and compare four copies of The Marble Faun-also published under the name Transformation: or the Romance ofMonte Beni in Europe-by Nathaniel Hawthorne. Three copies are from the publisher Tauchnitz and were copyrighted in 1860. These three volumes were found in the George Eastman House's Richard and Ronay Menschel Library and are of interest because they are illustrated with 19 century tipped in albumen prints bound into the novel. All three volumes appear to be made by different people and their origins and exact dates of production are unknown. However, Susan S. Williams-a professor of American literature and culture before 1900 at Ohio State University and the author of Confounding Images: Photography and
th

Portraiture in Antebellum American Fiction-noted that the creation of these extraillustrated copies probably did not begin until about 1868 and continued throughout the rest nineteenth century. 1 Since the publisher, Tauchnitz, made a practice ofleaving the original imprint date on the title page of all subsequent impressions of his books, it is difficult to track the exact dates on these three volumes. The fourth book is an illustrated copy of The Marble Faun, published by Houghton, Mifflin and Company in 1889. This later printing contains photogravures based on popular photographs that were added into the Tauchnitz printings. This thesis begins by examining the reasons why this novel was selected by booksellers and tourists to be extra-illustrated. This section will detail Hawthorne's own S. Williams. "Manufacturing Intellectual Equipment: The Tauchnitz Edition of The Marble Faun." Reading Books: Essays on the Material Text and Literature in America. Amherst: University of Massachusetts, 1996. 124.
1 Susan

1

experiences in Italy, his use of popular sites and locales within the text of his novel and his use of descriptive language to create visuals of the novel's Italian setting. The second section provides a description of and timeline for different photographic processes used in the creation of the photographically illustrated book. The third section discusses photography and travel and explains how the popularity of the photographic souvenir added to the popularity of the photographically illustrated edition of The Marble Faun. Finally, the thesis will end with an in-depth comparison of the four volumes that highlights several photographs and details their similarities and differences. By examining these four volumes against the background of technological advances in photography and publishing, tourism and souvenirs, this thesis will show how these factors led to the production of a unique photographically illustrated novel.

2

Literature survey
The examination of the three examples of The Marble Faun required research from different sources. The research on Nathaniel Hawthorne and the influence of the setting on the novel began with the biography Nathaniel Hawthorne: A Biography, by Alrin Turner. This book makes extensive use of Hawthorne's letters and documents to create a comprehensive timeline of Hawthorne's life while also providing insight into Hawthorne's creative process. Two chapters in particular were most insightful. The first, "Art and Artists in Italy," examines Hawthorne's time in Italy through the view of the friends he made in Italy, especially the artists he met. The other, titled "The Marble Faun," details the process by which the ideas presented in the Italian Notebooks later appeared in the novel. This chapter also discusses the publication of the novel in America. Another book that is important to this thesis is Passages from the French and

Italian notebooks o/Nathaniel Hawthorne, which offers an unedited insight into
Hawthorne's time in Italy, including his opinions ofItaly. These insights demonstrate how certain places; art pieces and architecture-many of which would later become important elements in The Marble Faun-had affected him. The influence of setting on the descriptive passages of the novel is effectively discussed in John A. Huzzard's article "Hawthorne's 'The Marble Faun,'" which appeared initalica, Vol. 35, No.2 (Jun., 1958). The seven-page article contains a condensed description of the writing of The Marble Faun and provides explicit examples from the text of Hawthome's description of Rome. Huzzard's objective was to demonstrate the influence Hawthorne's trip to Italy had on the setting of the novel.

3

Biographical infonnation on Hawthorne and a discussion of the tourist market during the publication of The Marble Faun was provided by Richard H. Brodhead's introduction to the 1990 Penguin Books publication of The Marble Faun. The introduction bridged the gap between the exploration of Hawthorne's settings and the discussions on photography and travel. Although the introduction does not discuss photography, it does mention the increasing number of American tourists and the development of the cult of tourism. The topic of tourism and photography is developed in the article «Photographed and Described: Traveling in the Footsteps of Francis Frith," from Scenes in a Library: Reading the Photograph in the Book, 1843

1875, by Carol Annstrong. While this

section is focused on Frith's albums, Annstrong also discusses the use of photographs in books for tourists. Most importantly, she compares these albums to the Tauchnitz printing of The Marble Faun. In this section, she describes how Tauchnitz used the tourist marketplace to sell The Marble Faun with its added illustrations. She concludes by comparing this practice to Frith's illustration of Longfellow's Hyperion. Dean MacCannell's The Tourist: A New Theory o/the Leisure Class examines tourism from an anthropological and sociological viewpoint and is used to deepen our understanding of the role of tourism and its connection to photography and souvenirs. MacCannell reviews the history of tourism from an ethnographic rather than a historic point of view. MacCannell claims his book "brings the concerns of social science to an analysis of travel and sightseeing in the postindustrial age, during which the middle class acquired leisure time for international travel. ,,2 It details the reasons behind the changes

2 Dean

MacCannel1. The Tourist: a New Theory o/the Leisure Class. New York: 4

in tourism from the nineteenth·century to the postwar era while providing a wide perspective on tourism and the use of souvenir. However, it only briefly discusses the role of photography in tourism and travel. Specific information on the Tauchnitz editions and how they were used by tourists were found in "Photography and the Museum of Rome in Hawthorne's The Marble Faun" by Timothy Sweet, from Photo-textualities: reading photographs and literature, in addition to "Reviewing Rome: the guidebook as liminal space" by Anne Busch, from Visual Communication 2002; 1; 369. Sweet's article explores the idea that the collector used The Marble Faun to recreate the experience of their tour of Rome. He also discusses the history of the Tauchnitz version of The Marble Faun, the subject of this paper, and its role as a souvenir. Sweet's article provides a solid background for approaching this version of The Marble Faun. Busch's work examines the book from a guidebook perceptive. She examines how the book was used and extensively compares it to the Blue Guide Rome and Knopf Guide Rome guidebooks. She "reminds us that guidebooks do not present destinations in a direct and objective manner, but straddle a more liminal space - switching between private and public understanding, between the reading and writing of place.,,3 Overall, the article gives a better understanding of how the Tauchnitz book compares to an actual guidebook, such as to Blue Guide Rome or the Baedeker's guidebooks.

Schocken, 1976. 1. 3 Bush, Anne. "Reviewing Rome: the Guidebook as Liminal Space. It Visual Communication 1 (2002): 369-75. SAGE Journals. Web. 20 Apr. 2010. <http://vcj.sagepub.com>. 370.

5

The topics of photography and publication were first investigated using The

Truthful Lens: A survey of the photographically illustrated book 1844 -1914 by Lucien
Goldschmidt and Weston J. Naef. The section "From Illusion to Truth and Back Again," written by Naef, was important to my research. It provides a comprehensive study of the history of photographically illustrated books and the technological evolutions that led to these changes. This section examines key points in photography's evolution, discusses the use of photography in technical manuals and examines its use in artistic representations. It ends with a discussion of the introduction of the photomechanical processes. While an overview of the photographic process within publications was important to the research for this paper, information about the publishing companies'that released the photographically illustrated books was essential. The Firma Tauchnitz, which published The Marble Faun, was the major focus of this topic area and two publications were used for this research. The first is Tauchnitz In 1841-1955: A Bibliographical

History by William B. Todd. This book contains an extensive decade-by-decade
summation of the books Tauchnitz published, the reasoning behind some publishing decisions, in addition to providing an extensive history of Tauchnitz. Although it contains only a brief discussion of The Marble Faun, the book gives a broader view of Tauchnitz's decisions and details which books were published by the company and when. The second publication consulted for this purpose is Susan S. Williams' essay "Manufacturing Intellectual Equipment: The Tauchnitz Edition of The Marble Faun," from Reading Books: Essays on the Material Text and Literature in America. In this essay, Williams examines how the production and packaging of Tauchnitz's edition of

6

The Marble Faun affected how the traveling public received it. 4 She provides an in depth examination of how and why the books were created and how they were then distributed to the populace to be illustrated.

4

Williams, 118.
7

Hawthorne and The Marble Faun
Nathaniel Hawthorne (1804 - 1864) was an American author who wrote eight novels and a number of short stories. He wrote four major novels: The Scarlet Letter (1850), The House o/Seven Gables (1851), The Blithedale Romance (1852) and The Marble Faun (1860). The most famous of these is The Scarlet Letter, which was one of the first mass-produced books in America, and his first best seller. Most of his novels were set in New England and were considered part of the Romantic Movement, with a specific focus on dark or gothic romanticism. Although Hawthorne's The Marble Faun was not his most famous work, it was influential, in its time, on the newly emerging tourist class. The story follows the trials and tribulations of four characters: Miriam, a painter; Hilda, a copyist; Kenyon, a sculptor; and Donatello, the Count of Monte Beni. Combining a murder-mystery plot with a romance, Hawthorne's story follows Donatello as he becomes smitten with Miriam. At the novel's outset, a mysterious monk is stalking and tormenting Miriam. Donatello notices the monk following while all four characters are taking a stroll. Donatello then attacks the monk, knocking him off a precipice and killing him. The remainder of the novel is the fallout from this event. Donatello becomes depressed and disappears, while Miriam follows him. Hilda and Kenyon search for them, developing their own love for one another. In the end, Donatello returns to Rome and gives himself up and Miriam embarks on a penitential pilgrimage. Meanwhile, Hilda finds solace in a Catholic confessional and her marriage to Kenyon. The entire story is set in Italy, with a specific focus on Rome and its art and architecture. This vibrant setting, coupled with Hawthorne's descriptive writing style, made the book a prime candidate for illustration 8

Hawthorne traveled to Italy in 1858 and stayed for a year and a half. During this time he detailed his experiences in his Italian Notebooks. He also produced a rough draft of The Marble Faun, which he completed when he returned to America. Reading his notebooks, it is obvious that Hawthorne experienced Italy not as a visitor attempting to immerse himself in the culture, but as a tourist. As Richard H. Brodhead notes in his introduction to a 1990 Penguin Books printing of The Marble Faun,
Italy as he engaged it was, in fact, scarcely an affair of living Italian people. His company largely confmed to other Americans abroad, Hawthorne met few Italians and made little effort to know their ways; and he showed virtually no responsiveness to Italy as another society with its own collective life, forging its own history in the present day. 5

One result of this tourist perspective was the creation of an idealized Italy. Brodhead again notes, "in composing the fictive world of The Marble Faun, what Hawthorne quite precisely reconstitutes is the aesthetic or touristic model of reality through which his 'Italy' has been given.',c; In other words, Hawthorne both traveled and created The Marble Faun with a guidebook mentality. As discussed in Timothy Sweet's "Photography and the Museum of Rome in Hawthorne's The Marble Faun", Hawthorne, like most of his American contemporaries, relied on guidebooks and travelogues, including the one written by his friend George Stillman Hillard. 7 Hillard's travelogue was titled Six Months in Italy and was the most popular travelogue on Italy among Americans in the nineteenth century; it was widely used as a guidebook. It is highly likely that Hillard's book influenced the setting of The Marble Faun and assisted in Hawthorne's

H. Brodhead. "Introduction." The Marble Faun, Or, The Romance ofMonte Beni. New York, N.Y., U.S.A.: Penguin, 1990. xi 6 Brodhead xvii 7 Sweet, Timothy. "Photography and the Museum of Rome in Hawthorne's The Marble Faun." Ed. Marsha Bryant. Photo-textualities: Reading Photographs and Literature. Newark: University of Delaware, 1996. 27.
9

5 Richard

novel's later incarnation as a type of guidebook for tourists in Italy. Indeed, as numerous authors have noted, one can almost check off the tourist hotspots mentioned in The Marble Faun. The plot moves through what were perceived at the time as the "official sights of Rome," such as the Fountain of Trevi, the Pantheon and the Coliseum. 8 The guidebook and romantic aspects of the novel greatly contributed to its popularity. For readers who were not tourists, the novel provided them a glimpse into the I talian world of art and architecture while, for the tourist, it provided points of reference on their journey. Certainly, it is not hard to imagine that standing in the spot where Kenyon finally wins Hilda in the Pantheon-"while standing before the pillared shrine, and the marble Madonna that marks Raphael's tomb, whither they had now wandered-"
9

could be a highlight of ones tour of Rome. In addition, the descriptions from the novel

could later assist the traveler as he or she recounted their tour to others who had not traveled to Italy. The movement from the written descriptions to photographic depiction seemed a natural progression. The addition of photographs allowed the tourist to create a visual memoir of their travels and thereby take a part of Italy home. Indeed, as Carol Armstrong notes,
as novels written by tourists for tourists, they suggest a theory of reading, as much as of writing, in which the reader visits the sites of the romance, makes the adventure that occurred there his or her own, and memorizes that ownership with photographs, either personally purchased by the consumer or commercially tipped into the book.lO

Brodhead xviii Nathaniel Hawthorne. The Marble Faun, Or, The Romance o/Monte Beni. New York, N.Y., U.S.A.: Penguin, 1990.359 10 Carol M. Armstrong. "Photographed an Described: Traveling in the Footsteps of Francis Frith." Scenes in a Library: Reading the Photograph in the Book, 1843-1875. Cambridge, MA: MIT, 1998.342 10
8

9

The Marble Faun's appeal to tourists is not the novel's only source of popularity and suitability for photographic illustrations. Additional factors that make the addition of illustration a natural advancement include the prominence of the setting within the novel as well as Hawthorne's visual descriptions. The Novel's descriptive passages often allow the setting to take hold and become more important than the characters or the plot In "Hawthorne's 'The Marble Faun,'" John A. Huzzard takes note of a scene in "Chapter XII: A Stroll on the Pincian," in which Hilda and Kenyon take an afternoon stroll through the Pineio. In Huzzard's description, Hawthorn "took advantage ofthe opportunity afforded him by Hilda and Kenyon and invited the reader to promenade with him, as he, either personally or through the medium of his two compatriots, pointed out the sights he wished them to see. ,,11 Indeed, the first few pages of the chapter only contain a description the Pincian Hill, as if the narrative is from a guidebook.
The Pincian Hill is the favourite promenade of the Roman aristocracy ... These foreign guests are indeed ungrateful, if they do not breathe a prayer for Pope Clement, or whatever Holy Father it may have been, who leveled the summit of the mount so skillfully, and bounded it with the parapet of the city-wall; who laid out those broad walks and drives, and overhung them with the deepening shade of many kinds of tree; who scattered the flowers of all seasons, and of every clime, abundantly over those green central lawns; who scooped out hollows, in fit places, and, setting great basins of marble in them, caused evergushing fountains to fill them to the brim; who reared up the immemorial obelisk out of the soil that had long hidden it; who placed pedestals along the borders of the avenues, and crowned them with busts of that multitude of worthies - statesmen, heroes, artists, men ofletters, and or song whom the whole world claims as its chief ornaments, though Italy produced them all. 12

11 John A. Huzzard. "Hawthorne's "The Marble Faun"" Italica 35.2 (1958): 119-24. Jstor. Web. 20 Apr. 2010. <http://www.jstor.org/stable/477492>. 123 12 Hawthorne, The Marble Faun. 78 11

This descriptive passage is illustrated in both the 1860 Tauchnitz printing (fig. 1) and the 1889 Houghton, Miillin and Company printing (fig. 2). Both editions employ similar photographs of a fountain on Pincian Hill (identified in the 1860 printing as

Pubblico passaggio del pincio Fontana del mose). The descriptive quality of the setting
influenced the selection of photographs that tourists used to illustrate their copies of the novel and three decades later a similar illustration was part of the 1889 publication. There are many further examples within the book of Hawthorne's descriptive depiction ofItaly and its arts. Indeed, Huzzard notes "In each of these episodes, no matter how full of suspense they may be, Hawthorne never failed to indulge in a lengthy and glowing description of the particular park or square, church or gallery in which his four young people could be found deliberating upon their respective fates.,,13 The importance of the setting in The Marble Faun often overshadows the characters and the plot. As Huzzard notes,
"Hawthorne strove with deep sincerity to convey to the reader his own emotional and intellectual experiences in a country to which, in the relatively short space of eighteen months, he had become so deeply attached that he at times entertained the idea of making it his permanent home. It is only natural, therefore, that the setting should assume a 14 greater importance in the novel than either the plot or the theme.

It is this focus on the setting, the guidebook-like descriptions, the referencing of
important sights and Hawthorne's visual depictions of these sites that made the novel highly suitable for illustration.

13

14

Huzzard 122 Ibid 119

12

Fig. 1 ?ubblico passaggio del pincio Fontana del mose (671 7). ca. 1860, Alb umen print, Tauchn itz Edition: Boo k 1

Fig. 2 Fo untain of Moses, ? incian Garden , ca. 1889, Photog ravure, Houghton, Mimin and Co mpany Editio n

13

Travel and photography
By the nineteenth century, the idea of travel to Europe was based upon the eighteenth century idea of the Grand Tour, "which any well born, young, rich gentleman should take, seeing historical places, like Italy, in order to see ancient sites, architecture and art. ,,15 For these gentlemen travelers, the Grand Tour was a means of gaining knowledge and enlightenment through their experiences. "The young aristocrat wondered at the site of classical times, collected works of art, created networks of friends and society, and then regaled colleagues back home with stories of foreign travel.,,16 These aristocrats perpetuated an idea1 of traveling. Their experiences informed later travelers on where to go, what to see, and how one should respond to the experience. The desire for more travel information created a growing market for guidebooks and travelogues, both of which contained step-by-step guides of places to travel and sights to see. These guides could be carried on the tourist's journey and serve as a checklist for the sights that were to be visited. Additionally, these guidebooks contained illustrations that presented an idealized version of the important sites and monuments. While these guidebooks showed the tourist what to expect at these sights, the guides also highlighted and perpetuated a specific concept of what places were important and in exactly what spirit they should be viewed.
17

De Avelar Pinheiro. "Tourist Photography." Encyclopedia of Nineteenth- Century Photography. London: Routledge, 2007. 1397 16 Chris Ryan. "A History of Tourism in the English-Speaking World." Recreational Tourism: Demand and Impacts. New Delhi: Viva Private Limited, 2006. 4 17 Barbara Levine, and Kirsten M. Jensen. Around the World: the Grand Tour in Photo Albums. New York: Princeton Architectural, 2007. 25 14

15 Nuno

While the eighteenth century Grand Tour was reserved for the upper echelons of the social elite, by the nineteenth century an affluent middle-class began to follow in their footsteps. New technologies, such as railroads, allowed easier access to travel. This access, combined with a growing number of people that possessed the necessary income, and the urge, to travel overseas, made the Grand Tour accessible to the middle-class. 18 This precipitated a change in not only the number and type of people traveling but also in the reasons for doing so. The new reasons for traveling ranged from an empirical search for knowledge and enlightenment to the entrenchment of "travel as part of the burgeoning activity and industry of tourism-the organized consumption of place as leIsure actIvIty.
. .. ,,19

With the introduction of the Thomas Cook packaged tours in the 1850s, tourism began to be transformed from an individual pursuit to a mass-market endeavor. The Cook's tours, and the other agencies that followed Cook's idea, took some of the work out of traveling. These fIrms would purchase tickets, select hotels, create timetables and provide a broad array of itineraries from which travelers could choose. Like the guidebooks of the eighteenth century, these packaged tours followed "the grand tour ideals." These standardized holidays helped solidify the cultural assumptions of where to go, what to see and what to experience. In light of the expanding market of people wishing to see similar sights and with the desire to "consume," or own, a piece of these sites, photographs became the perfect souvenir. Since its inception, photography was used to highlight and show off views of

Ryan 8 19 Kathleen Stewart Howe. "Travel Photography." Encyclopedia ofNineteenth - Century Photography. London: Routledge, 2007. 1404.
18

15

the foreign and exotic. Even daguerreotypes, a medium that could not be mass-produced, were used by publishing companies to create printing plates with accurate illustrations of these faraway places. Although there were travelers who brought finicky cameras and developing chemicals, most tourists did not go through this process. Instead, many tourists purchased their photographs from independent professional traveling photographers, or from large commercial photographic companies. As with the packaged tours and guidebooks of the time, the popularly available photographs followed the cultural assumptions and "the Grand Tour ideals" that determined what one should see and how it should be seen. As a result, photographs from different studios often appeared almost identical because the photographers created images of the same sites and monuments from the best vantage point. Much like the guidebook illustrations, these images presented an idealized view, devoid people or any trace of the modem buildings around the ancient monuments. These photographs provided travelers with a private, perfect view, suggesting that the site was theirs to own and keep.20 The idea ofthe photographic souvenir also followed the nineteenth-century emphasis on collecting, categorizing, and possessing the world associated with the sciences of geography, anthropology, and archaeology. After the introduction of photographic processes, whether they produced a permanent image on metal plate or paper print, photography became the preferred and most trusted mode of creating and presenting visual records of trave1~ this is largely because the images were derived from

20 Levine 25
16

the "neutral" operations of chemistry and optiCS. 21 In order to better collect and organize these images, tourists could purchase photographs individually and create travel albums. The tourist could then present the photographs in their own desired sequences and patterns. Additionally, local photographers would also provide the tourist with the option of purchasing pre-created, gilded and leather-bound albums. These albums had the photographs in a sequence designed to recreate a typical tourist's journey. 22 The desire to collect and own, in combination with the idealized views of the sites visited, made the photographic souvenir exceedingly popular. Independent photographers and stores selling photographs were located at major tourist sites. In fact, nineteenthcentury travel guides often listed the best local sources for photographs. 23 Most tourists could return home with at least one travel album containing photographs to share with their family and friends.
The Marble Faun was well suited to the culture of the photographic souvenir.

Because tourists were already using The Marble Faun as a guidebook, there arose an opportunity to create a unique souvenir for booksellers and tourists. As earlier mentioned, booksellers would rebind Tauchnitz's copies of The Marble Faun and insert commercially available albumen prints from large companies, such as Alinari, near significant passages in the book. This practice expanded with tourists finding and adding their own images into the books. This was not a new practice. Indeed, during the nineteenth century elite private collectors would often add photographs, notes and other

21

22

Howe 1404 Levine 25 23 Howe 1406
17

objects into their books in order to display their taste and collecting skills as well as to increase the value of the books.24 As noted in the previous section, an extra-illustrated copy of The Marble Faun is much like the photographically illustrated travel books, but its value as a souvenir set it apart from these travel books. The Marble Faun was used to create a personalized souvenir that reflected the tourist's particular experiences in Rome. In this way, The

Marble Faun became a travel album that allowed its owners to display photographs of
personal significance. As Atlantic Monthly noted,
just as Hawthorne created the romance of The Marble Faun as a response to his experiences as a tourist so too could readers create their own romance of travel by selecting illustrations that evoked memories of their present-day experiences. By choosing the photographs they wanted to tip 2 into their books readers could literally insert themselves into the nove1.

Thus, within the somewhat standardized touring culture of the time--with its Grand Tour ideals, its tourists following guidebooks and pre-packaged tours and the photographers furthering this by creating similar photographs for souvenirs-an extraillustrated version of The Marble Faun presented a souvenir that both follows these ideas and creates a somewhat unique opportunity. That is, although there was a high level standardization in tourism, the creation of an extra-illustration copy of The Marble Faun provided the traveler with a relatively unique and personal souvenir.

Williams 124 25 Ibid 138
24

18

Publishing and Photography
Although The Marble Faun was a prime candidate for illustration, important changes that occurred in the publishing of illustrated book in the period from the 1860's to 1889 were essential to its final production. This section will explore some of the substantial photographic processes that were used to illustrate books and place the different volumes being explored in this paper within that context. Illustrated texts were produced before the invention of photography. Technologies such as lithographs, woodcuts and etchings made illustrated books available to the general public. However, by the 1850s interest in these technologies was waning. According to Lucien Goldschmidt,
While the following forty years were marked by a few great but isolated achievements such as Manet's lithographs for Poe's Raven, 1875, or Sonnets et Eauxfortes, 1869, there was no sustained flow of new ideas until the 1889 The majority of non-photographic book illustrations, whether French, English, or German, copied earlier ideas. 26

It was within this environment that photography found a place in the illustrated novel.

While publishers made use of daguerreotypes to assist illustrators, it was Henry Fox Talbot's work with the salted paper print that provided the first examples of photographic books. The Pencil ofNature was published between 1844 and 1846, in six separate installments. The collection contained twenty-four individual photographs, which were pasted into the publication. Each section was unbound with the intention that the buyer would later have all the installments bound together. Longman, Brown and Green & Longman's published the sections in London. Each plate was accompanied by

Lucien Goldschmidt, and Weston J. Naef. The Truthful Lens: a Survey ofthe Photographically Illustrated Book, 1844-1914. New York: Grolier Club, 1980. 6
26

19

text that discussed the image and how it was obtained photographically. In the introduction, Talbot offered a brief history of the calotype process and identified the qualities that made the calotype and slated paper print effective for book illustration; he also described the shortcomings of his process. 27 This compendium of Talbofs work was the first step in photography's development as a successful illustration format. Despite its failure to achieve publishing success, The Pencil o/Nature inspired photographers and publishers to create photographically illustrated books. The idea spread outside of Britain in 1846 due to The Art-Union June 1st issue, which published an original calotype, printed and mounted by hand. That year also saw the production of the first photographically illustrated book outside of England, a collection of essays on Goethe that was published with a calotype of a statue of Goethe. Between 1846 and 1853, a number of photographically illustrated books were produced. William Stirling's Annals o/the Artists o/Spain contained sixty-six calotypes of engravings by artists in Spain. It was one of the first photographically illustrated books that had extensive writing on a topic other than the history of photography.28 The photographers Hill and Adamson, on the other hand, created books more focused on art, with limited text accompanying the photographs. Maxine Du Camp's Egypte, Nubie,
Palestine et Syrie was the highpoint of early photographically illustrated travel books.

According to Goldschmid, the book was organized this way: the «first part consisting of text without any illustrations is followed by one hundred and twenty-five salt prints mounted one to a leaf bearing a printed caption.,,29 Finally, Reports by the Juries o/The

27 Ibid 13 28 Ibid 16 29 Ibid 20
20

Exhibition ofthe Works of Industries ofAll Nations, created for the Great Exhibition in
London in 1851, highlighted the latest advancements in photographic technology. The publication was notable for both the number of photographic illustrations it contained and for the way the photographs were interspersed within the text. The Reports also marked the first use of glass negatives, as opposed to the paper negative, in the history of photograph-illustrated books?O The advancement of photographic technologies was also followed by advancement within the publishing sector. By 1853, attention had shifted away from salt prints to albumen prints and glass plate negatives. The publishing house of Bisson freres, who worked with Lemercier, a printing establishment, was a leader in the process of printing photographs. They produced two important books. The first was Charles Blanc's

L 'oeuvre de Rembrandt, which collected 100 photographs of Rembrandt's etchings from
the collection of the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris. The second was Photographie

zoologique ou representation des animaux rares des collections du Musee d'Historie Naturelle, a book that covered natural history, from sea life to human skeletons~ the book
was written by 1. Rousseau, who collaborated with the artist-photographer Achille Deveria. With the arrival of these two books, the use of albumen prints became the norm for publishing. 31

It was during this period that Tauchnitz's The Marble Faun was produced.
Bernhard Tauchnitz founded Tauchnitz in 1837. He made his company successful by producing reprints of popular novels by both British and American authors in his "Collection of British Authors." His cheap productions of "classic authors" are similar in

30

31 Ibid

Ibid 19 25 21

formula to those used by current publishing companies such as Penguin Books. The

Marble Faun 's two volumes are the 515 th and 516 th books published under the
"Collection of British Authors." They appeared only a few months after the novel's initial publication by Hawthorne's British and American publishers (Smith, Elder and Company, and his Ticknor and Fields, respectively). However, what makes The Marble Faun unique in terms of photographically illustrated books is that it was not the publishing company that illustrated the books. Instead, it was the booksellers, specifically the Italian booksellers, who started a new trend by their work with the books. The booksellers would rebind copies of The Marble

Faun, using ornate coverings such as white vellum, and sometimes with gold tooling.
They would then insert albumen prints of the scenes Hawthorne described in the novel. The booksellers also provided the customer with the option of creating their own extraillustrated copies by purchasing loose photographs, available at the booksellers, and inserting them into the book~ or, the sellers would bind photographs provided by the customers themselves into their books.32 This trend continued until albumen prints fell out of favor with the general public. By the 1870s, it was clear that books with original mounted prints were very expensive to manufacture. Publishers looked for new technologies to provide cheap, effective ways of replicating photographs. Earlier invented processes, such as the collotype and woodburytypes, were used in place of individually mounted albumen prints. This changed the nature of the books being produced. F or while albumen prints could be used

32

Williams 124 22

the nature of the chemistry and mechanics of albumen printmaking discouraged large editions because of the difficulties in achieving uniformity in appearance and permanence with the economics of mass production. In order for albumen prints to compete economically with the new photomechanical processes, quality had to suffer. For the new mechanical processes to be economical, larger editions were required, which meant that different kinds of books were published. In order to increase edition sizes the books had to appeal to a wider audience ... Subjects that aPEealed to the growing middle-class desire for gift books came to prevail.

The balance came in the form of the photogravure, a mechanical printing process that allowed photographs to be produced in smaller editions. While the early pioneers of photography, such as Talbot, had created forms of photogravure, it wasn't until 1878, when Czech painter Karel Klic began to refine the process, that it became commercially viable. By 1881
1882 final refinements of the process created "a facsimile of the

original image constituted of fine particles of printers' ink randomly arranged in continuous tone on the paper.,,34 Additionally, the process's popularity was helped by its similarity to the traditional hand etching that artists had used previously. It was a photo mechanical process that was simple enough, and similar enough to hand etching, that artists could create plates in their own studio, from beginning to end, if they wished to create an edition of non-silver prints. 35 With the introduction of photomechanical processes, the mass production of illustrated books expanded. Now, illustrated books could be printed more cheaply and not just as special editions and gift books. Follmving this trend, Houghton, Mifflin and Company - the successors to Ticknor and Fields - produced a uniform illustrated edition of The Marble Faun in 1889. The two volumes contained fifty-one photogravures of

33

Goldschmidt 40 34 Ibid 41 35 Ibid
23

various sculptures and locations important to the novel. The photogravures also replicated many of the popular photographs collected by the buyers and booksellers of the Tauchnitz edition. While the Houghton, Mifflin and Company edition did not completely replace the Tauchnitz versions, which were as much an experience as a souvenir, the mass-produced volumes allowed the non-traveler to enjoy the Italian setting as they traveled through the illustrations. In the end, it was praised by various publications, such as Atlantic Monthly, which claimed "the change from the photographer's or bookseller's clumsy extension of The Marble Faun to the publisher's edition, in which all the arts of bookmaking were studied with patience and nice attention to detail, was one worth making, and the result was notable for the good taste that marked it throughout. ,,36 As various technologies were created and refined, the publishing companies came closer to their goal of creating cheap and easily produced photographically illustrated books. Within this process, the Tauchnitz publication stands as an example of a book containing albumen prints individually added to books to create a unique souvenir for the booksellers and travelers. The Houghton, Mifflin and Company volume represented the publisher's need to create a simulacrum of the Tauchnitz copies. While lacking the individuality of the Tauchnitz publication, mass-production made this volume available for all consumers 'without the need to collect the photographs themselves. Thus, the use of a photomechanical process like photogravure was the best choice for this publication.

36

"Holiday Books." Atlantic Monthly 67 (1891): 123

24

Comparison
(Side by side graphic comparison shown in Appendix 2 and 3)
The previous sections examined the importance of setting in the illustrative text, the use of novel as guidebook and the changing photographic technologies that supported the illustrated publications of The Marble Faun. This section will culminate this research by examining three copies of the 1860 publications and one copy of the 1889 publication. This examination will show how the selections of photographs made by booksellers and tourists in the 1860 publications influenced the 1889 printing. The three 1860s copies were found in the library at the George Eastman House Richard and Ronay Menschel Library. All three were most likely added to the collection because they are unique examples of illustrated novels, they augment the library's extensive collection and they complement the photographic collection of carte-de-visite and inserted photographs

Book 1 - Tauchnitz 18605 edition Volume I
The fIrst 1860 copy contains the first twenty-five chapters of the novel and is labeled Volume 1. It is bound in white vellum with gilding on both covers and the spine. In addition, the front cover has gilding along the decorative border and has the image of a wolf with Romulus and Remus (fig. 3), the mythological founders of Rome. This volume contains twenty carte-de-visite sized albumen photographs added at certain stages of the book. The images in Book 1 are mainly landscapes and settings featured in the novel. There are five exceptions to this pattern, the frontispiece of Hawthorne, an image of the titular statue, the Faun of Praxiteles, and three copies of paintings or sketches.

25

I

I

Fig. 3 Cover of Vo lume I of the Tauchnitz 1860s printing

26

Most of the photographs have "Alinari" printed below the photograph, along with the photograph's title and a number that is assumed to be a l)egative number. Other images have a similar spacing for this information and some have the title printed on it or a negative number, but the accreditation to a studio is either faded and illegible or worn away completely. However, it can be conjectured that these are also Alinari images due to the similar text used in the titles and similar negative numbers. Additionally, Alinari was one of the largest and most popular photographic workshops at the time. The firm, founded in Florence in 1852 by Leopoldo Alinari with his brothers Giuseppe and Romualdo, was the oldest photographic firm in the world at the time. It specialized in photographing works of art and historical monuments and achieved immediate national and international renown. 37

Book 2 - Tauchnitz 1860s edition
The second book is catalogued with the previous Book 1 within the library's system, although it is of different construction. This book covers the last twenty-five chapters of the novel and is labeled as "Volume II" on the inside of the book. Although the volume has the same number of chapters as Book 1, this book is significantly thinner.
It contains only thirteen images and is not as ornately bound as Book 1. It has simple

marbled paper with a red leather quarter binding. There is no additional tooling or decorations other than the added ridges on the spine. Like Book 1, the photographs are carte-de-visite-sized albumen photographs. However, they do not have the same authentication as Book 1. While there are some images that are similar in style to

37

"History _ Picture Imaging Photo Gallery Fratelli Alinari." Alinari Picture Imaging

P holo Gallery, http://www.alinari.com/en!storia. asp

27

Alinari's images in Book 1. there is no credit line attached to them. It is therefore not possible to confirm the creator of the images. Additionally, only seven of the images are of landscapes or architecture. The other six images are of paintings, statues and a confessional.

Book 3 - Tauchnitz 18605 edition
The third book is an additional copy of Volume II. However, within the library catalogue it is not placed with the two books previously discussed. Like Book 1, it is bound in white vellum (now yellow) with slight gold embossing on the front and back. It is not as ornate as Book 1. The spine has a block of red with The Marble Faun written in gold and a block of blue with VOL. II in gold lettering. In addition, the spine also has gold designs embossed into it. It contains twenty-five images that are much smaller albumen images compared to those found in Book 1 or the Book 2. The photographs are albumen prints that are centered onto the blank pages that have been bound into the novel. The images are slightly more evenly weighted in their variety, with nine photographs of architecture and scenery, a number of reproductions of paintings and illustrations, some still-lives and even two studio-produced images. There is no attribution indicating the creators of the images. Because of the popularity and scope of the company's production, it is likely that they are Alinari images. It should be noted that at least three of the photographs (fig. 4, fig. 5, fig. 6) seem odd choices within the context of the novel because they are representations ofless obvious pieces of text and are not landmarks or buildings that a tourist might have been expected to include on their tour. It might be surmised that these were more personal selections and not the standard souvenir images sold to tourists.

28

Fig. 4 [Old Man sitting by a cross on the side of the road], ca. 1860, Albumen print, Tauch nitz Edit ion: Book 3

Fig. 5 [Two hands hold ing each other and sitting on a dark cushion]. ca. 1860, Alb umen print , Tauchn itz Ed ition: Book 3

Fig. 6 [Ruined Roman aqueduct with people on horses in the field surrounding it] ca. 1860, Albumen pr int, Tauchnitz Edition: Book 3

29

While each copy of the 1860 Tauchnitz publication of The Marble Faun is the same in that they were created with the intention that the consumer would collect images of Rome and display them as souvenirs within the context of the novel, each book is unique in its binding, the images selected, the types of photographs chosen and their placement within the text. These three volumes demonstrate some common aspects of the three differing types of construction discussed by Susan S. Williams. In one type of construction, booksellers would rebind copies of The Marble Faun, giving them new covers, usually white vellum with gold tooling, in addition to inserting standardized albumen prints or photographs of the scenes Hawthorne described. 38 A second construction method would be utilized "if the customers did not like these ready-made versions, they could also purchase loose photographs from separate displays and insert them into the book, although customers could also personalize their books by choosing scenes of particular meaning to them.,,39 Finally, booksellers also "occasionally bound into the books photographs provided by the customers themselves.,,40 The differences between Book 1,2 and 3 support Susan S. Williams' observations. Book 1 is a bookseller-created standard volume that would appeal to tourists. It contains regular images of the settings described in Hawthorne's work and utilizes standard images from well-known firms such as Alinari. This, in addition to Williams' description of rebinding the books with white vellum and gold tooling, accurately describes the construction of Book 1.

38 Williams 142 39 Ibid 40 Ibid

30

Book 2, meanwhile, is an example of the second construction method described by Williams, wherein the customers could take a standardized volume created by the bookseller and add other photographs that were available in the bookstore. Because most of the photographs in Book 2 are of a standard size and are of similar production, and because a number of the photographs are accredited to Alinari, it would seem likely that the photographs were supplied from a similar source. However, because some of the photographs have different texts and lack accreditation, it can be assumed they are from different studios. These variations would indicate that Book 2 was created through personal decisions rather than standard selections. Book 3 displays the highest level of personalization. In this volume, the creator added images using the text as a guide, rather than the bookseller. As a result, the book is a personal travel album, rather than an interesting souvenir created by a bookseller or modified by a customer's decisions. The lack of accreditation for the photographs and the inclusion of images that do not directly relate to the text of the novel (fig.4, fig.S, fig.6) suggest that this volume is a more personal creation. Thus, it is likely that Book 3 aligns with third type of construction described by Williams. Although the creation of these three books differs in their construction, they all speak to the appeal of the novel as an illustrated tourist souvenir. Houghton, Miffiin and Company also recognized this when they brought out their version of the novel in 1889. In their publisher's advertisement they mention the popularity of the Tauchnitz versions:
Ever since the first publication of The Marble Faun, travelers and lovers of Rome have used the book as a souvenir, and have found in its pages a most agreeable record of impressions created by the Eternal City and by the works of art preserved there. So satisfactory is the book in this regard that it early became the custom of visitors to Italy to collect photographs of the statues, paintings, and buildings referred to in the romance, and to interleave the book with them; and this has become so common that

31

dealers in Rome and Florence make it their practice to keep such photographs arranged and ready for the traveler. Nevertheless, photographs are unsatisfactory pictures for such a purpose, and the volumes in which they are interleaved are apt to be displeasing to a fastidious collector. The publishers of Hawthorne's works have therefore taken the hint from this well-established custom, and have prepared the following edition, by printing the work in two volumes and adding to the text photogravures of fifty subjects. 41

Book 4 - Houghton, Mifflin and Company 1889 Edition
The 1889 publication studied for this paper retrieved from the University of Toronto's Robarts Library using both the physical book and their available online copy. The two volumes are packaged together in the library catalogue. They are both bound in a bright red book cloth with a half binding of white vellum on the spine. The vellum has a small decorative border of gold tooled along the edge where it meets the book cloth. There is also a gold flower design on both the front and back of both volumes. The volumes are divided in a way similar to that of the 1860s version. The first volume contains twenty-five chapters and twenty-seven photogravures, while the second volume contains twenty-five chapters and twenty-four photogravures. The photogravures contain more images of sculpture and paintings than were found in Books 1,2 or 3~ however, there are a significant number of landscapes used to illustrate the text.

Photograph Comparisons
Throughout the four versions of the book, there are a number of similar photographs used to illustrate similar sections of text. One image shared by all four books is that of the Castle of St. Angelo (fig 7, 8, 9). In Book 1 it is used in conjunction with "Chapter XII: A Stroll on the Pincian." The photograph illustrates this section of text: "lifting their eyes Hilda and her companion gazed westward and saw beyond the invisible 4111Nathaniel Hawthorne." Publishers' Weekly 920 (1889): 389. 32

Tiber the Castle of St. Angelo; that immense tomb of a pagan emperor, with the archangel at its summit.,,42 The photograph shows the river and bridge as well as the castle. In all three Volume lis (Book 2, Book 3, and the 1889 publication) the text bei ng illustrated is w ithin the same few pages of the novel. Book 2 and the 1889 pub lication both place the image in "Chapter XL: Hilda and a Friend" near these two sections of text: "they went through the Piazza of Saint Peter's, and the adj acent streets, silently at first; but before reachi ng they bridge of Sant' Angelo,'.43 and " looking up, for example, at the statue of Saint Michael, on the top of Hadrian's castellated tomb.,,44

J
Fig 7. Castel S. Angelo e Fiume ca. 1860, Album en pri nt, Tauchni tz Edi tion: Book 2 Fig 8. [Castle S . Angelo], ca. 1860, Al bumen print , Tauchnitz Ed ition : Book 2

Fig 9. Castle of Saint Angelo, ca. 1889, Photog ravure, Houghton, Miffl in and Company Ed itio n

42 Hawthorne 68 43 Ibid 160 44 Ibid

33

Book 3 however, has the image placed later in the next chapter, "Chapter XLI: Snowdrops and Maidenly Delights," on page 168. The events described in the section of text that corresponds with the image takes place months after the events described in the previous chapter; the corresponding text from Book 3 mentions the "frozen foam along the eastern shore of the Tiber. ,,45 All the second volumes (Book 2, Book 3 and 1889's) have an image of the statue of Pope Julius the Third (fig. 10, 11, 12), in addition to images of Saint Peter's square (fig. 13, 14, 15). For the most part the images are similar when they are illustrating the same places within a chapter. In Book 2, the only image of Saint Peter's square appears in "Chapter XXXVIII: Altars and Incense." However, Book 3 and the 1889 publication have additional images of the interior of Saint Peter's as well as of the statue of Saint Peter. While they both use similar photographs to illustrate the text, Book 3 situates the photograph of the interior of Saint Peter's before that of the statue, while in the 1889 publication the order of these two photographs is reversed. In the 1889 edition, the photograph of the statue of st. Peter illustrates the same section of text that it does in the 1860s publication: "seeing a woman, a priest and a soldier kneel to kiss the toe of the brazen S1. Peter who protrudes it beyond his pedestal, for the purpose, polished bright with former salutations, while a child stood on tiptoe to do the same. ,,46 As well in the1889 publication, the image of the Interior of S1. Peter's is presented in the next chapter, "Chapter XXXIX: The World's Cathedral," in a section of text that does not describe the interior of S1. Peter's at alL

45

Ibid 168 46 Ibid 136
34

Fig 10. [Statue of a Pope (Pope Julius the Third)], ca. 1860, Albumen Tauchnitz Ed ition : Book 2

Fig I I. [Clo se up of statue of the Pope], ca. 1860, Albumen print Tauchnitz Edition : Book 3

Fig 12. Sta/ue of Pope Julius III ca. 1889, Photogravure, /-Ioughton , Miffli n and Company Edition

Fig 13. S. Pie/ro, ca. 1860, A Ibumen print, Tauchnitz Edition: Book 2

Fig 14. [Sa int Peter 's] , ca. 1860, Albumen print, Tauchnitz Edition : Book 3

Fig 15. Saini Pe/er's , ca. 1889, Photogravure, /-Ioughto n, Mifnin and Company Edition

35

The final example of a similar photograph that appears in all three books of Volume II is that used to illustrate a passage from "Chapter XL VI: A Walk on the Campagna." The text that is illustrated is found on page 222 (476 in the 1889s edition):
About two miles, or more, from the city gate, and right upon the roadside, Kenyon passed an immense round pile, sepulchral in its original purposes, like those already mentioned. It was built of great blocks of hewn stone, on a vast, square foundation of rough, agglomerated material, such as composes the mass of all the other ruinous tombs. But whatever might be the cause, it was in a far better state of preservation than they. On its broad summit rose the battlements ofa mediaeval fortress, out of the midst of which (so long since had time begun to crumble the supplemental structure, and cover it with soil, by means of wayside dust) grew trees, bushes, and thick festoons of ivy. This tomb of a woman had become the citadel and donjon-keep of a castle~ and all the care that Cecilia Metella's husband could bestow, to secure endless peace for her beloved relics, had only sufficed to make that handful of precious ashes the nucleus of battles, long ages after her death. 47

The three photographs used to illustrate this passage are all images of a tower or of ruins by a road (fig. 16, 17, 18); Book 2 and the 1889 publication use near identical photographs of Cecilia Metella's Tomb (the two images are only differentiated by their cropping). Book 3' s photograph is similar in its composition to the other two photographs, with the road cutting through the center of the image, but it displays generic ruins alongside the road instead of the specific tower of Cecilia Metella's Tomb.

47

Ibid 222

36

Fig 16. [/\ castle tower w ith a road separat ing it and a wa ll], ca. 1860 Albumen print, Tauchnitz Ed ition: Book 2

r ig 17. [Road with rui ns], ca. 1860, Al bumen print, Tauchn itz Ed itio n: Boo k 3

Fig 18. Cecilia Mele//a's Tomb , ca. 1889, Photogravure, Houghton. Mifflin and Com pany Ed ition

While the three prev ious examples are the only instances in which a photograph is the same throughout three or more of the books, there are numerous examples of simi lar images that are used in two versions of the novel. Both Volume }'s (Book 1 and 1889's) use a portrait of Nathaniel Hawthorne as the ir Frontispiece. However, in the 1860s publication the photograph is a seated full body portrait of Nathaniel Hawthorne, while the 1889 pub lication simply has a pOltrait of his head. Both books also have the same

37

image of The Faun of Praxiteles (the titular Marble Faun), illustrating the same text in "Chapter I: Miriam, Hi lda, Kenyon, Donatello." Another example of an identical image used in both Volume l's is a copy of Guido Reni's painting "Beatrice Cenci" (fig 19, 20) . In both editions, the copy is situated in "Chapter VII: Beatrice," in which the text specifically mentions the painting.

Fig 19 . Galleria Barberini Ritratto di Beatrice Cenci (7323), ca. 1860, A lbumen Pr int, Tauchnitz Edition : Book I

Fig 20. G uido's Beatrice Cenc i, ca. 18 89 Photogravure, Ho ughton, Mi fflin and Com pany Edition

There are other examples of si milar images used between the two books, but these images mainly consist of standard photographs of popular sites, such as Piazza del Popolo, Pincian Garden and Hi ll, Piazza di Spagna (The Spanish Steps), the Fountai n of Trevi, Trajan's Column and Forum and The Coliseum. Most of the images are only diffe rentiated by their viewpoint or cropping and illustrate the same sections of text. 38

Having two of the 1860s versions of Volume II allows the reader to view the similarities and differences in the photographs chosen by the original owners of the two copies. As noted previously, the photographs in the second copy of the 1860s publication seem to be of a more personal nature, containing fewer standardized photographs. However, despite these more personal selections, there are some interesting similarities in the photographs chosen for each copy. One involves an image of a woman with a bundle of sticks. Both copies have the image near the same section of text. However, the first copy has an actual photograph of a woman carrying a bundle of sticks on her head, while the second copy has a reproduction of a painting of a woman carrying a bundle of sticks and leaves, with goats around her and bridge in the background. The second image that is repeated in the two books is that of a confessional (fig. 21,22). In both cases, this image is used to illustrate a passage within "Chapter XXXIX: The World's Cathedral." While at first this may seem to be an odd image to insert into the book-for it is not a landscape, painting or building-the confessional itself is a pivotal point within the story. The chapter depicts a scene in which Hilde, a Protestant, seeks solace within a confessional in St. Peter's. Both images feature a confessional against the wall. However, in the first copy of Volume II it is a plain image of an empty confessional against a blank wall. Meanwhile, the photograph in the second copy appears to be a more spontaneous photograph; it depicts a priest in the confessional and two parishioners to the side, one of which is using the Confessional.

39

Fig 2 1. [Co nfes sional], ca. 18 60, A lbum e n prin t, Taue hnitz Ed ition : Boo k 2

Fig 22 . lCon tess io na l with pri est ins ide], ca. 1860 , A lbum e n pri nt, Tauehnitz Edi tio n: Book 3

The two copies of Vo lume 2 also contain two examples of two different photographs that are used to illustrate the same section of text. One examp le is on page 246 in Book 2 and page 247 in Book 3. Both of these sections come from "Chapter XL VB: A Scene in the Corso," which describes people watching a carn ival fro m the ir ba lconies (fi g 23). However, in Book 2 the photograph used to illustrate the scene is a demure reproduc tion of a painting of tlu'ee women on a balcony in traditional costume (fig 24). Meanwhi le, the second copy uses a more expansive scene : a reproduction of a painting depicting a parade through the streets, compl ete with people watching from balcon ies and w indows.

40

Fig 23 . [Pa inting of three women on a balcony in trad it ional costume] , ca . 1860, Alb umen print, T auch n itz Edi tion: Book 2

Fig 24. [Pa inti ng of a parade through the streets wi th people watching from balconies and windows], ca. 1860, Albumen print, Tauc hni tz Edi tion: Book 3

The other example of a maj or discrepancy between the books is found on page
191 in Book 3 and page 192 in Book 2. Both pieces of text are from "Chapter XL III: The

Extinction of a Lamp," but these two images are drastically different and showcase two very different sections of text. In Book 3, the image is a reproduction of an illustration depicti ng a filled theater; it is used to describe this text: "he went to the Teatro Argentino, and sat gloomily to see an Italian comedy, which ought to have cheered hi m somewhat, being full of g lancing merriment, and effective over every body' s disabil ities except his own.,,48 The image in Book 2 is of a street w ith a cart and a person. It is used to describe the sentence, "as he made his way through the complication of narrow streets, which perplex that portion of the city, a carriage passed him.',49 These examples prove that whi le there were standard images and themes often chosen for certain pages and chapters,

48 Ibid 192 49 Ibid 41

there was still some degree of personaHzation and choice claimed by the owner of a given book. Finally, in Book 3 and the 1889 Volume II there are four other examples of similar images that are used in both publications. The first example is the identical images of the statue The Apollo Belvedere used in both versions. Both illustrate a section of text in "Chapter XLIII: The Extinction of a Lamp" in which Kenyon is examining statues and questions whether "the Apollo Belvedere itself possesses any merit above its physical beauty, or is beyond criticism even in that generally acknowledged excellence. ,,50 It is interesting that this image should be used in this section oftext, especially given that the surrounding text mostly discusses The Laocoon Group. The Laocoon Group provides another example of how the same photograph is used in the two books. However, the treatment of this photograph is different in the two versions. In the 1889 copy, it is used as a frontispiece for the second volume. In the 1860s copy, the creator used the image to describe a passage that follows the photograph of The Apollo Belvedere: "nothing pleased him, unless it were the group of the Laocoon, which in its immortal agony, impressed Kenyon as a type of the long, fierce struggle of Man, involved in the knotted entanglements of Error and Evil, those two snakes, which (if no Divine help intervene) will be sure to strangle him and his children, in the end.,,51 The other two examples of the same landmark being used in the two volumes involve photographs of the Pantheon and the Tomb of Raphael. Interestingly, the two volumes display The Pantheon in very different photographs. The Pantheon in the 1860s copy is a reproduction of an image of the interior that displays the oculus as well as small 50 Ibid 156 51 Ibid

42

groups of people inside. The 1889 copy, on the other hand, deploys an image of the Pantheon's exterior. In this photograph, the buildings and streets are shown but the area is devoid of people. Meanwhile, the photographs of The Tomb of Raphael are very similar in the two copies. In both versions, the photographs highlight the plaque ncar Raphael's tomb. In the 1889 version, the image is a straight on shot of the plaque with nothing of surrounding area. The 1860s version shows more of the area around the plaque, but it is still obvious that the plaque is the focal point of the photograph. As proven by these comparisons, these four volumes share many similar images and photographs. The Tauchnitz volumes share these similarities even though each is the product of a different person's trip through Italy. As discussed in the previous chapter, despite the fact that travel had become somewhat standardized, tourists could still have a varied enough trip to create entirely different albums. In the case of the Tauchnitz volumes, a tourist did not even need to travel in order to complete their book because the bookseller had pre-made versions available. So while it is not surprising that volumes like Book 1 would share similar photographs with other volumes created in the same manner, this study has also shown that even the more personalized books, such as Book 3, contain photographs that are similar to other versions. So why, considering how different each tourist's trip could be, are the Tauchnitz volumes so similar? The primary answer lies within Hav.thome's text. The detailed descriptions of the scenes in Rome that are experienced by his characters provided a framework for the creation of specific photographs. In addition, since many of the si1cs featured in the novel were already historically and artistically important. professional photographs of these sites were readily available. As a result. the creator of a Tauchnitz

43

volume already had a framework of sites and a readily available supply of images with which to illustrate the scenes depicted in the novel. These factors help to explain the similarity in the three Tauchnitz volumes discussed in this paper. This commonality of images is also evident in the Houghton, Millin and Company 1889 edition. Because they were creating a mass-market illustrated book, the company knew that it would be wise to use a number of standard images of the sites in Rome that are highlighted in the novel. They therefore selected similar, and in some cases the exact same, images as those found in the Tauchnitz volumes. The publisher's advertisement quoted on page 31 indicates the intent to create a mass-market book that was similar to the Tauchnitz volumes. With this in mind, it can be surmised that the later publishers made use of the extra-illustrated Tauchnitz editions when selecting the images for their publication. Further proof of this theory can be found using even the small sampling chosen for this essay. For example, Book 1 and Volume 1 of Houghton, Millin and Company's edition have 66% similar images. Books 2 and 3 and Volume II of Houghton, Mifflin and Company's edition share a smaller, yet no less impressive number of illustrations: 41 % of the images are similar. Because Book 1 appears to be the most standardized of the three Tauchnitz, it is not surprising that this volume and the Houghton Mifflin Volume 1 share the most images. Houghton, Mifflin and Company seemed to have desired a mass-produced book and they achieved this by choosing images that were the same as or similar to those in the Tauchnitz volumes.

44

Conclusion
The publication of Nathaniel Hawthorne's The Marble Faun introduced readers to the lives of expatriate artists living in Italy. The descriptive views ofItaly contained in the novel, along with the rise of tourism and the changes in printing technology at the time, created an opportunity for the development of the books that are compared in this paper. While there are other known examples of illustrated books, Hawthorne's book is truly unique and suitable for extra-illustration because of its use of vivid landscapes and architectural settings, as well as his characters' artistic sensibilities. These factors, combined with the almost guidebook-like quality of the narrative, created opportunities for booksellers to provide standardized photographs that were used by tourists to illustrate their copies of the novel, thus creating a distinctive souvenir object. The production and use of photographs as a souvenir object was a mid-to-latenineteenth century development that was closely associated with the ideals of travel. As a result of the mass phenomenon of tourism, which developed in the nineteenth century, there was a growing demand for souvenir objects. In addition, the presence of a number of photographic studios and large commercial photographic companies meant that photographs were relatively cheap and provided an easy way for a tourist to "consume," or own, a piece of these sites. At the same time, the popularity of guidebooks and packaged tours created a standard itinerary for tourists. The Marble Faun's description of many sites that would be part of a typical travelers itinerary, in addition to the availability of photographs of these sites, make the novel's use as a guidebook and souvenir object an accurate reflection of nineteenth century travel ideas. Meanwhile, the

novel helped to standardize, and even codify, the ways in which foreign visitors experienced Rome. Bearing in mind the popularity of the extra-illustrated Tauchnitz editions of The Marble Faun and the technological changes in printing and photographic technology at the time, it is not surprising that Houghton, Mifflin and Company created a photogravure copy of The Marble Faun in 1889. The use of photo mechanical processes, such as photogravure, made it possible for the company to make a cheap, mass-produced and standardized simulacra of Tauchnitz's 1860s extra-illustrated editions. And examination of three copies of 1860s extra-illustrated Tauchnitz editions found at the George Eastman House Richard and Ronay Menschel Library revealed a number of differences. Some of these differences may be attributed to the creator's personal preferences, as noted by Susan S. Williams. It could also be speculated that some of the differences in the three Tauchnitz editions could also represent different ways of experiencing a tour of Italy. Book 1, with its ornate binding, standardized carte de visite-many of which can be attributed to a well established photography company-could have been bought by a tourist taking a standardized Grand Tour. It could be that, for this traveler, the sites to be visited were pre-determined, the visit to the booksellers pre-arranged and the final creation a showpiece souvenir. The deterioration of the photographs might also indicate that it was frequently opened or perhaps displayed. Book 2 is a more modest creation, perhaps representing a less lavish experience ofItaly. With the lack of ornamentation in its binding and the use of simple marbled paper on the front, it is likely that the book was . less for display purposes and more of a tool to be used by its creator while traveling in

46

Rome. It appears to be more of a guidebook used to note important places within the text and to allow its creator to review them at a later date. Book 3 seems to represent a more personalized experience of Italy. The inclusion of blank pages within the novel provides the creator with an opportunity to add personalized photographs. The inclusion of photographs such as the hands (fig. 5) might indicate a more personalized experience of the noveL The photograph of the two clasped hands appears within "Chapter XXXV: The Bronze Pontiff s Benediction," in which Hawthorne wrote, "in this momentous interview, therefore, two souls were groping for each other in the darkness of guilt and sorrow, and hardly were bold enough to grasp the cold hands that they found." This type of photographic selection might indicate that the creator of this volume used their book not only as a memento of their travel experiences but also as a tool to enhance the content and concepts presented in the novel. When the Tauchnitz volumes are compared to the 1889 Houghton, Millin and Company edition, it is possible to conjecture that the images in the 1889 edition were created using the 1860s extra-illustrated Tauchnitz editions as a template. Images that had proven popular with tourists would be an obvious choice for an illustrated edition of the novel. In addition, the availability of these extra-illustrated editions would provide the publishers with information on the photographs most frequently utilized. It can therefore be speculated that Houghton, Miffiin and Company used this information as a basis for their photogravure selection. In conclusion, the convergence of the wildly popular novel's realist text-which made it ideal for photographic illustration-the availability of standardized photographic processes and the expansion of tourism to include the middle-classes made the creation of

47

a personal souvenir not only feasible but also highly desirable. Developments in photomechanical reproduction in the late 19th century helped further transform the novel, which first existed as a unique tourist-produced souvenir and later into one of the earliest successful-and also one of the most influential-----examples of the mass market illustrated novel.

48
nya;~ :n:v·.t'~ITYlJZAA.qy

PROfIfJ1Y tf-. '.

>

Appendix 1
Summary descriptions of books
Book 1 - Tauchnitz 1860s edition (Volume I) Size: 4 Y2 x 6 W' (11.4 x 16.5 cm)
Contains the first twenty-five chapters of the novel 292 pages, 20 photographs Mostly accredited Alinari photographs Cover is white vellum with image of a wolf and Romulus and Remus in gilding along with decorative borders

-

Book 2 - Tauchnitz 1860s edition (Volume II) Size: 4 Y2 x 6 W' (11.4 x 16.5 cm)
Contains the last twenty-five chapters of the novel 280 pages, 13 photographs Some accredited Alinari photographs with other non- accredited studios Cover is simple marbled paper with a red leather quarter binding

Book 3 - Tauchnitz 1860s edition (Volume II) Size: 4 Y2 x 6 W' (11.4 x 16.5 em)
Contains the last twenty-five chapters of the novel 280 pages, 25 photographs No accredited photographs Cover is white vellum (now yellow) with slight embossing of gold on the front and back. Spine has a block of red with The Marble Faun written in gold and a block of blue with VOL. 1L also in gold lettering. Additionally the spine also has gold designs embossed into it.

Book 4 - Houghton, Mifflin and Company 1889 edition (Volume I & II)
Size: 17.1 x 11.9" (43.4 x 30.2 cm) Volume 1: The first 25 chapters, Volume II: the last twenty-five chapters Volume 1: 384 pages, 27 images Volume II: 372 pages, 24 images Photogravure prints . Covers are bright red book cloth with a half binding of white vellum on the spine. The vellum has a small decorative border of gold tooled along the edge where it meets the book cloth. There is also a gold flower design on both the front and back of both volumes

-

49

Appendix 2
Listing of Photographs in books

50

Co mparison of Photographs:
Between Book 1· 1860 Edition (Volume 1) and 1889 Edition (Volume :) Book 1: 1860 Edition (Volume 1)

1889 Edition (Volume 1)

Image 1
Page Number

Image 1
Frontispiece Nathanie l Hawthorne

Frontispiece Full bod) sItting portrait otNathaniel Hawthorne Bottom of image is signed

Imagt' title/description Accompanying text/notes Page Number Image title/d escri ption Accompanying

Image 2
Page I [Sculpture gallery] (5%8) Page discusses one of the saloons of the sculpture ga lIery in the itol at Rome

text/notes
Page Number Image title/description Accompanying tex t/notes

~--;-----------,

..-

Page 2 l rhe Roman Forum looking out on the ruins] (6242) ·'I-arlher on, the eye skirts along the edge of the desolate r·orum (where Roman washerwomen hang out their linen to the sun), .," Page 5 The Marble Faun (5993)

--------------------------------~

.. Page 22 The Faun of Praxi teles (Same image as in 1860 edition)

Page Number Image title/descri ptio n

Accompanying tex.t/notes

"The Faun is the marble image of a young man, leaning his right arm on the trunk or ~tump of a tree ... ,

Page Number Image title/description Accompanying text/notes

Image 3 Page 30 The Dying Gladiator

Image 4
Page Number Image fitle/d cscription Accompanying text/notes
Page Number Image title/description

Page 40 Saint Cecilia

Ima e 5
Page 46

In the Catacomhs

51

Accompanying tex t/notes

Ima e 6
Page Number Image title/desc ri pt io n Acco mpa ny ing texUnotes Page Number Image title/descri plio n Accompanying texUnotes

Page 68 Hilda's fower, Yia Portoghcse

1m
Page 73 Galleria Barberini Ritratto di Beatrice Cenci (7323)

e7

Page 84 Guido's Beatrice Cenci

"But by \\ ha~ unheard-of solicitations or secret interest have) ou obtained leave to copy Guido's Beatrice Cenci?,

· Page Number Image title/d esc ription Accompanying text/notes

Page 100 [Copy of Painting (Tarantella)] (23 J) "They pro\ ed to be a vagrant barld such as Rome and 311 Italy, abounds with.

.. .-

Page "lumber Image title/descript io n Accompanying tnt/notes

Page 115 Piazza del Popolo (6703)

·

.- .
Page: 20 Piana del Popolo

"[ n the board piazza., too the was a motley crowd."

Ima e 8
Page Number Image title/d escription Accompanying text/notes

Ima e 9
Page 1::'2

Page 116 Pubblico passaggio del pinciu Fontana del mose (6717)

Fountain of rvtoses, Pincian Garden 'The Pine ian Hill is the favourite promenade of the Roman aristocracy."

Page Number Image title/d escri ption Accompanying tcxUnotes

Page 125 Castella e ponte s'angelo (60'"'5)

· -.

.

"Lifting their eyes Hilda and her companion gazed westward and saw beyond the invisible Tiber the Castle of SI. Angelo; that immense tomb of a pagan emperor. with the archange: at its summit."

Image 10
Page Number Image title/descri ption

Page 1"26 Basilica e Piaz78 San Pietro

Page 130 View from the Pincian Hill

52

Accompany ing text/notes Page Number Image title/descr iption Accompanying text/notes Page Number Image title/descri ption Accompany iug text/nofes Page Number Image title/description Accompanying tex t/notes

··At any nearer view the grandeurofSI. Peter's hides itself. ... Page 130 f.>iazza d i Spagna (42 I. 8)

...
Page 136 Grand Stairs from the Pian a di Spagna

Mention of Piazza on page 13 J

Irna e 12
Page 138 Canova's Studio

[Sketch of Rafael's Madonna Lind Child (Study/or the

Page 150 The Rape of the Sabines

Madonna del Granduw)]
"As interesting as any of these relics was ... "

Irna e 13
Page Number Image title/description Accompanying text/notes Page Number Image title/descript ion
Page: 70 Fontana di frev; (6240) lountain mentioned on 171

Irna e 14 Page In
Fountain ofTrevi

Ima e 15
Page 174 A Roman Peasant

Accompanying text/notes

..
Page 178 II Foro fraiano (6260) "This was the fate, also, of Trajan '5 forum ... " Page 178 Trajan's Column and Forum

Page Number ;mage title/d escript io n Accompanying text/notes

Ima e15
Page Number Image title/d escription
Page 18] Antiteatro Flavio e Colosseo (5817)

Ima e17
Page 182 The Coliseum

53

Acco mpa ny ing text/notes

"As usual of a moonlight evening, several carriages stood at the entrance of this famous ruin ... "

Ima e 18
Page Number [mage title/c! escri(1t io n Accompanying text/notes Page Number Image title/descriptio n Accompanying text/notes
Page 184 Interior of the Co liseum

Page 188 Arch of Constantine

Page Number Image title/d escriptio n
Accompanying tutlnotes

Page 190 Arch of Titu s

Ima e 21
Page Number
hna~e

Page 194 Roman Forum

title/description
Accompanying text/notes

Ima e 22
Page Number
Ima~e

tit le/cJescrip tion Accompanying text/notes Page Number Image tille/description Accompanying textiootes Page 198 Piazza del Campidog:lO Slatua di Marco Aurelio
"The party ascended the winding v.ay that leads for the Forum to tht; Piazza of the Campidoglio ... ··

Page 196 Approach to the Capilol; to the left. Steps of the Ara Coel

Page 198 Statue of Marcus Aurelius

Ima e 17
Page Number [mage title/description
Page 21 0

Campidoglio. Palazzo SenaLorio, ora Comunale (5961)

54

Ac.:ompallying text/notes

" When they reached the flight of steps, lead ing downward from the Capitol. . . "

Page Number

page 221
Chiesa di S. Maria della Concezione . San Michele Arcangelo (7197)

Image
title/description

Page 216 Guido's Saint Michael

Acco m pa ny ing
te~t/ notes

"Accord ingly, they turned into the first chapel on the rig!"> i. hand ... ,.

Ima e 19
PaJ::c Number Image title/d escription Accompanying text/notes

Ima e 25
Page 226 Capuchin Crypt

Page 226 [S ame church 1 Una delle Cappelle morluarie dei Cappuccini ivi sepa/li (6 123) "The dead monk was clad, as when alive, in the brown wooler: frock of the Cap uchin s ... "

Ima e 26
PaJ::e Number Image title/description Accompanying text/notes

Page 234 Medici Gardens

PaJ::e Number Image title/description Accompanying text/Dotes

Page 263 Villa e Torre del Calla (Prafrieta del Co nI< Paolo) val/elli (3345) " But what a fine old tower' its tall front is like a rage of black-letter, taken from the history of the Italian republics ."

Page 260

Dining-room of:ill Ital ian palace

Total Dumber of
images

20

27

55

Comparison of Photog raphs:
BetV'-'een Book 2: 1860 Edition (Volume 2), Book 3: 1860 Edition (Volume 2) and 1889 Edition (Volume 2) Book 2 : 1860 Edition (Volume 2)
Page Number

Book 3: 1860 Edition

1889 Edition (Vo lu me 2)

Image 1
Frontispiece

Imagt title/description Accompanying text/Doles Page Number Image litle/description Accompanying text/Dotes Page Number Image titlc/d escription Accompanying text/notes
1Fi~ Page Number

The Laocoon Group

Page 292 (Page 25) Grand Ducal Square, and Palazzo Vecchio. (-,Iorenc,-

Page 18 Rambino d'Aracoe]i (4097) "Inside ofaglass case an Image of the sacred Bambino .. ."

Page 294 (Page 27) Titian's Magdalene

Image 2
Page 62 [Woman with bundle ofsticksJ

...
Page 63 [Reproduction of p ..inting of wvman carrying a bundle of sticks and leaves with goa~ aroWld her and bridge in lhe background] "Another ordinary sight, as sylvan as the above. and more agreeable, was a girl, hearing on her back a huge bundle of green twigs and shrubs ... "
Pa~p, 72 [Old Man sitting by a cross on the side of the road] "There are man~! religious customs if these people thal seem good ... "

Image 4
Page 334 (page 67) The Three Fates, by M Iche langelo

Image title/descri ption

Accompanying text/Dotes

"He delighted in the picturesque bits of the rustic character and manners ... "

~----------------------~-------

Page Number Image title/d escriptioo Accompanying text/notes

r---------------~

Page Number Image title/description Accompanying text/notes Page Number Image title/description

Page 82 [Old Gothic church (Milan Cathedral?)] "The friends left the church, and, from the exterior ... " Page 87 [Palazzo with fountain in the middle)

Page 348 (page 81) A fresco by Giotto, in the Church ofSt. Francis, at Assisi

56

Accom panyin g text/notes

" I'hey wandered to and fro. accordingly, and lost themselves ... "

Ima e 1
Page Number Image title/descri ption Accompanying text/Dotes
Page Number Image ;itle/descri plion Page 356 (page 89) Angel, by Fra Angelico

..

-

Page 90 [Statue of a Pope (Pope Ju Iius the Third)] "on one side. there was an immense edifice ... "

.. Page 9 J [Close up of statue of the Pope (front facing without the column he is sitting on showing)] " ... 1can spare in :,tudying yonder statue uf Pope Julius the fhird ... ·· Page 370 (page 103) Statue of Pope Jul iu<: III

Accompany;ng text/notes

Ima e 6
Page Number
Ima~e

tiile/descri plion Accompanving tel. till otes

Page I 0 I [Two hands holding each other and ~itting on a dark cushion] . the instinctive motions of their hearts, impelling them towards the other." Page 112 [Pain ling of Joanna of Aragon]
'1 he Transfiguration, by Raphael

Page Number Jrna!!e titleld esc ri plio n Accompanying textlnotes

"One Jay, while shG stood before Leonardo da Vinci's picture of Joanna of Aragon Page 394 (page I '?7) Interior of St. John Lateran

Page Number Image title/d esc ri ption [Painting of woman with br.:asts exposed and holding a cloth undemeatr them] "The remainder of the gallery comprises mythological subjects ... "

Accompanymg texUnotes

Page Number Image title/description

Page 130 Chiesa dell'Ara Coeli

Page 130 [Front of building with statues along the top and large columns. 1n the foreground is a horsedrawn carriage and two men walking past the building]

Accompanying text/Dotes

"She climbed the hundred steps of Ara Coel i .. -"

Ima e 5
Page Number Page 134

Image 10
Page r 35

.. Page 398 (page 131)

57

Image title/descri ption Accom panying text/notes Page Number Image title/description Accompanying text/notes Page Number Image title/description Accompanying text/notes Page Number Image title/desl;ription Accompanying texth:otes

S Pietro

"Her pre-conception of Sa int Peter's ... "

[Saint Peter's] "One afternoon, as Hilda entered Saint Peter's in sombre mood ... ·' Page 136 [Saint Peter's interior]

St. Peter':-

Page 400 (pClgl; 133)

Statue of St. Peler "She would not have banished one of the grim 0 cS.. ."

--

Page [37 [Statue of Saint Peter]

.

Ima e 13
Page 41 0 (page 143) Inter ior of St. Puer's

- -.
Page 1-+2 [Confess ional]

.

" .. . kneel to kiss the toe 0 f the brazen St. Peter. .. "

.-

Page 141 lConfessional with priest inside] "Who, in truth, that considers the matter, can resist a simi lar impression!" Page 160 [Castel S. Angelo] "Looking up, for example, at the statue of St. Michael.. " Page 169 [Statue of woman reclinin3 with bottom pedestal carved with m.:n and snakes (Sleeping Ariadne)] The Sev~n - Branched Go Id en Cand lestick

.

"Approaching on of the confessionals . .. "

Ima e 7
Page Number Image title/description Accompanying text/notes Page Number Image titleld cscription

Ima e 14 -------~
Page 420 (page 153) Castle of SainI Angelo

Page 168 Castel S .1 ngelo e Fillme " ... frozen foam along the eastern shore of the Tiber ... "

Accompanying text/notes

"Kenyon'5 Roman artisans, all thi ~ while, had been at work on the Cleupatra.'

Ima e 16
Page Number Image titleld escri ption Accompanying text/Dotes

Ima e 16
Page 440 (page 173) The Ghetto

Page 182 [A square v.ith an L-shaped building] (284) "In that vicinity lies the Ghetto, where thousands of Jews are crowded within a narrow com ass .. . "

Page 185 [Man of religious order in white robe with hood , holding a box] "Between Hilda and the sculptor there had been a kind of halfexpress.:d understanding ... "

_Ima e 17
Page "lumber

Ima e 17
Page 446 (page 179)

Page 186

58

Image Wle/d esc ri ption Accompanying text/notes

[Statue of nude young man with sandals and a cloth draped across his arm (Apollo Belvedere)1 " ... and whe ther the A po 110 Belvedere itself possesses any merit above its physical beauty ... "

Apollo Belvedere

·

Page Number Image title/d escription Accompanying text/notes
_ . '* ·

Page 187 [Laocoon Group] "Thus , in the l.aocoon, the horror of a moment grew ... "

..

·

Page Number Image title/description Accompanying tex t/notes

..

·

.

..

. .

Page 192 [Street with cart and pl:rson] "As he made his way through complication ofnalTOw streets ... " (Note person is blurred)
~he

Page 191 [Reproduction of an illustration ofa filled theater] ... he went to the Tcatru Argentino, and sat gloomil) to see an Italian comedy ... "

Page 472 (page 205) Porta San Seba stiano, anel 1\ rch of Dru~us

Ima e 19
Page Number Image title/description Accompanying text/notes Page Number Image title/dcscri ption Accompanying text/ootes Page Number Image title/description Accompanying text/notes Page Number Image title/description Accompanying text/notes
Page 4 74 ( page 207) Arch of Drusus: Appian Way

·
Page 222 [A castle tow.:r with a road
separating it and a wall] "About two mi les or more from the city gate and right o the ro ds·de "

Page 222 [Road with ruins]

..

...
Page 476 (page 209) Cecilia Metella's romb

Image 11
Page Number
Page 226

Ima e 21
Page 228

Ima e 21
Page 480 (page 213)

59

I mage title/descriptio n

[Statue of naked young woman with hand covering breast and leg supported by tree sLUmpl "For these long buried hands immediately disposed themselves in the manner ... "

[Portrait of two young children in traditional costume]

Venus de' Medici

Accompanying te"t/notes

"Kenyon now saw the figures of a peasant and a Contadina ... "

Ima e 12
Page Number
Image title/description

Ima e 22
Page 247 rPainting (Jf a parade through the streets with people watching from balconies and windows]

Ima e 22
Page 490 (page 223) The Cumpagna, Appian Way. and C'laudian Aqueduct

Page 246 [Painting of three women on a bakony in traditional costume]

Accompanying tex t/notes

"Among this various crowd, at window:, and in balcon ies ..

"You may see throngs of men and boys who thrust themselves beneath the horses hoofs to gather up bouquets that were aimed amiss from balcony and carriage ..."

Ima e 23
Page ;\lumber
Ima~e

Ima e 23
Page 514 (page 147) The Panth;;on

Page 248 [Int..:rior of Pantheon, "But, to do the Roman people justice, they were restrained by a better sateguard ... " Page 257 [TrajaJl'S column] "He now found himself

title/description Accompanying text/notes

Page Number Image title/d escri ptiOll Accompanying text/notes

Page Number Image title/description

Page 266 [Piazza della Rotonda:

Accompanying text/notes

"A fev. days after Hilda ' s reappearance, she and the sculptor..." nhe obelisk in the front, Lhe pantheon is in the background and there are two carriages in the iazza)
13

Page 267 [Plaque with Raphaeli Sanctio Toann ]" Vrbinati .. . (plaque near Rapheal's tomb?)] --They went in, accordingly a stood in the free space of that great eire Ie ... "

Page 520 (page 253) The Tomb of Raphael

-.-

Total Dumber of images

25

24

60

Appendix 3
Selected image comparisons

Book 2 : Castel S. Angelo e Fiume, ca. 1860. Alb umen print
--------------------~

Book 3: rCastle S. Angehl. ca. 1860. Albumen print

61

1889 publicati on: Casile oj'Sa int An e:elo , ca. 188 9, Photog rav ure

62

Book 2: [Statue of a Pope (Pope Julius the Third)] , ca. 1860, Albumen

Book

~.

[Close up of statue of th e Pope], ca. 1860, Albumen print

1889 pub lication: Statue of Pope Juliu ~' !If. ca. 1889. Photogra .. ure

63

Book 2 : S. Pie/rooca. l860 Albumen print

Book 3: rSaint Peter's1. ca. 1860. Album n print

64

1889 publication: Saint Peter's, ca. 1889, PhotoQravure

65

Boo k 2: L A castle tower with a road separating it and a wa lli . ca. 1860,

Ibum n print

Book 3 : [Road with ruins], ca. 1860 Albumen print

66

1889 pub lication : Cecilia Metella's Tomh, ca. 1889, Ph0[Ol!r:w IJfI:

67

Book I : Galleria Barb rini Ritratlo eli Beatrice Cen ci (7 323) ca. J 8 60 ~ Albumen print

1889 P Iblication: Guido Bea/rice Ce nci. ca. 1889,
I ,

Photogra'v ure

68

..

Bo ok 1: Pia::::a del DODolo (6 703). ca. 1860. A Ibumen print

~

________________________________________________

1889 publication :

nt'll

from fh Pincian Hill. ca . 1889, Photog ravure

~ 69

Boo k I : Fontana di Trevi (6240). ca . 186 0. Album en pri nt

,

1889 publication: Fountain ofTrevi. ca. 1889. Photouravure

70

Book 2: rConfessionall . ca. 1860. Albu me n print

Book 3 : [Confessiona l wi th priest in side], ca. 1860 , A lbume n print

71

Book 2: [Painting of three women on a baicony in traditional costume], ca. 1860, Albumen print

Book 3: [Pa inting of a parad e through the streets with people watching from balconies and windows], ca . 1860, Albumen print

72

Book 2: rStreet with cart and perso nl . ca . 1860. A lb um en print

Book 3: [Reproductio n o f an illustration ofa fill ed theaterJ, ca. 1860, A lb umen print

Book 3: flnterio r of Pantheo n1. ca. 1860. Albumen print

1889 publica tion : The Pantheon. ca. 1889. Photogravure

74

Bibliography
Hawthorne and The Marble Faun
"Nathaniel Hawthorne." Atlantic Monthly 5 (1860): 97-105. "Nathaniel Hawthorne." Publishers' Weekly 920 (1889): 389. "Holiday Books." Atlantic Monthly 67 (1891): 121-26. Hawthorne, Nathaniel, and Thomas Woodson. The French and Italian Notebooks. [Columbus]: Ohio State UP, 1980. Hawthorne, Nathaniel, and Richard H. Brodhead. "Introduction." The Marble Faun, Or, The Romance of Monte Beni. New York, N.Y., U.S.A.: Penguin, 1990. ix-xxix. Hawthorne, Nathaniel, Robert Milder, Randall Fuller, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Nathaniel Hawthorne, and Nathaniel Hawthorne. The Business ofReflection: Hawthorne in
His Notebooks. Columbus: Ohio State UP, 2009.

Huzzard, John A. "Hawthorne's "The Marble Faun"" Italica 35.2 (1958): 119-24. Jstor. Web. 20 Apr. 2010. <http://www.jstor.org!stableJ477492>. Liebman, Sheldon W. "The Design of The Marble Faun." The New England Quarterly 40.1 (1967): 61-78. Jstor. Web. 20 Apr. 2010. <http://www.j stor. org!stableJ363 852> . Shloss, Carol. "Nathaniel Hawthorne and Daguerreotypy: Disinterested Vision." In
Visible Light: Photography and the American Writer, 1840-1940. New York:

Oxford UP, 1987. Smith, Allan 1. "'The Wrong Side of the Tapestry': Hawthorne's English Travel Writing."
The Yearbook ofEnglish Studies 34 (2004): 127-37. Jstor. Web. 20 Apr. 2010.

75

<http://www.jstor.orgistable!3509489>. Turner, Arlin. Nathaniel Hawthorne: a Biography. New York: Oxford UP, 1980.

Analysis of the extra-illustrated Tauchnitz editions
Armstrong, Carol M. "Photographed an Described: Traveling in the Footsteps of Francis Frith." Scenes in a Library: Reading the Photograph in the Book, 1843-1875. Cambridge, MA: MIT, 1998. 277-332. Bush, Anne. "Reviewing Rome: the Guidebook as Liminal Space. II Visual Communication

1 (2002): 369-75. SAGE Journals. Web. 20 Apr. 2010. <http://vcj.sagepub.com>.
Moylan, Michele, and Susan S. Williams. II Manufacturing Intellectual Equipment: The Tauchnitz Edition of The Marble Faun." Reading Books: Essays on the Material
Text and Literature in America. Amherst: University of Massachusetts, 1996.

117-50. Sweet, Timothy. "Photography and the Museum of Rome in Hawthorne's The Marble Faun." Ed. Marsha Bryant. Photo-textualities: Reading Photographs and
Literature. Newark: University of Delaware, 1996. 25-42.

Wilsher, Ann. "The Tauchnitz IMarble Faun'" History ofPhotography 4 (1980): 61-66.

Publishing and Photography
Bennett, Stuart. "Photography as Book Illustration 1839-1900." Collectible Books: Some
New Paths. New York: R.R Bowker, 1979. 152-76.

Benson, Richard. The Printed Picture. New York: Museum of Modem Art, 2008.

76

Cameron, John B., and Wm B. Becker. Photography's Beginnings: a Visual History:
Featuring the Collection ofWm. B. Becker. Rochester, MI: Oakland University,

Meadow Brook Art Gallery, 1989. Foster, Sheila 1. ., Manfred Heiting, and Rachel Stuhlman.lmagining Paradise the
Richard and Ronay Menschel Library at George Eastman House, Rochester.

Rochester, NY: George Eastman House, 2007. Goldschmidt, Lucien, and Weston 1. Naef. The Truthful Lens: a Survey ofthe
Photographically Illustrated Book, 1844-1914. New York: Grolier Club, 1980.

Lavedrine, Bertrand. Photographs ofthe Past: Process and Preservation. Los Angeles: Getty Conservation Institute, 2009. Price, Lois Olcott. "The Development of Photomechanical Book Illustrations." The
American Illustrated Book in the Nineteenth Century. Ed. Gerald W. R. Ward.

Winterthur, DE: Winterthur Museum, 1987. 233-56. Maxwell, Richard. The Victorian Illustrated Book. Charlottesville: University of Virginia, 2002. Parr, Martin, and Gerry Badger. The Photobook: a History Volume 1. London: Phaidon, 2007. Todd, William B., and Ann Bowden. Tauchnitz International Editions in English, 18411955: a Bibliographical History. New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll, 2003.

Travel and Photography
Chaney, Edward. The Evolution ofthe Grand Tour: Anglo-Italian Cultural Relations since 77

the Renaissance. London: Frank Cass, 1998.
Hamalian, Leo. Ladies on the Loose: Women Travellers o/the 18th and 19th Centuries. New York: Dodd, Mead, 1981. Howe, Kathleen Stewart. "Travel Photography." Encyclopedia o/Nineteenth- Century

Photography. London: Routledge, 2007. 1404-407. Kousari, Nadia Louise.
"Constant Companion: an Analysis of the Use of Baedeker's Guidebooks in Creating a Victorian Photograph Album." Thesis. Ryerson University and George Eastman House, 2008. Levine, Barbara, and Kirsten M. Jensen. Around the World: the Grand Tour in Photo

Albums. New York: Princeton Architectural, 2007.
Lofgren,Orvar. On Holiday: a History o/Vacationing. Berkeley: University of California, 1999. Lubbren, Nina, and David Crouch. Visual Culture and Tourism. Oxford: Berg, 2003. MacCannell, Dean. The Tourist: a New Theory o/the Leisure Class. New York: Schocken, 1976. Nordstrom, Alison. "Making a Journey: the Tupper Scrapbooks and the Travel They Describe." Photographs Objects Histories: On the Materiality 0/ Images. New York: Routledge, 2005. 81-95. Pinheiro, Nuno De Avelar. "Tourist Photography." Encyclopedia o/Nineteenth- Century

Photography. London: Routledge, 2007. 1397-400.
Ryan, Chris. "A History of Tourism in the English-Speaking World." Recreational

Tourism: Demand and Impacts. New Delhi: Viva Private Limited, 2006. 1-22.
78

Schaff, Barbara. "John Murray's Handbooks to Italy: Making Tourism Literary." Literary

Tourism and Nineteenth-Centry Culture. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009. 106-18.
Veblen, Thorstein. The Theory o/the Leisure Class. New York: Penguin, 1979. Walton, John K. "Histories of Tourism." The SAGE Handbook o/Tourism Studies. London: SAGE, 2009. 115-29.

79


