ACQuISITION PROPOSAL FOR CONTEMPORARY BRAZILIAN PHOTOGRAPHS FOR THE GEORGE EAST.MAN HOUSE COLLECTION

by

Marilia Palhares Fernandes Toronto, Ontario, Canada, September 2008

A Professional Practice Project Presented to Ryerson University and George Eastman House

in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of :Master of Arts in the program of Photographic Preservation and Collections Management

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2008 1.farilia Fernandes

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this Professional Practice Project. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this Professional Practice Project to other institutios or individuals for the purpose of scholary research.

Marilia Palhares Fernandes

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this Professional Practice Project by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholary research.

MarHia Palhares Fernandes

ii

MA Program in Photographic Preservation & Collections Management Ryerson University in association with George Eastman House - International Museum of Photography & Film
Professional Practice Project - Supervisor's and Second Reader's Report

Student's Name: MarHia Palhares Fernandes

Student's ID Number: 500154030

Project Title: ACQUISITION PROPOSAL FOR CONTEMPORARY BRAZILIAN PHOTOGRAPHS FOR THE GEORGE EASTMAN HOUSE COLLECTION Assessment:

Transcript entry for PPP (PP8000):

Pass

o

Fail

o

Supervisor

Date _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

Second Reader

Date _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

APPROVED: _________________ Program Director Signature Either Ryerson or GEH

Date _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

iii

Abstract
ACQUISITION PROPOSAL FOR CONTEMPORARY BRAZILIAN PHOTOGRAPHS FOR THE GEORGE EASTMAN HOUSE COLLECTION Mater of Arts, Fall 2008 Marilia Palhares Fernandes Photographic Preservation and Collections Manegement Ryerson University and George Eastman House

The present Professional Practice Project is intended as an essay on Brazilian photography. From its history to the naming of selected contemporary artists, this proposal is an overview of photography in Brazil. This paper aims to be a tool for those proposing the acquisition of something unknown to an institution such as George Eastman House, and to prove that it is important to look for images beyond the range of familiar knowledge. This essay includes an acquisition proposal, with a short biography on each artist included, as well as a section on the history of photography in Brazil. There is also a segment on the acquisitions policies of the institution for which this proposal has been written, with the story of how the major collections within it came to be there.

iv

Acknowledgements

Though the following dissertation is an individual work, I could never have reached its completion without the help, support, guidance, and efforts of many people. First and foremost I thank my parents who tought me how to love and appreciate art from my earliest days. Who encouraged me to follow my dreams, and supported me thrughout every educational endeavour I embarked on. For their unconditional love and care, and for always being there for me. I thank my father specially for his guidence in this project, and for his unlimited zeal over my work. I thank my professor and advisor Don Snyder for his brilliant lessons, guidence, and extended editing of my foreigner english. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank my professors at Ryeron University, specially Marta Braun, David Harris, and Robert Burley for teaching me so much in so little time. Their lessons made a huge difference in my life and carreer. At Ryerson I would also like to acknowledge and thank Peter Higdon, for giving me the opportunity of working with him, and for being the best companion and guide during the Paris workshop. Also, I thank the staff at George Eastman House for their assistance and patience thrughout the year, and the many oportunities they gave me to work close to them. A special thanks to Jamie Allen for always being there for me and all of the other students. I would like to thank Alison Nordstrom for giving me the opportunity of curating an exhibition of photographs, which was definetelly the most exciting experience I had at the George Eastman House. A special thanks to Rachel Stuhlman whom I worked with at the Richard and Ronay Menschel Library at the George Eastman House. For trusting in me, and encouraging my work and for giving me the opportunity of working at a place with such a wonderful collection. A special thanks to the photographers Nair Benedicto, Luiz Braga, Mario Cravo Neto, Claudio Edinger, Walter Firmo, Eustaquio Neves, Miguel Rio Branco, Rosangela Renno, and Cassio Vasconcellos for providing all the necessary information for the completion of this dissertation. My very special thanks to my brother Pedro Palhares Fernandes for being a wonderful friend, always close at the hard times, and for his constant advice. Thanks to Leticia Ranzani, my best long distance friend, for her contribution to this work. Finally, I would like to thank my

marvelous friends from the PPCM program, who made my two years abroad the best ever. A special thanks to Soledad Abarca, Tess Sparkman, Julie O'Rourke, and Samantha Wells just for being the best friends a Brazillian girl can have.

vi

Dedication

For my father:
My greatest inspiration in life.

vii

Table of Contents
Introduction ...................................................................................................................... 1

1. A little history of George Eastman House 11useum of Photography and
Film ..................................................................................................................................... 3

2. A Brief History of Photography in Brazil:
The Discovery................................................................................................................. 7 The Arrival and Evolution of Photography in Brazil... ............................................9 Modernity and Photography in Brazil... .................................................................... 12 The Brazillian Identidy................................................................................................. 15

3. Acquisition ProposaL ................................................................................................ 21
Nair Benedicto .............................................................................................................. 22 Luiz Braga...................................................................................................................... 33 11ario Cravo Neto ........................................................................................................ 37 Claudio Edinger............................................................................................................ 41 Walter Firmo ................................................................................................................. 45 Eustaquio Neves ........................................................................................................... 49

11iguel Rio Branco ........................................................................................................ 53
Rosangela Renn6 .......................................................................................................... 56 Cassio Vasconcellos ..................................................................................................... 59

4. Estimated Budget for Acquisitions ......................................................................... 62 Bibliography.................................................................................................................... 63

viii

Introduction

The following paper is an acquisition proposal for Brazilian photographs for the George Eastman House Collection. This project seemed appropriate for the Master's in Photographic Preservation and Collections Management, and it is a good way for me to contribute my knowledge of Brazilian photography to the Museum, the program and my colleagues. This project idea came from the desire to study more of my own culture. After participating in the first year of this program, I felt that not only Brazil, but also Latin America have been ignored by photographic historians, and they are not discussed at all as centers of photographic production. This also happens in the case of other cultures, especially those which are outside of North America and Europe. When visiting photographic collections in Paris last May, I realized there is only a limited number of people acknowledging the photographic production that happens in the Latin countries. Apart from a few photographers, which, at most times, live either in Europe or the United States, there is a common ignorance of what is going on in Latin countries. W'hen investigating how many and what type of materials made by Brazilian photographers the collection currently owns, I found that the number is small. There are stereo cards from the end of the nineteenth century, mainly by four photographers: Marc Ferrez, Henschel & Benque, and Georges Leuzinger. All of these are renowned photographers; however, it is not presently possible to create a representative nineteenth century collection from their work since most of their photographs already belong to museums and other cultural institutions. The other set of Brazilian photographs in the collection are from the late 1960s until the 19805. There are sixteen pieces by the photographers Claudia Andujar, Cristiano !vfascaro, Boris Kossoy, and Sebastiao Salgado. Most of them are different portraits of groups in Brazilian society. Andujar is well represented with 6 photographs of the Bororo Indians. These images were the first contact the artist had with an Indian tribe in Brazil, which led to her latter attachment to the Yanomami tribe. Her work with this later group was essential in changing their lives. It was through this photographer's dedication to their cause that the government gave them back their land. Nowadays they have their own state within the country, where they can live according to their traditions and beliefs.

1

Thinking about these more contemporary pleces, I believe that they are a good start for increasing the holdings of Brazilian photographs in the GEH Collection. This proposal focus on contemporary works, mainly from the past 30 years. My goal is to suggest an expansion of the collection, starting with the photographers cited above, and adding a few more of similar significance. My hope is that the works suggested will actually be acquired by the museum in the near future, possibly through a successful grant proposal .. Aside from the proposal, the first chapter is about the collecting history of the museum, and the second is an essay on the history of photography in Brazil. All the suggestions for this project are based on the acquisition policies of the George Eastman House. The format used is similar to the one utilized by the institution for the acquisitions committee reports. All the photographs suggested for acquisition in the project will be justified by their historical importance, institutional acquisition policies, market and availability. I have contacted the photographers and got current prices, edition numbers, and all information possible on the actual photographs for this proposal. At the end of this paper there is a selected bibliography on books and Web Sites, which are supplemental to the further researching and understanding of the history of photography in Brazil, as well as on the artists which make up this proposal. In my opinion Brazil has the most important contemporary photographic production in South America. If you think in terms of Latin America, Mexico and Brazil have the most expressive photographic works from the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and this fact makes them a strong power in contemporary photographic art.

2

1. A little history of George Eastman House Museum of Photography and Film

Before presenting my suggestions for acquisition, I would like to tell a brief history of the institution for which I am writing it. The George Eastman House Museum of Photography and Film, also known as GEH, opened in 1948 in the former home of George Eastman in Rochester, New York. Eastman was the creator and founder of the Eastman Kodak Co. and was responsible for several improvements and discoveries in the photographic field throughout the 20th century. The Museum was established to honor the brilliant man who introduced photography as an accessible medium accompanied with the logo ''You press the button, we do the rest", which rapidly became known throughout the world.! His home has been preserved in its original state through the museum's best efforts, and a more recent building (opened in January 1989) attached to the mansion holds the collection archives, as well as the exhibition galleries. The photography collection of the George Eastman House started before the opening of the museum in 1948. The Eastman Kodak Company owned a collection of photographs and ephemera which became the foundation of the Museum. Nowadays the collection has over 400,000 photographs and negatives, along with books, moving pictures, cameras, lenses, and other apparatuses related to photography and film, or even the life of George Eastman. In light of its sheer magnitude, the extent of its masterworks and the wide variety of materials it has acquired over the years, Eastman House is widely regarded as one of the most important and influential photographic collections in the world. Its holdings have been subject of research and loans for the past 50 years, and has led to new histories of photography. The largest and most important photographic collection Eastman Kodak owned was the one of Gabriel Cromer (1873 - 1934). Cromer was a frenchman with a deep interest in nineteenth

!

Peres, Michael R., Ed. The heal En0'clopedia ofPh%grap~y. 4th Edition. Burlington: Focal Press, 2007. P. 126

3

century French photography. He owned photographs, apparatus and photographic books, all pertaining to his main interest. He had a special interest in Louis-Jacques-Mande Daguerre (1787 - 1851). He owned portraits of the man, drawings and paintings by him, Diorama related material and even a daguerreotype signed by Daguerre himself, as well as a Giroux camera he believed had belongued to Daguerre. Amongst his collection there were five hundred daguerreotypes, and early paper photographs by Edouard Baldus (1813 - 1889), Henri Le Secq (1818 - 1882) and Gustav Le Gray (1820 - 1884), among others. There were also ephemera related to photography such as cartoons, advertising materials, cameras and even pre-photographic engravings2· The Cromer collection was sold to the Eastman Kodak Company by his widow in 1934. When the museum opened in 1948, Beaumont Newhall (1908 - 1993) was appointed head curator. Newhall's wide-ranging approach to collecting brought
to

the institution most of its

treasures, including two very large collections which had been formerly owned by Alden Scott Boyer and Sipley13M. Boyer's collection consisted of over 13,500 photographs and equipment, including pieces by Julia Margaret Cameron, Maxime DuCamp, Francis Frith, Hill & Adamson, and a thousand

daguerreotypes by Southworth and Hawes. This collection was offered and donated as a gift to the institution by the collector himself in 1951. The 3M Corporation donated Louis Walton Sipley's collection to GEH in 1977. The company had acquired the collection after Sipley's death from his widow, when she failed to find a home for the pieces. Sipley started gathering photographs in the 1930s while looking for images for his educational projects. In 1940 he created the American Museum of Photography in Philade1phia. The museum owned 61,000 photographs from all kinds of backgrounds. This collection was not only composed of masters but also of commercial photographs. Sipley's first large purchase was the Caspar W. Briggs company, one of the oldest photographic businesses in the United States. The company came with about 10,000 stock negatives and a large collection of lantern slides3 ·

David. "The Blind Man's Elephant". In Photogmphs: George Eastmatl HOllse, 21-30. New York: Taschen, 1999. P. 21 3 Wooters, David. "The Blind Man's Elephant". In Photographs: George Eastmatl HOllse, 21-30. New York: Taschen,
2 Wooters,

1999. P.27

4

With the hiring of Beaumont Newhall, the GEH collection expanded in several differen,t directons. He acquired modern pieces by Alfred Stieglitz (1864 - 1946), Edward Steichen (18791973) and Edward Weston (1886 - 1958). He also collected photographs by his close friends Ansel Adams (1902 - 1984), Laszlo Moholy-Nagy (1895 - 1946) and Alvin Langdon Coburn (1882 - 1966), as well as early color photographs and commecial images. In addition, Newhall was highly influential on the development of photographic history in the United States. He worked at the Museum of Modern Art in New York for nearly ten years, and wrote one of first essays on the history of photography. This essay was published as a catalog accompanying an exhibit at the Museum of Modern Art in 1937.4 He left the former museum and moved to Rochester in 1948 to be the first curator of photographs at G EH, and in 1958 became the director of the same institution. After Beaumont Newhall left GEH, other curators and directors followed continuing his work and every year bringing in new objects for the collections, ensuring that these would be current with the contemporary history and processes of photography, fUm and technology. The present director of GEH is Anthony Bannon, who has been in charge for ten years, and the curator of photographs is Alison Nordstrom (since 2003). The collection continues to grow, having main acquisitions come in twice a year. Not only contemporary objects are being incorporated into the collection but also historical ones to fill in possible gaps or complement other materials. The current mission statement of the museum points out the following: "George Eastman House, an independent nonprofit museum, is an educational institution that tells the story of photography and motion pictures-media that have changed and continue to change our perception of the world. We: · Collect and preserve objects that are of significance to photography, motion pictures, and the life of George Eastman. · Build information resources to provide the means for both scholarly research and

4

Bentley-Kemp, Lynne. "Photography Programs in the 20th Century Museums, Galleries, and Collections". In Peres, Michael R., ed. The I-ocal Enryclopedia oJPhoto,~raphy. 4th Edition. Burlington: Focal Press, 2007. P. 209

5

recreational inquiry.

·

Keep and care for images, literature, and technology to tell the story of photography and the motion picture in history and in culture.

·

Care for George Eastman's house, gardens, and archives, maintaining them for public enjoyment and as a memorial to his contribution to our lives and our times.

We do these things to inspire discovery and learning-supporting the education of a regional, national, and international audience."s This statement reinforces the collection's commitment to diversity and justifies new acquisitions of photographs from all over the world. Considering that a few countries are misrepresented and/ or not represented at all, I feel it is a duty of the new generation to bring photographic objects from these countries into the collection. If one of the purposes of the collection is to keep and preserve objects to tell the history of photography, then one cannot exclude certain parts of the world, just because they are unfamiliar Now that I have presented how the GEH Collection came to exist and what its purpose is, I feel I have given the reason for this proposal.

5

George Eastman House Mission Statement. http://ww'\v.eastm:lOh()usc.or~'linc Ithe museum Imission.php (accessed June 23, 2008).

6

2. A Brief History of Photography in Brazil

The Discovery The nineteenth century was a time of change. Industrialization took place in all parts of the world. Farm workers migrated to the cities in search of jobs in the new factories and industries. Most major cities in the world underwent a process of urban reform, based on the example set by Napoleon III (1808 - 1873) when he re-constructed Paris. New technologies were constantly evolving. Amateur scientists were spread throughout the world and each experimented with different materials. Some of these men were looking for a way to fix the image they saw in the camera obscura, looking for a way to represent the world as the eye sees it. In France Joseph Nicephore Niepce (1765 - 1833) started experimenting with the camera obscura, and in 1822 obtained permanent images on glass, stone, or metal plates coated with asphaltum. Not completely satisfied with the results, in 1829 he created a partnership with LouisJacques-Mande Daguerre (1787 - 1851). Both would research on the subject and correspond about their findings and results with each other. Niepce died in 1833, while they were still experimenting, and Daguerre continued the research on his own based on the earlier work. He finally achieved wonderful results in 1837, using an iodized copper plate coated with silver and developed on mercury fumes. The process was extremely laborious and time consuming, but became popular nonetheless. A few months after the discovery, Franc,:ois Arago (a French physicist) introduced the Daguerreotype (the name given to this process) to the French Academy of Sciences in Paris, and the French government bought the rights for this formula and presented it to the world. The exceptions were England and the United States, where the process was patented. Daguerreotype studios quickly spread throughout Europe and the United States, becoming the most exciting novelty at the time. Contemporary to this discovery William Henry Fox Talbot (1800 - 1877) in England was working with fixing an image on paper from 1834 onwards. After accomplishing several images reversed in tone, he figured out a method to reverse them back, and created the concepts of negative and positive) which became the world's most popular form of photography for the next 160 years. Talbot corresponded with Sir John Frederick William Herschel (1792 - 1871), a British

7

astronomer, who himself created the cyanotype and the anthotype processes, and discovered the I use of sodium thiosulfate as a fixing agent for the images (used by Daguerre included). He is also known to have coined the still-used terms pbotograpl!J, negative, positive, elllulsion and snapshot. Talbot announced his discovery to the world in 1839 as well, and patented it in 1841 under the name of calotype. Another man in France is nowadays widely known for his discoveries. Hippolyte Bayard (1801 1887) experimented with printing images on paper, creating positive pictures in camera. In 1840 he presented his findings and even put together albums with different examples of his images and processes (which today are held by the Societe Fran~aise de Photographie and The Getty Institute). However the French public completely disregarded him, since they were already fascinated by the daguerreotype. What is least known among the different "discoveries of photography" throughout the world is that in the village of Sao Carlos (nowadays Campinas) in Brazil, a Frenchman printed his first photograph in 1833, six years before Daguerre and Talbot. Antoine Hercule Romuald Florence (1804 - 1879) came to Brazil in 1824. At the time he was a painter and designer, but established himself working for a French businessman in Rio de Janeiro. In 1825 Florence joined the Langsdorff expedition as the second illustrator, becoming the first when the other died during the first year. The expedition lasted four years and was funded by the Russian empire. It was a very important scientific and iconographic documentation of the rural Brazil of the time. During the expedition he met his future wife, Maria Angelica Alvares Machado e Vasconcellos, at a stop they made in Porto Feliz in the province of Sao Paulo. Once the expedition was over he married her and they established themselves in Sao Carlos. Florence started experimenting with printing processes in 1829 when he wanted
to

publish his

studies in Zoophonie, in which he investigated animal voices. At the time there was only one printing press in the province of Sao Paulo, and it was not possible for him to use it as he wished. Faced with this situation he started researching methods to it himself. He came up with a printing process he named Po!J'graphie in 1830, and spent the rest of his life trying to improve this process and make it known to others. 6

6 Kossoy, Boris. Hercules Florence, 1833: a descoberla isolada da Fotograjia no Brasil. Sao Paulo: Faculdade de Comunicas:ao Social Anhembi, 1977.

8

While looking for means to reproduce his work, he had the idea of printing under daylight. At the time he was aware that silver nitrate darkened under sunlight, and started from there to look for means of fixing the images. His location provided limited materials, which made the process more difficult. After achieving satisfatory results using his urine, which contains ammonia, the component he needed, Florence started using the process for printing Ma<;om diplomas and labels for a pharmacy belonging to a close friend. This happened years before the announcement of the daguerreotype. He was using the reproduction abilities of photography in his printing business, and called this method Photographie, a term he wrote on his journal in 1832, seven years before Hersche1. 7 As soon as Florence heard about Daguerre's discovery in France, he published his invention in the Sao Paulo newspaper A Phoenix, in October 26, 1839. At this moment the daguerreotype had not yet arrived in Brazil. This discovery was forgotten as soon as Florence died. No one paid attention to ali of his publications on the subject in Brazilian and in French newspapers. It was only in the 1970s that the Brazilian researcher Boris Kossoy (1941) started going through Florence's 26 journals, photographs, drawings, among other original objects, at the time in possession of his greatgrandson Arnaldo Machado Florence. Kossoy was able to prove Florence's discoveries not only by reading his original documents and publishing an acount of them, but also by getting the Rochester Institute of Technology to perform the actual experiment using the original formula, found in the journal. The results were successful.

The Arrival and Evolution of Photography in Brazil The history of photography in Brazil goes back to January 1840 when the religious Frenchman Louis Compte demonstrated the Daguerreotype for the first time, in Rio de Janeiro. All three daguerreotypes he made at the time are in the collection of the Palacio Grao-Para in Pett6polis, Rio de Janeiro. Among the auclience was the Emperor Don Pedro II (1825 1891), at the time

fourteen years old. He was a man who loved the new technologies, and in March 1840 he bought a daguerreotype camera for himself, becoming the first amateur photographer of Brazil.

7 Kossoy, Boris. Origen! e E>.polisao da Fotografia 110 Brasil: Siclllo XIX. Rio de Janeiro: FUNARTE, 1980. Pg. 21.

9

Don Pedro 1I brought several photographers from Europe to work in Brazil. He was the first sovereign in the world to appoint royal photographers, two years before Queen Victoria of England. In total there were 23 royal photographers, in Brazil and abroad, and one royal photographer appointed for the marines. The daguerreotype was not widely produced in Brazil, however, once the collodion and albumen processes were introduced, and soon after there were Europeans and a few Americans settling up photographic studios throughout the country. They would itinerate from place to place, photographing the wealthier populations of the area. Former painters, engravers and miniaturists started practicing the trade as well. The Carte de Visite (4 x 3 inches) and Cabinet Cards (4 V4 x 6
I/Z

inches) became widely popular, and were done in the European style brought over by the

foreign photographers. Photography became the mostly used tool to document landscapes, cultures, architecture and city development. The Americas, still unkown to most Europeans, became widely photographed as a means to portray in "reality" what the uncivilized world looked like. The Frenchman Jean Victor Frond (1821 1881) came to Brazil in 1858 running from the

Napoleonic troops, and settled in Rio de Janeiro for four years. He photographed the landscapes, as well as the sugar and coffee farms of Brazil. When he went back to France he published an album containing lithographs of his photographs entitled Bresil Pittoresque. This book is the first ever to be published on Brazilian photography in the world, and it is the first photography book in Latin America Throughout the second half of the nineteenth century, photography expanded all over Brazil. There were studios in all of the major cities, doing mainly portraits, and several photographers are still remembered in specialized books and collections. Landscapes were also widely done, portrayng astonishing views of the tropical land. I chose only two photographers to mention here, but both have done work of high quality and great historical importance. Marc Ferrez (1843 1923) was the son of a Frenchman; however, he was born in Rio de Janeiro.

He learned photography under Franz Keller (1835 - 1890), who at the time worked in George Leuzinger's (1813 - 1892) studio. In 1865 Ferrez opened his own studio in Rio de Janeiro. He was appointed by Don Pedro II as the royal marine photographer. Marc Ferrez photographed all

10

of the large cities in Brazil, and today he is not only considered the most important nineteenth century photographer of Brazil, but of Latin America. s Another important name in the history of photography in Brazil is Milido Augusto de Azevedo (1837 1905). He started working in the studio Carneiro & Gaspar in Sao Paulo in 1860 and even

became its director in 1874, when he re-named it to Photographia Americana. Militio was a popular photographer for his portraits, producing aproximately 12,500 of them throughout his career. He also kept a sitters book with information on all of his clients, which nowadays belongs to the collection of the A1useu Paulista da Universidade de Sao Paulo. However, it is for a different kind of work that he is most remembered. In 1862 Milido photographed different streets and corners of the city of Sao Paulo. In 1887 he went back to the same locations and photographed the same views again. He then put together a comparative album with around 60 photographs. This is considered the only piece of documentation of the growth and expansion of this city, which was going through drastic cultural and economical changes at the time. At the turn of the century imperialism was over, and the young republic was expanding, its economy was growing, and the cities were modernizing based on European models. Rio de Janeiro is a good example of this renovation. The city was being re-constructed, and the mayor hired the photographer Augusto Cesar Malta de Campos (1864 - 1957) to document the transformation of the colonial city into a twentieth century one. When this assignment was over, Malta continued to work for the city of Rio de Janeiro for forty years, documenting every event the city held. He is today considered "Brazil's first photo-journalist,,9. At a time when photography in Brazil is still mostly documentary and ephemeral, there was one man who was using it as means of artistic expression. Valerio Otaviano Rodrigues Vieira (1862 1941) started working with photography in 1880 doing portraits in a studio. In 1900 he released his most well known work to date: Os Ttil1ta Valerios (The Thirty Valerios). In this image Vieira sits his own head on every body in the picture: even the roman bust on the corner has his face, and all three pictures hanging on the wall are portraits of himself as well. This image won the silver medal at the St. Louis International Exhibition in 1904.

8

Historia da jotograJia flO Brasil: Panorama geral e riferellcias bdsicas. Sao Paulo: Instituto Moreira Salles, 2002. 9 Vazquez, Pedro. "The Pioneers of Brazilian Photography". Niteroi, 1995. In Carvalho, Maria Luiza Melo. Novas Trt1l'tssias: Contemporary BraiJliafl Photograpl!J, 10 11. London: Verso, 1996.

11

He also did panoramas in extremely large scale, such as one of the landscape in Sao Paulo which' was 40 feet long. There is one panorama still in existence in the collection of the 1vluseu da lmagem

e do Som of Sao Paulo. It shows the city in the 1910s, measures 4 V2 x 46 1/2 feet, and has a 1800
VIew.

Modernity and Photography in Brazil
In Brazil modernity arrived late for the arts, and even later for photography. In 1922 The Municipal Theater of Sao Paulo hosted the ':S'emana de Arte Modema" (week of Modern Art), which encompassed most of the avant-garde arts including painting, sculpture, architecture, literature and music. However, the event left out photography and cinema as art manifestations. At this time the photography being made in Brazil was given meaning and importance by the Photo Clubs and Illustrated Magazines. There were clubs spread throughout the country from the 1920s until the late 1940s, but the most successful ones were the Photo Club Brasileiro created in Rio de Janeiro in 1923 and the Foto Clube Bandeirante created in Sao Paulo in 1939. The Photo Clubs would organize photography exhibitions, competitions, and the Photo Club Brasileiro even created a Magazine entitled Photogramma (1926-31) as well as a radio show to teach practical and theoretical photography. The members of the Photo Clubs were mainly amateur middle class men, and until the late 1930s most of the images were done in the pictorialist style. In 1928 the illustrated magazine 0 Cmzeiro was launched. According to Rubens Fernandes Junior

"0 Cmzeiro was the most important contribution to Brazilian photojournalism and for the
construction of the image of a modern country synchronized with international information and technological advancements." The magazine was distributed nationaly throughout the country and it aimed to tell its stories not only through text, but also through photographs. Fernandes Junior continues, "Its stories, based on the style of the foreigners Ufe and Paris Match, opened generous spaces for photography, which becomes the m~in information of the magazine, creating an original visual narrative for all the other national magazines."l0 During this period photographers would pair up with reporters and create the stories together. The photographers at most times had the freedom of editing the images in the magazine themselves. This was also the

10 Fernandes Junior, Rubens. Labin"nlo e Identidades: Panorama da FOlografia no Brasil, 1946-98. Sao Paulo: Cosac & Naify, 2003. Pg. 143. Translated by Marilia Fernandes on June 2008.

12

first time in which images would be credited to the photographers, validating the importance of' their work.
It is also important to mention that some of the photographers working for 0 Cruzeiro and other

magazines at the time, were members of the Photo Clubs. In time the documentary approach to photographs replaced the pictorialist, and cameras turned to political, social, and cultural events of Brazilian society. In the 1940s a new influx of photographers fleeing the war in Europe came to Brazil. With them they brought a new vision of photography, already influenced by the earlier European avantgarde and the use of the small format 35mm camera such as Leica. Photomontage was one of the new means of producing photographs which these photographers introduced to a new generation of photographers in the country. A lot of these immigrants join the Photo Clubs, mainly the Poto Clube Bandeirante in Sao Paulo, and also started photographing for the illustrated magazines. At the end of the 1940s and beginning of the 1950s a new wave of modernity came into the country. A new dty was designed and built from scratch to be the new Federal Capital. The design was extremely modern for its time, and it became a symbol of the "new" Brazil. Thomaz Farkas (1924) documented the construction of the new capital, Brasilia, going back and forth during the four years of its construction. The most important cultural institutions were created during this period as well, such as the

IV/useu de Arte de Sao Paulo Assis Chateaubriand (1\1ASP); the Museu de Arte Moderna de Sao Paulo (MAA1/ sPy, and the Museu de Arte A10derna do Rio de Janeiro (1\1AA1/R]); the Sociedade Brasileira de Comfdia,' the Companhia Gnematogrijica Vera Crut which was an attempt to industrially establish
Brazilian cinema; the Sociedade Brasileira de Progresso e Gencia (SBPC); the television network Tupi, the first in Brazil; and in 1951 the first Bienal Internacional de Sao Paulo, the most important art biennial in Latin America to date. 1t
It was at MASP in 1949, that for the first time photography was exhibited in a Brazilian art

museum. The photographer was Thomas Farkas, whose work, according to He10uise Costa, was characterized by "formal order, enphasizing rhythms, planes, and textures, and resorting to

11 Fernandes Junior, Rubens.LAbirinto e ldentidades: Panorama do Fotograjia no Brasil, 1946-98. Sao Paulo: Cosac & Naif)" 2003. Pg. 144.

13

backlight." He rendered movement problematic in photography, especially through dance ' expressions and he participated in the surrealist group which had the urge to use photography as a "means of psychological deviation. However, it was in the use of unusual angles that the artist reached his maturity in the modern speculation, creating a work of great personality.,,12 Another important figure of this time was Geraldo de Barros (1923 - 1998). He was a member of the Folo Clube Bandeiranles, and was the first to "perform interventions in the process, materializing a pro fund questioning of the limits of photographic language. [...] it was, however, through an abstract research in which the artist's sensibility found a fertile field in which he could expand, diluting the frontiers which conventionaly separate photography from the plastic arts."t3 In 1950 Barros showed his series Fotojormas at 11ASP, which was a complete shock to society at the time for its unusual composition and vision. The images were abstract and remind us of concrete art, even though he was unaware of such a movement. Barros was also responsible for putting together the the photographic laboratory at 11ASP, in 1949, which gave him the space and the freedom to create his ground breaking photography. There are many other photographers who were also experimenting with different possibilities in photography at the time. The following played an important part in the construction of the modern visuality in Brazilian photography: Jose Oiticica Filho (1906 - 1964), Jose Yalenti (18951967), German Lorca (1922), Gaspar Gasparian (1899 - 1966), Eduardo Salvatore (1914 - 2006), Chico Albuquerque (1917 - 2000), Benedito Junqueira Duarte (1910 - 1995), Nogueira Borges, Herminia de mello Nogueira Borges(1894 - ca.1989) and Gregori \Varchvick. In the early 1950s another illustrated magazine was launched to compete 'with 0 Cruzeiro. Manchete used color photography, providing a whole new universe of compositions and possibilities. Walter Firmo (1937) was one of the young photographers who worked for this new publication, establishing himself as one of the most important and influential photographers in the country. Firmo learned photography from the pages of 0 Cruzeiro and has since the 1960s created several photo essays. His work about the Black population of Brazil started back then and it is still being

12

Costa, Helouise and Renato Rodrigues. A Fotl{~rafia Moderna no BrasiL Rio de Janeiro: Funarte and Editora UFRJ, 1995. Pg. 50. Translated by Marilia Fernandes in July, 2008. 13Costa, Helouise and Renato Rodrigues. A Fotografia'Moderna no BrasiL Rio de Janeiro: Funarte and Editora UFRJ, 1995. Pg. 51. Translated by Marilia Fernandes inJuly, 2008.

14

done to date. Fernandes Junior says about Firmo, "at times he uses a classic composition, at ' other times he uses an instigating enacting." And Firmo himself stated in 1997 that his work is an attempt to "built an atmosphere involving the participation of the black man in the routine of the country, giving him citzenship, [...] timeless luminescence, and the feeling of national hero.,,14 Firmo's photographs add to the thousands, and in his portraits and landscapes one can grasp the feeling of Brazil, the warmth and character of this tropical land. In the late 1950s there was a decline of the Photo Club movement and a rise in the professional photography. There were more illustrated magazines throughout the country, and photographic reportage became a commodity. Television and cinema were also on the rise, and were a new form of imagery towards which some photographers shifted. In 1964 the military regime took control of the country and freedom of speech ceased to exist. Magazines and newspapers were deeply censored and eventually shut down. Artists of all media had to flee the country in order to survive and others were tortured and possibly killed by the regime. It was a time of tension and fear.

The Brazilian Identidy
In the late 1970s there was a growing opposition to the military regime, and this brought a new generation of photographers to work. They organized themselves to create technical and pratical courses, photo galleries, magazines dedicated to photography, as well as meetings and portifolio reviews. These events happened widely in Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro and in smaller accounts throughout the northern and southern states of Brazil. This was what set the ground for the boom of photography that happened in the 1980s. This period also brought together the first photo agencies in the country, based on the model of Magnum. Photographers got together and independently documented the news of the politically tense country. They were fighting against the military regime, through images that critized the same, and were also battling for authorship rights.

14 Fernandes Junior, Rubens. I Abirinto e Identidades: Panorama da Fotografia no Brasil, 1946-98. Sao Paulo: Co sac &

Naify, 2003. Pg. 155.

15

,

The most important agencies created at the time were Agenda F4 in Sao Paulo and Agp

Fotrjornalismo in Brasilia. In 1979 the Nucleo de Fotografia opened as a space where photographers
and critics can discuss the production of the medium in the country. According to Fernandes Junior "Photography played an enlightening part during this period, printing in its language a style that re-activated our moral and political conscience. The decades of 1970 and 1980 were fundamental for the organization of the photographic movement in different Brazilian states. [...J This moment of organization of the photographers and the systematic production was marked by the boiling creativity of the professionals - provoked by the period's boiling politics and aesthetics - and for the appearance of a new generation of photographers, graduated in different courses from the most important universities in the country, which brought the impulse and the necessary knowledge to reach international notoriety."IS
It is during this period that most names in this proposal began their carreers as photographers

and artists. Nair Benedicto (1940) is one of the founders of Agenda F-4 in Sao Paulo, where she still lives and now runs a different phot agency called N-Imagens. She is considered one of the most important photojournalists in the past 30 years, and has fought intensely for the rights of the professional photographers in Brazil along with her partner at F-4,Juca Martins (1949). In her own photographs Benedicto has focused on the minorities, portraying women, Indians (the native Brazilians), the Amazon and the abandoned minors. Her work aims for social change, and her vision documents a Brazilian identity hidden from most eyes. With her work she leaves behind an extremely important document of Brazilian society at the end of the twentieth century. In the 1980s photography was not only a document of the country's society and politics, but also more conceptually. Photography became a form of making art with much more strength than ever before; image makers pushed the medium to its limits in order to explore all of its possibilities. Art salons started awarding prizes to photographers, and photo exhibitions become more frequent and popular. With this new concept came a new group, young people taking advantage of the freedom they never had before, the ability to speak without censorship, and the knowledge of international artistic movements. Brazil was no longer an isolated country, it was now open to the rest of the world. Most photographers start focusing on personal, experimental, and conceptual works. The

15 Fernandes Junior, Rubens. Labirinto e Identidades: Panort1!fJa da Fotograjia no Brasil, 1946-98. Sao Paulo: Co sac & Naify, 2003. Pg. 159. Translated by Marilia fernandes on August, 2008.

16

instant was replaced by a concept, a freedom of what and how to photograph. Editing becam~ a fundamental tool, not only as choosing the images which would become part of the series, but also as cropping, montages, and other photographic possibilities. Photography was finally integrated in the curricula of schools of art and media studies. Independent photo schools were also created, with the intent of teaching the techniques of photographing and printing. This openness of the media helped with the expansion of the profession, and allows photographers to pass their knowledge onto a younger generation, keeping the field fresh for new concepts and ideas. From then on, artists worked with photographs and photographers became artists. An example of this new group is Mario Cravo Neto (1947) who started his career as a sculptor and a photographer, and continued to work in between both trades throughout his life. The publication "The Eternal Now" (2002) featured over 100 Black and White photographs and is one of his most comprehensive publications. The photographs in this publication have been exhibited all around the world and are part of many important collections. The selection presented in this proposal were part of this group. His photographic work mainly focuses on African-Brazilian religious culture. In Salvador, Mario's birth city and home, there is a very rich African culture mixed with the Catholic traditions. Christian saints mixed with African gods, creating a unique religion in the area, which has spread throughout the country. Mario uses this creed as inspiration for his extremely symbolic images. Mario also experiments with videos, creating short films and installations, which continue to explore the symbolic, ritualistic beliefs of his land. According to A.D. Coleman, Mario's body of work is: " ... nourished by his maritime surroundings, Mario Cravo Neto has been journeying through the deep waters of the unconscious and his own creative world, producing an oeuvre that expresses the culture of Bahia. Today, as he immerses himself ever more in the natural and mythical worlds of Brazil, Mario Cravo Neto continues on his lifetime journey of creative activity, producing new works and great pleasure to many viewers around the world.,,16 Another important name of contemporary photography in Brazil is Miguel Rio Branco (1946). He is not only a photographer, but also works with experimental cinema. Rio Branco explores

16 Mario Cravo Neto's home page. "biography". http;/ Iwww.cr:woneto.com.brlen/bio:aaphy/biograpllY.htm (accessed July 7, 2008).

17

through colors, shades, blured edges, and textures the possibilities of creating a unique atmosphere for his subject. His themes revolve around violence, sensuality, death and misery. His work is extremely tense and unsettling for the viewer. His presentations, usually in diptychs, triptychs and slide shows create a complete scene of a world we sometimes prefer to ignore. What is most intriguing about his work, is that even though the images are a reflection of the ugliness of our society, because of his ability to compose with light and color, they are beautiful and intriguing photographs. The 1990s arrived as a time of accomplishment in Brazil. The country had a new strong currency, inflation droped immensely, the economy rised, and art became even more possible. In 1992 in Sao Paulo a group of photographers, curators, and researchers created the group NAFOTO (Nucleo dos Amigos da Fotografia). This group included amongst others, Nair Benedicto and Rubens Fernandes Junior. The main program organized by NAFOTO was the bi-annual International Photo Meeting of Sao Paulo, which has now reached its eighth edition. Its first edition attracted over 100,000 visitors and had twenty-seven exhibitions of national and international artists. The photo meeting also had portifolio reviews and workshops, and brought together people who organized the same kind of events in other parts of the world. With these new perspectives came a new generation of artists. From the north of Brazil I bring to this proposal Luiz Braga (1956). His images made in Belem and the Amazon area have a extraterritorial visuality: they are a reflection of an imaginary world, in which skies are pink, and kites fly on them. Braga's photographs portray the cultural life and customs of the North, but they escape the traditional documentary style. They have their own contemplative way of showing us this colorful part of the country. From the Southeast of Brazil, I bring four contemporary photographers. One works documenting every aspect of the country, and the other three work with constructed realities, manipulating the final image. Claudio Edinger (1952) was raised in Sao Paulo, but spends his career travelling through the country documenting different aspects of society. He lived in New York City for about twenty years, where he worked documenting the structures of society and urban development, the same type of work he did in Brazil, establishing this as the main theme of his oeuvre. Working with a large format camera he tries to capture the marginalized and the un-noticed people on the streets.

18

In this proposal I am suggesting the acquisition of photographs from his series Camaval (1996). These images were taken in several parts of Brazil, portraying the differences and similarities of the most celebrated date in the country. Going away from the straightfoward documentary photography, there are three photographers working today whom 1 feel the need to recognize. Cassio Vasconcellos (1965) from Sao Paulo; Eustaquio Neves (1955), and Rosangela Renno (1962) from :tvfinas Gerais. All three of them have very distinct bodies of work, but one thing in common: all of them manipulate the image for an aesthetic purpose and create a world that does not exist before our eyes. Cassio Vasconcello's black and white images are the ones which made him well known. His manipulation with the negatives and/or with the prints became his trademark. He has a stong relation with lines, noises and balance. His images have a strange reality, causing a certain confusion when viewed. His simple lines and interferences are done with such caution, that they escape the obvious and become disorienting. In the series Nocturnes presented here, Vasconcellos portrays the city of Sao Paulo, his home town, at night and in color. Using a 1970s Polaroid camera he captures images that are almost abstract in their composition, and if it were not for its titles, one might not figure out what one is looking at precisely. He states in his book Nocturnes: "By personal choice, my photos are silent, as the night tends to be. Not because there are not people in them - after all, my purpose was to capture human vestiges, and not characters. But because the city's life and turbulence are just implicit in the scene. Among such mystery, one notices a clear stress, with plans that integrate with each other and counterpose with buildings and trees, solid forms and clouds.',17 Another photographer that goes beyond the negatives captured by his camera is Eustaquio Neves. He uses more than one negative to create an image and has no fear of scratching it and sewing pieces together, amongst other interferences. When printing he also uses the chemicals from the laboratory to create stains, shadows, lights and cloudy areas on the print. As Rubens Fernandes Junior said, Neves
« ... knows

how to construct and innovate from several fragments,

proposing an overlapping and cumulative composition, sometimes un-connected, however

17 Vasconcellos, Cissio.

Noclllmes: sao Paulo. Sao Paulo: Bookmark Publishing, 2002. Pg. 9.

19

related to the question of the Black's identity. The series Arturos constitutes, probably, one of the biggest novelties in the Brazilian photographic aesthetics of the 1990s.,,18 To finish this proposal I chose one of the most well known artists nationally and internationally, Rosangela Renno. In her work she uses photography amongst other media and uses archive materials as her primary source. In her work Cicatriz (Scar), for instance, she uses images from the

Aluseu Penitencidrio Paulista (prison museum). In the Red Series, chosen for this proposal she used
old photographs of soldiers, found in flea markets and given to her by friends, and gave them a red filter. In my opinion the images are a rememberance of all the blood spilled in the many wars the world has seen. The soldiers are very faint behind the filter, as if they were ghosts. The phantasmagoric feeling these images transmit to the public seems intentional, as a reminder of our fragility. My hope with this work is to bring forward the work of artists such as the ones mentioned above, to a culture that is so drowned in photographs it ceases to investigate unknown waters. Brazillians have been portraying the world since the earliest days of photography and Brazil has grown into a powerful artistic society. With its own identity culturally and economically, and with a very distressed history, Brazilian photographers have found a strong identity and are producing not only images but entire oeuvres worthy of recognition. Angela Magalhaes and Nadja Peregrino conclude in the publication Not'as

Travessias edited by Maria L. M. Carvalho: ''Brazjlian photogaphers are today seeking out their own visual sense, in the construction and deconstruction reality, in the representation and artifice, in the use

cf

cf matry different concepts and the e:xploration cf different formats. In this dit.ersity cf styles and tendencies, there is at least something cf a consensus which brings to photograpl?J aspects cf our f?ybrid culture, cf our vacation cf conciliation, cf the coming together cf different elements

oour B'" ra::(ftlanness.
of

,i/9

The Following photographs are a small selection of the vast contemporary production. Some of this images are iconic in the Brazillian art world, while others represent in a very unique way our culture and history. All of the artists chosen for this proposal played an important role in the growing and expansion of photography in Brazil, and have created their own, singular identity,

18 Fernandes Junior, Rubens. IAvirinto e Identidades: Panorama da Fotograjitl no Brasi4 1946-98. Sao Paulo: Cosac & Naify, 2003. Pg. 180. Translated by Marilia fern andes on August, 2008. 19 Carvalho, Maria Luiza Melo. Not,tlS T ravessias: Contemporary Brai}liar1 Photography. London: Verso, 1996. Pg. 29.

20

,

being recognized from a distance by those who know their work. There are many other photographs and different works by the following artists, and I recommend looking further into their work. There are also many other photographers, doing works s good as these, and for those interested, 1 recommend a further look into the Brazillian artists and their art.

21

ACQUISITION PROPOSAL

22

Nair Benedicto
b. 1940 in Sao Paulo, Brazil \\''WW.n-imagens.com.br

Nair Benedicto was born in Sao Paulo, the city where she still lives and works. She graduated from the University of Sao Paulo, one of the best in the country, in Radio and Television Studies. Since the 1970s she has been working as a freelance photographer, documenting social issues and popular demonstrations. Benedicto played an important role in Sao Paulo, where she fought for reproduction rights for photographers and has brought light to social issues such as the abandoned children in the state. She is one of the founders of two very important agencies in the country: F-4 and Nafoto. Her work has been published in many magazines such as Veja, 1sto e, Stern, Paris Match, Newsweek, Time, and BBC-Illustre. Among the exhibitions that have included her work, I would like to highlight the following venues: II Col6quio Latino Americano de Fotografia, Mexico (1981); Centres Georges Pompidou, Paris, France (1983); MIS, Sao Paulo, Brazil (1985); III Photo Meeting, Quito, Equador (1995); and The New York Public Library (1997). Benedicto's photographs are part of the collections of MoMA, New York; Smithsonian Institute, Washington D.C.; DPH/PMSP, Sao Paulo; MAlYI, Rio de Janeiro; and Pirelli/lV1ASP, Sao Paulo.

23

Portfolio Nair Benedicto
Collection Tire
18 Photographs
11 .8 x 15 .7 5 inches (9.5 x 11.8 inches)

apart

30 x 40 cm (24 x 30 cm)
Inkjet Prin ts o n H ahe mmuhle P hoto 308 g/ m2 Paper. Text pages printed o n Permajer D elta 270 g/ m2 Paper.

1000 F uros

Mulheres do Sisal
Bahia, 1985 Series Er%gia

4

Crians;a Kaiap6, Aldeia Aukre
Pad. ,1985
Se ries Indio.) Brmileiros

Mulheres Kaiapos saindo para lavoura, Aldeia Gorotire

Para, 1981
Serie indio.) BraJileiroJ

4

Kaiap6s com Borboletas, Aldeia Aukre

Para, 1986
Serie Indios Brasileiros

Irmandade da Boa M orte-Cachoeira

Bahia, 1995
Serie Rell;~iosjdadt

4

india Arara com macaquinho, Altamira

Para, l983
Series Indios Brasileiro

india Arara na rede, Altamira

Pad, 1983
Scric~ Indios 13rasikiros

4

Miss a do Vaqueiro, Serrita
Pernambuco , 1988
'eri es
~ estas

PopHlareJ

MST-Movimento dos Sem Terra

Parana, 1989
Scri :, .HIT

4

Pintura Kaiapo, Aldeia Aukrc
Para, 1986 Series indios Brast/eL!vs

Pintura Kaiap6 , aldcia Aukre
Para,1989 Series indios Brasilelras

4

Lixao
Sao Paulo , 1975

Assembleia na Igreja, Matriz Sao Bernardo Campo
Sao Paulo, 1980

Series Metal, A

B e

4

Pagadora de Promessas, Aparccida
Sao Paul o ,19 81 Se ries
Oil'O f

Tesao no Forro, Forro do Mario Zan
Sao Paulo, 1978 Scric o.r DanrorinoJ

4

Indiazinhas Kaiapo, Aldeia Kubenkranken
Para, 1982
Scrie i ndios Brc w/eims

Trabalho no Canavial
Pernambuco, 1984 Serie Tm/JallJo f ,,(anti!

Louvas;ao a Iemanja, Praia Grande
Sao Paul o, 1978

Scric Noil'as

Luiz Braga
b. 1956 in Belem, Para, Brazil www.luizbraga.fot.br

Luiz Braga has a degree in architecture, but since 1975 has worked as professional photographer in his home town, where he owns a studio. Braga does commercial work for tourism, architecture and advertising agencies, along with his personal work. He has a very specific focus on the Amazon area always looking for ways to portray this region and its comtemporary culture. His work has been exhibited widely nationally and internationally, in institutions and events such as the Photography Gallery at FUNARTE (National Foundation for the Arts), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (1985 and 1988); FotoForum, Litovske Museum, Ruzomberok, Czech Republic (1989);
~fASP,

Sao Paulo, Brazil (1992); Swiss Foundation for Photography, Zurich, Switzerland (1992);

I International Photo Meeting, Sao Paulo, Brazil (1993); Bienal Internacional de Sao Paulo (1884); and the Photographer's Gallery, London, England (1996); amongst others. Braga's photographs also belong to important collections including }VfAlvI, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Pirelli/MASP, Sao Paulo, Brazil; Photographic Resource Center of Boston University, USA; and Museu de Arte de Belem, Brazil.

4

Image List

Menino com Papagaio (Boy with Kite), 1986 15 3/ 4 x 23 112 inches (40 x 60 cm) Edition o f 25 Printed on F uji p lex paper. USS 1,640 .00 (includes packing and shipp ing)

Tajas, 1988 15 % x 23 1 /2 inches (40 x 60 cm) Editiun of 2:) Pri nted on Fujiplex paper. L :S 1,640.00 (includ es tra nsportation)

4

Homem com Ceu Vermclho (Man with Red Sky). 1988 15 % x 23 I/Z inches (40 x 60 cm) Eclition of 23 Printed on Fujiplex pape r. CS 1,640.00 (includes transpo rtation)

Lona Azul (Blue Canva ), 1991

1- 3. \. _.3 I _ inehec; 411 ... f:-.d.iuon of 1. -

6n em,

Printed on Fujiple .. paper. l -1.64 . mclude (ran portau()n j

4

Barracao Laranja (Orange Tent), 1991
15 3/ 4 , 23 liz inch es (40 x 60 cm) Edition of 25 Printed on F ujiplex pap er. US 1,640.00 (in cludes transportatio n)

4

Mario Cravo N eto
b. 1947 in Salvador, Bahia, Brazil www.cravoneto.com.br

Mario Cravo Neto was Born in Salvador, Bahia in the northen part of Brazil, where he still lives and works. Mario's interest in art started at a very young age. In 1964 he moved to Germany with his father, the sculptor Mario Cravo Jr., while he participated in an artist residence in Berlin. Mario was only 17 and started experimenting with photography and sculpture during that year. The next year, back in Brazil, he won an award for his sculpture work and had his first solo exhibit. In 1968 he moved to New York City, where he lived for 2 years and studied at the Art Students League under the direction of the artist Jack Krueger. In 1970 he published his first international photography catalogue for the exhibition lriformation at the Museum of Modern Art in New York. His time in New York was crucial to his development as an artist. He kept a studio in Soho and did his first well-known photo work entitled "On the Subway". Marlo's work is well known nationally and internationally and has been exhibited in several museums and art galleries including Patrizia Papachristidis Gallery, London, England (2006); Galeria Fernando Pradilla, Madri, Spain (2006 and 2004); FotoMuseo, Bogota (2005); Rencontres d'Arles. Arles, France (2005); 11useu Afro-Brasil, Sao Paulo, Brazil (2005); Mostra Pan Africana de Arte Contemporanea: MAM, Salvador, Bahia (2005); Dahlen Ethnologisches Museum, Berlin, Germany (2004); VI Biennale de l'Art Con tempo rain, Dakar, Senegal (2004); Museo de Bellas Artes, Caracas (2003); Centro Cultural Banco do Brasil, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (2003); Galled Image, Arhus, Denmark (2003); Daros Latin America, Zurich (2003); IF A Gallerie, Sttutgart, Berlin, Germany (2002); Galerie Esther Woerdehoff, Paris, France (2002); Sicardi Gallery, Houston, USA (2002); Yancey Richardson Gallery, New York, USA (2001); Galeria Buades, Madrid, Spain (2001); V Biennale de Lyon partage d'exotismes, Lyon, France (2000); Pinacoteca do Estado de Sao Paulo, Brazil (2000); Galeria Visor, Valencia, Spain (1999); Galeria S - 292, Barcelona, Spain (1999); Photo Espana 98, Madrid, Spain; Fahey/Klein Gallery, Los Angeles (1998); MASP, Sao Paulo, Brazil (1995); Catherine Edelman Gallery, Chicago, USA (1995); Frankfurter Kunstverein, Frankfurt, Germany (1994); Museum of Photographic Art, San Diego,

4

USA (1994); FotoFest 1992, Houston, USA; XIV Bienal Internacional de Sao Paulo, Brazil (1977). Amongst the collections that include Cravo's works are The Museum of :t>.fodern Art New York; The Museum of Fine Arts / The Allan Chasanoff Photographic Collection, Houston; The Museum of Photographic Arts, San Diego; The Princeton Art Museum, Princeton; The Santa Barbara Museum of Art, Santa Barbara, CA; Volfsburg Kunst Museum, Volfsburg Museet for Fotokunst, Odense; l'v1ASP, Sao Paulo; Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; Suomen Valokuvataiteen Museo, Helsinki; Museu de Arte Contemporinea de Sao Paulo; l\L'\1f, Rio de Janeiro; l'v1lL\<I, Sao Paulo; l\~I, Bahia; Museum voor Fotografie, Antwerpen; The Hasselblad Collection, Goteborg; The Brooklyn Museum, New York; Tokyo Institute of Polytechnics, Center of Photography, Tokyo; Fondation Cartier, Paris.

4

Image List

Silence, 1992
1~ x 1~ ine hc.::. (4() x 4(, I-',d itic)n ()/25
Cclatin Sil \ cr I)rin l
CIlI )

USS5,4 (II J.( lt I

·

·V

.1;.

.

'-~t ~~,,:

'>~.'
"(
.

Ii
Heart of Stone, 1991

.,-.....
"'

.A

.,

'"

15,75

x

15. 7 5 Inches (4(, x 4( , em)

f .diti(Jn 20j25

(;c1atin

~iI\ <':1'

Print

L SS (; ,(J()().()()

44

Lord of the Head, 1988
18 x 18 inches (46 x 46 cm)

Edition 24/ 25
Gelatin Silver Print

L SS 12,OOO.OO

Sacrifice V, 1989
18 x 18 inches (46 x 46 cm)

Edition 24/ 25
G elatin Sih'er Print

USS12,OOO.OO

44

Claudio Edinger
b. 1952 in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil www.claudioedinger.com

Claudio Edinger moved to Sao Paulo with his family in his childhood. He graduated in Economics, however he never practiced the trade. He always worked as a photographer, and in 1975 had his first solo exhibition at the Museu de Arte Assis Chateaubriand (lv1ASP), in Sao Paulo. In 1976 he moved to New York City where he stayed for the next twenty years. \xThile in I\ew York he worked for magazines such as Time, Life, Rolling Stone, and Newsweek, and corresponded with two newspapers from Sao Paulo. He also taught at the New School for Social Research and at the International Center of Photography, where he held a solo exhibition in 1978. I Ie had photographic lessons with Philippe Halsman (1906 - 1979) in 1977. During his stay in New York he published eleven books, from which two (Chelsea Hotel, 1983, and Venice Beach, 1985) were awarded the Leica Medal of Excellence. In 1993 he was awarded a scholarship to document the Brazilian CarnavaL The work resulted in a book published in 1996, the same year he returned and settled in Brazil. His work has been exhibited at the Photographer's Gallery in London (1983); the Centre Georges Pompidou in Paris (1983); Maine Photographic Workshop, CSA (1993); and several museums and galleries in Brazil. He has images in the Pirelli/rv1ASP collection, Sao Paulo, Brazil, as well as in various private collections throughout the world.

4

Image List

The Mud Parade, 1995 Parati, Rio de Janeiro
19
3/ 4

x 23

1 /2

inch es (50 x 60 em)

E diti o n o f 5 D ig ital Pri nt, F nJ.mm ed

USS7,nO O.OO

The Mud Parade, 1995 Parati, Rio de Janeiro
19 3J4 x 23 '/2 inch es (SU x 6U em)
E dition of 5 D igiral Print, Fram m cd

USS 7,000.00

4

panema Band, 1991
Ri o de J aneiro 19 % x 23 '/z inches (50 x 60 cm) Edition of 5 Digi tal Print, F ramm ed
S37,000.00

Ipanema Band, 1991 Rio de Janeiro
19 Y4 x 23 '/2 inches (50 x (lO cm) E dition of 5 Digital Print, l::" rammed

tS 7,000.00

44

Patio de Sao Pedro, 1992 Recife 19
3/ 4

x 23 '12 inches (50 x 60 em)

Editi on of 5 D igital Print, F ramm ed

USS7,O OO.OO

Street Carnival, 1992 O linda

19 % x n '/2 inches (50 " GO cm)
Edition o f .5 Digital Print, Framm d

USS7,OOll.OO

44

Walter Firma
b. 1937 in Rio de Janciro, Brazil www.walterfinno.com.br

Walter Firmo began his photographic carreer in 1957, when he made documentary images for the ne"\vspaper Ultima Hora. A few years later he integrated the team of a new illustrated magazine called Realidade. From then on he continued documenting Brazil and its culture for publishing companies and was awarded several photographic prizes. During the 1970s firmo started photographing for advertizing agencies, however it was the phonographic industry that captured him. Some of his classic images are of Brazilian musicians. He is nowadays the photo editor of the magazine Caros Amigos. Some of the places where his work has been exhibited arc:
~luseu

!\acional de Belas Artes, Rio

de Janeiro, Brazil (1983); MM1, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (1983); 111 Co16quio Latino Americana de Fotografia, Hayana, Cuba (1984); FotoFest 1992, Houston, USA; Misumi University, Ezuo, Japan (1994); and Maison Europeenne de La Photographic, Paris, France (1998).

Image List

Sem Titulo (Untitled), 1992
23
1 /2

x 15 % in ch es (60 x 40 cm)

Colo r prin t US$2,500.00

Sem Titulo (Untitled), 1992
23
1 / 2

x 15 % inches (60 x 40 cm)

Colo r p ri nt

US· 2,500 .00

44

Scm Titulo (Untitled), 1992

23

1 /2

x 15 % inches (60 x 40 em)

Culor prin t USS 2,500.00

Sem Titulo (Untitlcd) , 1994

23

1/2

x 15 '14 inch es (60 x 40 em)

Colo r print 'S · 2,500 .00

44

Sem Titulo (Untitled), 1994
23 liz x 15 3/4 inches (60 x 40 cm) Co lor p rint

US 2,500 .00

44

Eustaquio Neves
b. 1955 in Juatuba, Minas Gerais, Brazil eustaquionevcs@yahoo.com

Eustaquio Neves has a formal education in chemistry; however he abandoned the profession to become a photographer. He started his career photographing weddings and post-cards. In 1986 he opened his own studio in Belo Horizonte, MG, and started using his knowledge in chemistry
to

create different images in the laboratory. At the time he was doing fashion photographs in his

studio. He has been awarded two very important prizes, Premio Marc Ferrez de Fotograjia (1994). and Pdmio

Nacional de Fotograjia (1996), both given by FUNARIE (National Foundation of the Arts). His
photographs have been exhibited several times in Brazil and abroad. which includes the following as the most significant: Galeria de Arte da ETFOP, Ouro Preto, Brazil (1991); Fotografia Brasileira Contempodnea: Anos 50-90, I International Photo Meeting, Sao Paulo, Brazil (1993); Central Library at the University of Toronto, Canada (1994); Novas Travessias: Contemporary Brazilian Photography, The Photographer's Gallery, London, UK (1996); Eustaquio Neves and Pierre Verger. Pinacoteca do Estado de Sao Paulo, Brazil (1996); 0 lndividuo e a Memoria, VI Biennial of Havana, Cuba (1997); II Photography Biennial, Tokyo Metropolitan "Museum of Photography, Japan (1997); Blues Sky, Oregon Center for the Photographic Arts, Pordand, Oregon, USA (1997); Real Maravilhoso, Immagine Fotografia, Milan, Italy (1997); FotoFest 1998, Houston, Texas, USA; Antologia de Fotografia Africana e do Oceano indico, Maison Europeenne de La Photographie, Paris, France (1998). Neves's photographs integrate collections in Brazil and thruout the world, such as the Pirellij:MASP, Sao Paulo, Brazil; FotoFest, Houston, Texas; and Havana's Fototeca, Cuba.

44

----

-~---"

Image List

Arturo .
1992 15.75 x 11 .8 inches (40 x 30 e m ) E dition 4/ 20 G ela tin Sil ver P rint R ' 7,500.00

Arturos
1992 11 .8 x 15.75 inches

(30 x 40 em)
E ditio n 4/ 20 Gelatin Siker Print

R 5,50U.00

44

f\rturos
1992

15. 75 x 11.8 inches
(40 x 30 cm)
Edition 4/20

Gelatin Si lver Print RS7,500.00

Arturos
1996

11.8 x 15.75 inches cm)
Edition 4/ 20

(30 x 40

G elatin Siker Print RS 7,SOO.OO

4

Arturos 1992 11.8 x 11.8 inches (30 x 30 cm) E djtion 3/ 15 Gela ti n Silver Print R 7,500.00

4

Miguel Rio Branco
h. 1946 in Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain dugancho@terra.com.br
:Miguel Rio Branco spend his childhood and adolescence between Spain, Portugal, Brazil, Switzerland and the United States. His father was a diplomat and moved around with his family a lot. In 1966 he entered the New York lnstitute of Photography, and later started studying industrial design at a school in Rio de Janeiro. He is one of the most important artists of his generation in Brazil, and even though his most well known work is done with photographs, he is also a painter and works with cinema. Rio Branco is nowadays a Magnum photographer, along with his personal documentary work. Over the past forty years his work has been shown many times throughout the world. Some of the places where he exhibited are: Sawdust Gallery, New York, USA (1965); Galeria Fotoptica, Sao Paulo, Brazil (1980); Galerie Magnun, Paris, France (1985); Teatro San Martin, Buenos Aires, Argentina (1986); Pallazo Fortuny, Veneza, Italy (1988); Foto Forum, Frankfurt, Germany (1991); Rencontres d'Arles, France (1991); Throckmorton Fine Art Gallery, New York (1996); I Bienal Internacional de Fotografia, Curutiba, Brazil (1996); and Gallery London Projects, London, England (1998), among others. His work is also represented in several collections such as, .MASP, Sao Paulo; i\1AM Sao Paulo; MAM Rio de Janeiro; Museum of Modern Art, San Francisco; Museum of Photographic Arts, San Diego; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; and Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam.

Image List

On Guard Softly, Santa Rosa, Rio de Janeiro 1992
31.5 " 31.5 in ches (80x80cm) I.?diti o n f7 ibachrome US 8000

Hanging Shadow, Santa Ros a, Rio de Janeiro
1992 31.5 x 31. 5 inches (80x80cm) Editi o n 2/7 Cibac hrome

US$8,000

Fading, Santa Rosa, Rio de Janeiro
1992 31. 5 x 31. 5 inches (80x80cm) Editiun 4/7 Cibachrome liS · 8,000

44

Back, Santa Rosa, Rio de Janeiro 1994 19.6 x 1 ':>.6 inches (50 x 50 cm) E di tio n 3/ l S Cibac hrume US '8,000

Saint Sebastian, Santa Rosa, Rio de Jan eiro 1994 31. 5 x 31.5 in ches (80x80cm) Edition 4/7 Cibach ro me US$ 8,000

She looked tenderly, Santa Ros a, Rio de Janeiro

1994
31.S x 31.5 inches (80x80cm) Edition 4/7 Cibachro mc LJSS8,OOO

44

Rosangela Renno
b. 1962 in Belo Horizontc, Minas Gerais, Brazil www.rosangelarenno.com.br

Rosangela Renno is a multimedia artist. She graduated in architecture in 1986 and in Arts in 1987, started producing her always personal work in the late 1980s. She moved to Rio de Janeiro in 1989 where she still lives and works. In her first pieces she used family albums as a reference; she continued to use "archive" photographs and texts throughout her career, appropriating anonymous images and essays as the foundation of her works. Renno got her PhD in Arts in 1997 at the University of Sao Paulo, and ever since has received several prestigious scholarships, including from the Civitella Ranieri Foundation, from Umbertide, Italy; from the Funda<;ao Vitae, in1998; and from the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation, New York, in 1999. Amongst the places where her work has been exhibited are MAlvI, Sao Paulo, Brazil (1998); Australian Centre for Photography (1999); Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles, EUA (1996); Lombard-Freid Fine Arts, New York, EUA (2003); 50th Venice Biennial, Italy (2003); Museum of Modern Art, Oxford, UK (2001); and Galeria Fortes Vilas:a, Sao Paulo, Brazil (2003).

44

Image List

Mad Boy, 2000 Red Series
Lam in ated light jet o n Fuji Crystal Arc hive paper 70 % x 39 1/2 inches (180 x 100 cm) Digi[al photos made fro m ph o tograp hic o riginal s p urchased in fl ea markets o r do na ted b\' famihan d friends .

USS 12,000.00

44

Rifle Man, 2000 Red Series
Laminated light jet- on F Uji Crystal Archive paper 70
3/4 X

39

1/2

inch es (180 x 100 cm)

Digital photo s made from photographic o rig inals purchased in fle a markets or d o nated lw . famik . and friend s.

us~ 12,000.00

44

Cassio Vasconcellos
b. 1965 in Sao Paulo, Brazil w\vw.cassiovasconcellos.com. br

Cassio Vasconcellos started his photographic carreeer in 1981 at the school Imagem e A<;ao in Sao Paulo. He has since worked as a photojournalist, and as a publicity photographer. In 1991 he opened his own studio focusing on commercial photography parallel to his personal and artistic work. His work has been shown in several museums and art galleries, and is part of collections in Brazil and abroad. The series "Nocturnes" has been shown at Galeria Vermelho in Sao Paulo (2006); FotoRio in Rio de Janeiro (2007); Galeria El Ojo Ajeno, Lima, Peru (2005); FNAC at both Paris and Toulouse, France (2005); Festival de Photographie & Image it Biarritz, France (2005); Fotogaleria del Teatro San Martin, Buenos Aires, Argentina (2004); Galeria 1L\S ART, Barcelona, Spain (2004); FOTOARTE 2004; and the French Embassy, Brasilia, Brazil.

His earlier works have also been widely exhibited in places such as Argentina, Cuba, Italy, USA, Germany, and Portugal among others. He has participated in events such as FotoFest 2004 in Houston, Texas, and the exhibition Mapas Abiertos: Fotografia Latino Americana 1991-2002.

His photographs are in collections such as the Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris, France; Cid Collection, Sao Paulo, Brazil; Cole<;ao Gilberta Chateaubriand, MAM, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Danforth Museum of Art, Framingham, USA; Fogg Art Museum, Cambridge, USA; Joaquim Paiva Brazil' MAC-CE Museu de Arte Contemporinea do Ceara, Fortaleza, Brazil; .MAM, Rio

"

,

de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; MAM, Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil; :MASP, Sao Paulo, Brazil; MIS-Museu da Imagem e do Som, Sao Paulo, Brazil; Museo N~cional de Bellas Artes, Buenos Aires, Argentina; Museum of Fine Arts, Houston, USA; Pirelli/MASP, Sao Paulo, Brazil; Polaroid Collection, Cambridge, USA; Worcester Art Museum, Worcester, USA ..

44

Image List

Marginal Pinheiros # 23
1 o cturnes, 1988, 199 H - 2002 Sao P aulo 11" 3/4 xl 1" 1/ 4 (19" x 13") 30cm x 29 cm (48 .3cm x 33 .1cm) P o laroid SX -70 A rchi\·allnk jet Pri m o n A rchi\'al P aper (Prese n ation Series) , 310 wm P rin ted b: M arcos Ri bei ro R 4,UOO.00 (ap roximately CS2,.100.(0)

Pras;a da Se #3
l'\ octurn es, 1988 , 19<)8 - 2nn2 Sao Paulo 11 " 3/4 x 1 I" I / 4 (It) " x l.~ ") 30cm x 29 em (48 ..1cm x 33.1 em) Polaroid SX- -(l rehi\ al I n kj er Prinr ()n \ rch i\.t1 P;tpt:r Pre Series), .1 III gsm P rinted In \ 1arc ()~ Rihtin> R 4,l)(1().lJU (ar ro .... im;ltcl~ L 2J{ I( 1.(111

l: n

:trion

44

T orre TV Bandeirantes
N octurn es, 1988, 199 8 - 2002 Sao Paul o 11" 3/ 4 x 11" 1/ 4 (19" x 13") 30cm x 29 cm (48.3cm x 33. 1cm) Polaro id SX-70 rchj\"allnkj t Print on Archiva l Paper (preSe lyatio n Series) , 3 10 gs m Printed by Marco s Ri beiro R 4,000.00 (apro xima tel~' L 2,300 .00)

Viaduto Santa lfigenia #1
[ octurnes, 1988, 1998 - 2002 Sao Paulo 11" 3/ 4 x 11" 1/ 4 (19" x 13") 30cm x 29 cm (48.3cm x 33.1cm) Polaroid SX-70 rchivallnk jet Prim on Archi\ ill Pape r (Preservation Series), 310 gsm Printed by ~'farcos Ribeiro R 4,000.00 (aproximately U 2,300.00)

4

4. Estimated Budget for Acquisitions

Total Author I tern description Unit Price Total Price Price in US Dollars*
Portifolio Nair Benedicto containing 18 photographs US$1,640.00 Luiz Braga 5 Photographs (includes packing and shipping) Mario Cravo 4 Photographs Neto Claudio 6 Photographs Edinger Walter Firmo Eustaquio 5 Photographs Neves Miguel Rio 6 Photographs Branco Rosangela Renno Cassio 4 Photographs Vasconcellos Estimated Packing and Shipping 5000,00
263181,50

1,000.00

1,000.00

1407,00

US$8,200.00

8200,00

US$5,400.00 (1) US$6,000.00 (1) US$12,000.00 (2) US$7,000.00 US$2,500.00 R$7,500.00 (3) R$33,500.00 R$5,500.00 (2) US$8,000.00 US$48,000.00 48000,00 58658,50 US$42,000.00 US$12,500.00 42000,00 12500,00 US$35,400.00 35400,00

5 Photographs

2 Photographs

US$12,000.00

US$24,000.00

24000,00

R$4,OOO.OO

R$16,000.00

28016,00

*Based on CUTTent cumnry from September 9, 2008.

4

Bibliography

Benedicto, );' air. Brasil: &tratos e tradlfao - a portrait oj tradition. Sao Paulo: Sver & Boccato, 1989. Benedicto, Nair. As me/hores Fotos 2. Sao Paulo: Sver & Boccato, 1988. Braga, Luis. Fotoportati!. Sao Paulo: Cosac & Naify, 2005. Carvalho, Maria Luiza Melo. Novas Travessias: Contemporary Bra'{j/ian Photography. London: Verso, 1996. Chiu, Melissa (ed.). Rosdnge/a &nno:
Vu~o

[A/ias]. Sydney: University of Westen Sydney, 1999.

Correa do Lago, Bia and Pedro Correa do Lago. Os Fotografos do Impedo. Rio de] aneiro: Capivara, 2005. Costa, Helouise and Renato Rodrigues. A Fotografia Moderna no Brasi!. Rio de Janeiro: Funarte and Editora UFRJ, 1995. Cravo N eto, Mario. A Cidade da Bahia. Salvador: Aires Editora, 1984. Cravo Neto, Mario. The Eternal Now. Salvador: Aires Editora, 2002. Cravo Neto, Mario. Exvoto. Salvador: Aires Editoia, 1986. Cravo Neto, Mario. LaetiYe. Salvador: Aires Editora, 2000. Cravo Neto, Mario. Man'o Cravo Neto. Frankfurt: Edition Stemmle, 1994. Cravo Neto, Mario. Mado Cravo Neto. Salvador: Aries Editora, 1995. Edinger, Claudio. CarnaLla!. Stockport: Dewi Lewis Publishing, 1996. Edinger, Claudio. Flesh and Spidt. New York: Umbrage Editions, 2006. Edinger, Claudio. lsso e que i. Sao Paulo: DBA, 2006. Edinger, Claudio. L1Jucura. Sao Paulo: DBA, 1997. Edinger, Claudio. Portraits. Sao Paulo: DBA, 2000.

44

Edinger, Claudio. Rio. Sao Paulo: DBA, 2004. Edinger, Claudio. Venice Beach. New York: Abbeville Press, 1985. Fernandes Junior, Rubens (ed.) De Volta Instituto Cultural Banco Santos, 2003. Fernandes Junior, Rubens. Labirinto e Identidades: Panorama da Fotografia no Brasil, 1946-98. Sao Paulo: Cosac & Naif)', 2003. Fernandes Junior, Rubens. Histaria da Fotografia no BrasiL- Panorama Geral e Referencias Basicas. Sao Paulo: Instituto Moreira Salles, 2002. Fernandes Junior, Rubens and Pedro Correa do Lago. 0 Seculo XIX Na Fotografia Brasileira: Colerdo

a Luz: Fotografias Nunca

Vistas do Imperador. Sao Paulo:

Pedro Correa do Lago. Rio de Janeiro: Francisco Alves, n.d.
Ferrez, Gilberto. Photograply in Bra'.:(jL· 1840-1900. Translated by Stella de Sa Rego. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1984. Ferrez, Gilberto and Weston

J.

Naef. Pioneer Photographers

of Bra'.:(jL·

1840-1920. New York: The

Center for Inter-American Relations, 1976. Firmo, Walter. Finno. Rio de Janeiro: Bem-te-vi, 2005. Firmo, \"'Valter. Pixinguinha e Oulros Batulas. Sao Paulo: Pinacoteca do Estado de Sao Paulo, 1997. Firmo, Walter. Walter Finno: Antologia Fotogrdfica 1. Rio de Janeiro: Dazibao, 1989. Herzog, Hans-Michael. La Mirada: Looking at Photograply in Latin America Todqy. Zurich: Daros Latin America AG and Oehrli GmbH, 2002. Kossoy, Boris. Origens e Expansdo da Fotografia no BrasiL- Serulo XIX. Rio de Janeiro: FUNARTE, 1980. Kossoy, Boris. Hercules Florence, 1833: A Descoberta Isolada da Fotografia no BrasiL Sao Paulo: Faculdade de Comunicayao Social Anhembi, 1977. Neves, Eustaquio. Arluros. Sao Paulo: Pinacoteca do Estado de Sao Paulo, 1997. Neves, Eustaquio. Fotoportatil05. Sao Paulo: Cosac & Naify, 2005.

44

Peres, IVllchael R., Ed. The Focal Enryc!opedia 2007.

of Photograpf(y.

4th Edition. Burlington: Focal Press,

Renno, Rosangela. 0 Arquivo Universal e Outros Arquivos. Sao Paulo: Co sac & Naify, 2003. Renno, Rosangela. Cicatrizes. Los Angeles: The Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles,1996. Renno, Rosangela. Fotoportatil. Sao Paulo: Cosac & Naify, 2005. Renno, Rosangela. Rosdngela Renno. Sao Paulo: Galeria Camargo Vila<;a, 1995. Renno, Rosangela. Rosdngela Renno. Sao Paulo: EDUSP, 1997. Renno, Rosangela. A ultima Foto. Sao Paulo: Galeria Vermelho, 2006. Rio Branco, ~figueL Dulce Sudor Amargo. Mexico City: Fondo de Cultura Economica, 1985. Rio Branco, Miguel. Brasile, fotograjie di Aliguel Rio Branco. Venice: Idea Books edizioni, 1988. Rio Branco, MigueL Entre os Olhos, 0 Deserto. Sao Paulo: Cosac & Naif, 2001. Rio Branco, Miguel. Aliguel Rio Branco. Sao Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 1998. Rio Branco, ~figuel. Miguel Rio Branco. New York: Aperture, 1998. Rio Branco,
~gue1.

Silent Book. Sao Paulo: Cosac & Naify, 1997.

Vasconcellos, Cassio. Nocturnes: Sao Paulo. Sao Paulo: Bookmark Publishing, 2002. Vasconcellos, Cassio. Paisagens Marinhas. Sao Paulo: Paparazzi, 1994. Vasquez, Pedro Karp. Dom Pedro II e a Fotograjia no BrasiL Rio de Janeiro: Fundacao Roberto Marinho and CIS, n.d. Vasquez, Pedro Karp. 0 Brasil na Fotograjia Oitocentista. Sao Paulo: Metalivros, 2003. Watriss, Wendy and Lois Parkinson Zamora. Image and Memory: Photograpf(y From Latin America,
1866-1994. Houston: University of Texas Press and FotoFest, 1998.

Weiermair, Peter (ed.) Mario Cravo Neto. Zurich:Edition Stemmle, 1994. Wooters, David. 'The Blind Alan's Elephant". In Photographs: George Eastman House, 21-30. New York: Taschen, 1999.

44

