Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2008

Investigation of model calibration issues in the safety performance assessment of Ontario highways
S.M. Morjina Ara Begum
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Civil Engineering Commons Recommended Citation
Begum, S.M. Morjina Ara, "Investigation of model calibration issues in the safety performance assessment of Ontario highways" (2008). Theses and dissertations. Paper 168.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

INVESTIGATION OF MODEL CALIBRATION ISSUES IN THE SAFETY PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT OF ONTARIO HIGHWAYS

by S.M.Morjina Ara Begum, B.Sc.Engg. Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET) Dhaka, Bangladesh

A thesis presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Applied Science in the Program of Civil Engineering

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2008

© S.M.Morjina Ara Begum

PROPERlY OF
RYERSON UNlVmGnY LIBRARY'

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis.
I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of
scholarly research.

Signature S.M.Morjina Ara Begum Department of Civil Engineering Ryerson University

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total
or in part, at the request of other institution or individuals forthe purpose of scholarly research.

SIgnature S.M.Morjina Ara Begum Department of Civil Engineering Ryerson University

.

ii

BORROWER'S PAGE Ryerson University requires the signature of all persons using or photocopying this thesis. Please sign below and give your address and date.

Name

Address

Signature

Date

,

iii

INVESTIGATION OF MODEL CALIBRATION ISSUES IN THE SAFETY PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT OF ONTARIO HIGHWAYS

Master of Applied SCience, 2008

By S.M.Morjina Ara Begum Department _of Civil Engineering Ryerson University

Abstract

A set of Safety Performance Function (SPFs) commonly known as accident prediction models, were developed for evaluating the safety of Highway segments under the jurisdiction of Ministry of Transportation, Ontario (MTO). A generalized linear modeling approach was used in which negative binomial regression models were developed separately for total accidents and for three severity types (Property Damage Only accidents, Fatal and Injury accidents) as a function of traffic volume AADT. The SPFs were calibrated from 100m homogeneous segments as well as for variable length contiguous segments that are homogeneous with respect to measured traffic and geometric characteristics. For the models calibrated for Rural2-:Lane Kings Highways, the variables that had significant effects on accident occurrence were the terrain, shoulder width and segment length. It was observed that the dispersion parameter of the negative binomial distribution is large for 100m segments and smaller for longer segments. Further investigation of the dispersion parameter for Rural 2-Lane Kings Highways showed that the models calibrated with a separate dispersion parameter for each site depending on the segment length performed better than the models calibrated considering fixed dispersion parameter for all sites. For Rural 2-Lane Kings Highways, a model was calibrated with trend considering each year as a separate observation. The GEE (Generalized Estimating Equation) procedure was used to develop these models since it incorporates the temporal correlation that exists in repeated measurements. Results showed that integration of time trend and temporal correlation in the model improves the model fit.

iv

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I would like to thank and express my deep gratitude to my thesis supervisor professor Dr.Bhagwant Persaud for giving me this opportunity and introducing me to the domain of road safety. His outstanding supervision made it possible for me to complete this thesis. I will always be grateful to him for arranging the financial assistance he gave me throughout the study and to the Ministry of Transportation Ontario's HIIFP programme and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada for providing the fund for that assistance. I am also grateful to Mr. Craig Lyon, a Research Associate in the Department of Civil Engineering, for his help throughout the study. I would like to express my gratitude to Professor Dr Said M. Easa who made my admission possible to this program. Finally, I wish to also thank Ms Susan Nichole of the Ministry of Transportation, Ontario for her assistance at the data preparation stage. Her quick turnaround in providing the data is greatly appreciated. I would also like to acknowledge the contributions of Dr. Mike Chapman and Dr. Jinyuan Liu for reviewing my thesis and giving some valuable suggestions. I am also grateful to my husband Zayedi and my dear sons Zahid and Farhan, who sacrificed so much for me to be engaged in and complete this study.

v

