Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2007

Space vector PWM sequence and harmonic comparison for high power current source rectifier
Nagaraja H. Chikkegowda
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Electrical and Computer Engineering Commons Recommended Citation
Chikkegowda, Nagaraja H., "Space vector PWM sequence and harmonic comparison for high power current source rectifier" (2007). Theses and dissertations. Paper 172.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

Space Vector PWM Sequence And Harmonic Comparison For High Power Current Source Rectifier

by

Nagaraja H Chikkegowda Master of Engineering, Bangalore University, Bangalore India

A Project
In

The Department
Of

Electrical and Computer Engineering

Presented in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Master Degree at Ryerson University Toronto, Ontario, Canada 2007
PROPERlY OF
"""''''''''''1.'' ~Ni{~ LIBRARY

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this project.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this project to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholar research.

11

BORROWER'S PAGE

Ryerson University requires the signatures of all persons using or photocopying this thesis. Please sign below, and give address and date.

Name

Address

Signature

Date

(

111

Space Vector PWM Sequence And Harmonic Comparison For High Power Current Source Rectifier
Master of Engineering 2007 Nagaraja Chikkegowda Electrical and computer Engineering Ryerson University, Canada

ABSTRACT
The space vector PWM (SVPWM) schemes for high power current source drives normally produce low order harmonics due to low switching frequency. To provide a SVPWM with the best harmonic performance, different space vector sequences suitable for a current source rectifier (CSR) are investigated in this project. Details on how to achieve the waveform symmetries with minimum switching frequency for each sequence are discussed. A thorough comparison of the harmonic performance of different space vector sequences based on current source rectifier implementations is carried out. An optimum space vector modulation (SVM) method is proposed to achieve the best line current THD and reduced switching losses. The space vector sequence investigation has been verified in simulation and experimentally using a 10kVA GCT based CSR prototype.

IV

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The work presented in the thesis was carried out at the Laboratory of Electric Drive Research and Application (LEDAR) at Ryerson University.

At first I would like to thank GOD to allow me to study in engineering and to get me a best supervisor Professor Dr. Bin Wu. Also I would like to thank Professor Dr. Wu for his continues support and help during the period when I studied at Ryerson University. The precious advices and numerous discussions triggered insightful research and enhanced my academic knowledge and scientific inspiration.

I am grateful to Professor Dr. Richard Cheung and Professor Dr. David Xu and all the fellow students at LEDAR new and old lab for their support and friendly atmosphere. My appreciation also goes to Dr. Ryan Y.W.Li for his help and support.

I would like to share the joy of achievements with my families, my parents and in-laws my sisters and my wife Madhu and son Anuraag. I am very grateful to my wife, son and my parents and in-laws for their understanding and support.

