Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2008

New Migration Motives and New Settlement Challenges: Integration Experience of Korean Immigrants in the Toronto CMA
Byung Chun Oh
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Other Social and Behavioral Sciences Commons Recommended Citation
Oh, Byung Chun, "New Migration Motives and New Settlement Challenges: Integration Experience of Korean Immigrants in the Toronto CMA" (2008). Theses and dissertations. Paper 86.

This Major Research Paper is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

NEW MIGRATION MOTIVES AND NEW SETTLEMENT CHALLENGES: INTEGRATION EXPERIENCE OF KOREAN IMMIGRANTS IN THE TORONTO CMA © Byung Chun Oh, 2008 Master of Arts Immigration and Settlement Studies Ryerson University ABSTRACT This paper explores the migration motives and the integration experiences of recent Korean immigrants in the Toronto CMA, who are significantly different from their previous cohorts in terms of migration motives, socio-economic status, and settlement experiences. These differences can be attributed to changes in social transformation and economic development in Korea as well as to accelerated globalization and global migration trends. Recent Korean immigrants are characterized as middle-income earners who possess higher levels of education, skills, and wealth, with a strong desire to educate their children in developed Western countries where English is an official language. Despite recent Korean immigrants'

increased human capital, their labour market integration has experienced great difficulties mainly due to a lack of Canadian official language skills. In addition, since the end of the twentieth

Century, Korean migrants have increasingly been choosing Canada over the United States as their destination of migration. This shift indicates that Koreans are looking for new answers in search of better lives for their futures.

Key words: Korean immigrants, migration motives, integration, Toronto, global migration


