               
An Immersive Multiimage Video Installation 

GRAVITY IS QUIET       

by      Frances Lengden,  Bachelor of Arts, University of King's College, 1996.      An MRP      presented to Ryerson University      in partial fulfillment of the      requirements for the degree of    Master of Fine Arts    in the Program of    Documentary Media      Beaver Hall Gallery, June 511, 2016      Toronto, Ontario, Canada 2016    © Frances Lengden 2016 

         

 

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION:    I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this MRP. This is a true copy of the MRP, including  any required final revisions. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this MRP to other institutions or  individuals for the purpose of scholarly research I further authorize Ryerson University to  reproduce this MRP by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other  institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my MRP may be  made electronically available to the public.       

 

ABSTRACT:    GRAVITY IS QUIET  An Immersive MultiImage Video Installation      Master of Fine Arts, 2016  Frances Lengden  Documentary Media  Ryerson University          This  paper  presents  research  related  to  an  immersive   installation  that  explores  the  possibility   of  creating  a  portrait  of  a  particular  state  of   mind.  This  optimal  state  of  consciousness,   called  flow  and  coined  by  psychologist  Mihaly  Csikszentmihalyi  reveals   a  subtle  and  hidden  world  of  true  presence  and  untapped  potential.  Entitled  Gravity is quiet1, this 3channel audio visual installation  examines  the  world  of  highline2  as  a  walking  meditation  and  mines   the  introspections  of  various  flow  practitioners  through  a  singular,  yet  symphonically  built  voiceover.  The  documented  individuals  push  the  perceived  boundaries  of  their own mental and physical capacities, illustrating  their  acceptance  of  the  culture  of  risk,  and  the possibility  of harnessing fear, discomfort, creativity  and  joy  through  the  world  of   movement.  Subjects  were  filmed  in  Canyon  SainteAnne  and  Kamouraska,  Quebec  in  the  late  summer  of  2015.  The  installation  is  based  on  data  collected  through  participant  observation,  semistructured  interviews,  and  visual  content  analysis  of  sportfocused media.     

 Dr. Toast, Gravity is Quiet, Dr. Toast. False Profit Records, 452858981, 2011.  http://music.drtoast.com/album/gravityisquiet.  2  Highline refers to slacklining at a high elevation. Slacklining is the practice of balancing and walking  along a dynamic nylon line, 1 to 3 inches in width and of a particular set tension between two anchor  points. Highline uses a 1 inch wide line. 
1

 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS:    To my subjects: highliners Chantal Therrien (narrator), Julien Desforges, Anthony Boulay, Meggie  Meilleur Miller, `Jay', Isobel Phoebus, Renaud Vezeau and the Montreal Slackline family for their  generous spirit. Rock climbers Greg Goff, Dave Zully, and Leslie Timms, the Balmy Beach Kayak  and Canoe Club, the Nova Unioa JiuJitsu Mississauga Club, Emily McBurnie & Kundalini Yoga  community, and the Toronto Roller Derby Federation. Thank you for showing me consistent f  low   something I didn't even think was possible. It was mesmerizing.    Thank you to my academic advisors Robert Burley and Michael Conford for their support, and my  classmates for enduring the word flow one too many times, particularly Tamar Mankassarian for  her essential standin narration, Orri Jonsson, and Alyssa Bistonath. Special thanks to professors  Pierre Tremblay, Dafydd Hughes, Jason O'Hara, and Vid Ingelevics who understood my idea from  the beginning as well as Don Snyder, and Sara Knelman.    A big thank you to Dev Singh for being my mentor on the project, Francis Mercier for his skillful  sound mixing, additional tech support from Jeremy Littler and the invaluable installation  assistance of Phil Lengden.     

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS:    Author's Declaration  Abstract  Acknowledgements  Table of Contents  List of Figures  List of Appendices    Introduction      1. Searching for flow: The optimal state of consciousness.  1.1. Understanding flow, and the work of psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi  1.2. Types of flow and strategies  1.3. The full potential of flow  1.4. Identifying motivation  The c  ulture of risk    2. The Science of flow  2.1. Neurochemicals  2.2. Observing flow in the brain    3. Project Methodology and Discussion  3.1. Preconception stage  3.2. Fieldwork  3.3. Finding form  3.4. Considering presentation    4. Documentary Relevance  4.1. Sensory ethnography and the nonlinear form: L  eviathan (2012), Sweetgrass (2009).   4.2. The phenomenological approach: L  eviathan, Sweetgrass and T  he Diving Bell and the  Butterfly (2007)  4.3. The power of beauty and surrealism: Elaine Scarry and Richard Mosse  4.4. The use of multiimage: EijaLiisa Ahtila  4.5. The use of soundscape and voice over: Ben Frost, Ernst Karel and Terrence Malick  4.6. The active participant in the gallery space: T  he Rink (2012), V  ery Nervous System  (19821992), Force of Nature (2015), Rain Room (2012) and T  ransfinite (2011)  4.7. Awakening the image with postproduction devices: A  n Afternoon Unregistered on the  Richter Scale (2011), Simulacra (2015) and B  ones of the Forest (1995)   

 

  5. Project Analysis and Assessment through phenomenological feedback  5.1. Judging the efficacy of the multiimage video installation to create presence through an  embodied experience.   5.2. Judging the efficacy of the multiimage video installation to create an active audience and  flow within a confined space.    6. Concluding Remarks    Figures  Appendices  Bibliography       

 

LIST OF FIGURES:  Figure 1  3D rendering of installation of G  ravity is quiet (2016)  Figure 2  Title wall of Gravity is quiet  Figure 3  Artist's Statement for Gravity is quiet  Figure 4 to 7  Gravity is quiet  Figure 8  Leviathan (2012)  Figure 9  The Rink (2012)  Figure 10  Sweetgrass (2009)  Figure 11  The Enclave (2013)  Figure 12  The Diving Bell and The Butterfly (2007)  Figure 13  Where is Where? (2008)  Figure 14  Very Nervous System (19821992)  Figure 15  Force of Nature (2015)  Figure 16  Rain Room (2012)  Figure 17  Transfinite (2011)  Figure 18  An Afternoon Unregistered on the Richter Scale (2011)  Figure 19  Simulacra (2015)       

 

LIST OF APPENDICES:  Appendix 1  Description of Installation  Appendix 2  Neurochemicals of flow           

 

INTRODUCTION:    Making the unknown--known--in terms of one's medium is allabsorbing... Whether you succeed  or not is irrelevant, there is no such thing. Making your unknown known is the important thing and  keeping the unknown always beyond you -- catching crystallizing your simpler clearer version of  life... you must always keep working to grasp--the form must take care of its self if you can keep  your vision clear.3     
­ excerpt from Georgia O'Keeffe's letter to Sherwood Anderson 

  Beyond  the  description  of  her  organic  struggle  between the unknown and representational form, I  find O'Keeffe's choice of language both inspiring and familiar.  working                                catching                                 crystallizing                           grasping    Her  words  directly  address  writer  Sherwood  Anderson  and  the  art  of  personal practice however,  she  also  appears to speak precisely to the visceral highline experience and an athlete's search for  flow.  With  a  clear  vision,  one  can  explore  a  "living  thing  out   of  the  adventure  of   his  spirit  into  the  unknown...  [To]  clarify  something  he  feels  but  does  not  clearly  understand  ­  sometimes  he  partially  knows  why  ­  sometimes  he  doesn't ­ sometimes it is all working in the  dark".4 O'Keeffe's  fascination  with  representing  the  unknowable  as  a  living  form  mirrors  my  own  objectives  in  this  MRP.    This  project  began  with  a  desire  to  visualize  human  drive.  If  this  invisible  force  could  be  made  perceptible,  we  could  then  ask:  where  does  the  need  to push the measurable limits of the human  body  come  from?  How  is  my   constitution different than the  athletes who achieve great feats? And 

 Jack Cowart and Juan Hamilton, Georgia O'Keeffe: Art and Letters, (New York: New York Graphic  Society, 1990).   4  Ibid. 
3

 

why  is  our  society  becoming  more  comfortable  with  the  culture of risk and `positive' pain? Could I  capture  that  zenith  by  understanding  it?  These questions emerged out of my own experience and  selfidentity,  particularly  after  growing  up  in  an  active household with three older brothers,  playing  competitive sport at a university level and now experiencing my own slump in physical activity.    A  search  for  athletes  who  displayed  deep  focus  and  an  acceptance  of  increasing  physical  pain  was  my  starting  point.   In  2015,  while  filming  at  the  Montreal  Action   Sports  Festival,  Jackalope  I   unwittingly  encountered  a  pure  state  of  flow  on  the  highline.  It  was  the  first  time  I  had  witnessed  the  intense  connection  between  fear,  mindfulness,   joy  and  unlimited  potential  a  completely  new  phenomenon  for  me.  The  talented  Montreal   Slackline  highliners welcomed me into this world and  I  soon  found   myself  on  camping  east  of  Quebec  City  in  Canyon SainteAnne and in  Kamouraska  on  the  south   shore.  The   highline  community's  strong  bonds  were  both  captivating  and  decidedly  nonexclusive.    From  the  beginning  of  this  project,  I  knew   I  wanted  to  create  an  immersive  video  installation that  encouraged  viewer  participation.  A  nonlinear  document  that  embraced  the  subject's  voice   and  blurred  the  distance  between  athlete  and  spectator.  The  late  discovery  of  multiscreen  (with  its  similar  qualities  to  flow)  however,  was  an  amazing  gift.  Multiscreen  offered  simultaneous  and  alternative  perspectives  of  time  and  space,  along  with a  framework for adhering multiple directive  soundscapes.  Embracing  both  fear  and  personal  potential soon became a far  more intriguing and  empowering  focal  point  than  the  phenomenon  of  `positive'  pain.  The  piece   began  to   embrace   a  universal theme of untapped potential and happiness for a wider audience to ponder.   

 

Over  the  course  of  10  months,  I  made   multiple  trips  to  Quebec  to  shoot,  interview  my  subjects   and  record  their   experiences   of  the  highline  then  returned  to  Toronto  to  edit.  During  this  time  I  struggled  on  two  fronts:  first  physically  in  Quebec,  struggling  to  keep  up  with  the  highliners  as  they  scaled  rock  faces  their  anchor  points  and  then,  later  as  I edited nonlinearly in Toronto. I had  many  of  my  own  "falls"  as  I  grappled  with  conceptual  and  technical  issues  related   to  my  final  installation.  Ultimately,  I  had  to  find  a  form for my subject to convey both the fear and exhilaration  that  came  with  experiencing  flow.  In  June  of  2016  the  final  installation  was  realized  and  presented at the Beaver Hall Gallery in Toronto as part of the D  ocNow Festival.    The  primary  intent  of  this  installation  was  to   uncover  the  highliners'  subtle  world  by  tapping  directly  into  their  optimal  state  of  consciousness.  Presenting  a perceptible and accessible form of  consciousness  is  not  an  easy  task  however, GIQ hopes to have unpacked the  visual and audible  sensations of flow and to have listened attentively to  the subjects as they speak for themselves. "If  we  want  to overcome the solipsism of our individual experience," wrote filmmaker Hito Steyerl "we  cannot do without witnessing... [it is] an attempt to open oneself up to the experience of others."5       

 Hito Steyerl, "Can Witnesses Speak? On the Philosophy of the Interview," Eipcp.net  05 (2008),  accessed June 1, 2016, issn 18111696. http://eipcp.net/transversal/0408/steyerl/en.  
5

 

1. UNDERSTANDING FLOW :  1.1 Defining flow and the work of Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi  "I  found  a  group  of  puzzled  people  with  a  tiger by the tail, interested not so much in mythology as  in  touching  and  holding  an  experience   as  ephemeral  as  spider  silk...There  is,  I  think  now,  even  more  to  the  edge  than  the  ephemeral  feeling.  It  has  its  own  time its own  space. The edge has its  own gravity."6    Most people have experienced flow, but they simply haven't identified it as such.    I  saw  pure  flow   that  night.  With  the   swirling  gray  clouds  and  a  sliver  of  sun  peeking  through  a  single  figure  danced  in  silhouette  along  a  thin  line  in  the  sky.  With a long piece of fabric wrapped  around  his  head  and  trailing  down  his  back,  he  seemed  perfectly  at  ease  and  content.  He  could  have  been  there  or  a  million   miles  away.  Happy  in  his   playful  solitude  and  simultaneously  performing to the crowd below.    As  we  sat  below  the  Montreal  Olympic  Stadium tower, I asked Anass Ajh of Morocco and Joseph  Huard of Montreal to define flow in a sentence. Their definitions temporarily perplexed me but now  that  the  project  is  complete,  I  find  their descriptions aptly succinct. "Flow is the absence  of control  of  our  conscious  mind  on  our  behaviours"  began Anass, a highline practitioner of two years. "You  don't  have  to  think,  your  unconscious  mind  will  do  the  job  for  you."7  "Letting  your  unconscious  mind  work  on  your   body,"  added  long  time  member  of  Montreal  Slackline,  Joseph  "and  keeping  the conscious part of your mind in the moment, in pure silence."8   

 Michael Bane, Over the Edge: A Regular Guy's Odyssey in Extreme Sports, (Alabama: Wilderness  Press, 1996), 232.  7  Anass Ajh (student/highliner) in discussion with author, August 2015.  8  Joseph Huard (student/highliner) in discussion with author, August 2015. 
6

 

Highline,  an  active meditation which takes place hundreds of feet in the air is a perfect example of  flow.  If  you  cannot  calm  the  mind,  you  cannot  begin.  It  has  no  time  restraints  and  involves  the  simplest  of  movements    walking.   A  looser or longer line increases difficulty  as all movements are  suddenly  magnified,  enabling  even  deeper  flow.  All   highliners  practice  slacklining  first  to  perfect  their skills9  and then attempt to match their skills to the challenge.    Highline  embodies   the  essence  of  flow  as  its  focus  is   not  what  you  experience  but   how  you  experience  it.  Flow  is  about  controlled  intensity,  and  highline  is  intense.  "We're  really  exposed  to  emptiness  under  us.  It's  super  high  and  the  natural  instinct  is,  you're  just  scared  of  being  there...Your  brain  is  like  I  shouldn't  be  here, it's too high, it's not normal...That's a panic sensation  that comes up to your brain. And then you just get over that to get in the flow."10    If  you  are  visualizing,  you  are  not  in  the  flow  because  you  are  imagining  yourself  in  the moment.  You  are  thinking. Flow is not a deeper  level of concentration. Instead your mind must be blank, on  autopilot  and  you  are  no  longer  consciously  analyzing  anything.  "I  hear  everything  with  a  lot  of  precision,  but  I  don't  give  them  any  sense, any explanation" explains Anass. "I just accept to hear  everything."11  It's  more  closely  understood  as  a  state  of  observation,  similar  to  an  out   of  body   experience where "[e]ssentially, you detach yourself from the outcomes. You don't have to seek to  win  or  to  be  perfect.  You  just have to be in the moment."12 At this point, my internal alarm for New  Age  talk  started  going  off.  Surely,   we  are  all  acquainted  with  those  rare  moments  of perfect bliss  where  our  skills  match  the  present  challenge  and  everything  appears  easy.  But  the  idea  of 

 Malcolm Gladwell, Outliers: The Story of Success (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 2008), 3568.  Re: 10,000 hours of wellstructured practice.  10  Joseph Huard (student/highliner) in discussion with author, August 2015.   11  Anass Ajh (student/highliner) in discussion with author, August 2015.  12  Joseph Huard (student/highliner) in discussion with author, August 2015.  
9

 

consistently  entering  this  state  of  mind  and  maintaining   it  for  long  periods  of  time  seemed  godlike.    Vipassana  was   one  gateway   to  understanding  flow  according  to   Anass  and  Joseph.  A  10day  intensive  meditative  workshop,  involving  10  hours  of  meditation  per  day  and   the  removal  of  all  distractions.  Participants  aim  to  become  equanimists:  individuals  in  "a  state  of  psychological  stability  and  composure  which  is  undisturbed  by  experience  of  or  exposure  to  emotions,  pain,  or  other  phenomena  that  may  cause  others  to  lose  the  balance  of  their  mind."13  If  one could control  their  reaction  to  outer  stimulus,  they  could  in theory control the state of their own mind. If pain,  for  example  remains  unclassified  as  said  pain,  then  it  will  not  multiply   twofold  into  physical   and  mental  pain.  It  will  be  experienced  as  a  temporary  state  that  will  soon  diminish.  If  you  remain  calm,  and  accept  the  situation  then  a  state  of  flow  will  return.  And  this  is   true  for  any   sensation.  The  idea  is,  not  to  treat  everything the  same but to only attach to things you want to experience.14  But  what  if  something  you   did  not  anticipate  occurs,  and  you   need  to  alter  your  course  immediately?  An  equanimist  would  advise  you  to  let  your  subconscious  decide  what  to  do  next  and  that  will  lead  to  the  best  possible  outcome.  They  believe  the  unconscious  mind  is   stronger  than you are.    Anass  compares  his  nonreaction  (to  sensation)  to  a  wave  that  simply  passes  through  him  and  diminishes.  Hungarian  psychologist  Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi recognized this phenomenon back in   the  1970s  when  looking  for  the  meaning  of  life.   His  1976  Experience  Sampling  Method  Study  at 
 "Equnimity," Wikipedia: The Free Encyclopedia, accessed June 1, 2016,  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Equanimity.  14  For two days, you focus strictly on your breathing and slowly start to experience moments of pure  silence. These moments gradually become longer and longer. Then you start to focus on sensation and by  day 4, you are scanning your body for sensations which can be very painful, pleasurable or indifferent.  You start learning not to react to these `temporary' sensations until slowly, you learn to let them be and  then they diminish slowly. 
13

 

the  University  of  Chicago  became  the  quintessential  happiness study. (Ironically, I came from the  opposite  perspective,  trying  to  understand  society's  growing  acceptance  of   `positive'  pain.)  Csikszentmihalyi  was  interested  in  the  pinnacle moments of flow of average citizens, savants and  entire  civilizations,15  particularly  those  whose  inventions  surpassed   the  normal  arc  of  progress.  His  international  study  observed  over  100,000  subjects  who  wore  electronic  pagers,  recorded  what  they  were  doing  and  how  they  were  feeling  at   eight  randomly  chosen  times  during  the  workday.  Constantly  probing  for  new  knowledge,  the  study  used  a  phenomenological  model  based  on  information theory,  which included "how sensory data are processed, stored, and used   the  dynamics  of attention and memory."16 Followers such as philosopher Don Ihde17 believe this is  a  return  to  `naive'  experience  where  analysis  brackets  out   assumptions  and  an experience's true  essence can be revealed.    After  extensive  research, Csikszentmihalyi outlined ten attributes which contribute to this alternate  reality.18  (A  minimum  of  three  attributes  creates  microflow  and  the  presence  four   or   more  attributes constitutes macroflow.)    1. Clear goals  A clear objective creates profound mental clarity.   2. Concentration  Nothing else matters except for the data pertaining to the moment. 

 Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, "Flow, the secret of happiness," TedTalks video, 18:55, February 2004,  https://www.ted.com/talks/mihaly_csikszentmihalyi_on_flow?language=en.  16  Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience (New York: Harper Modern  Classics Ed., 2008), 26.  17  Don Ihde, "Postphenomenology: Sounds beyond Sound" (keynote presentation, Philosophy in Practice,  Ryerson Graduate Philosophy Conference, Toronto, Ontario, February 28, 2015).   18  Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, "Flow, the secret of happiness," TedTalks video, 18:55, February 2004,  https://www.ted.com/talks/mihaly_csikszentmihalyi_on_flow?language=en. 
15

 

3. Loss  of  feeling  selfconsciousness    There  is  no  energy  left  to  monitor one's self  and "your  existence  is   temporarily  suspended."19  In  a  rich  environment,  you  merge   with  your  surroundings.   4. Time  dilation    Time  speeds  up  or  slows  down.  There  is  such  a  surplus  of  information  available  within  the  moment  that  it  appears  to  take  additional  time  to  examine  it  all.  For  explorer  Mike  Horn,  "The  moment  everything  slows  down,  is  the  perfect  moment  of  flow...nothing is rushed."20   5. Direct and immediate feedback.  6. Almost perfect balance between ability and challenge (due to intense practice and drive).  7. Personal Control. The participant feels competent, reaches goal, and feels empowered.  8. Intrinsically rewarding (therefore the action feels effortless).  9. Lack  of  bodily  needs  and  even  emotions.  Your  physical  needs  are  not  considered  a  high  priority.  Psychologist  Martin  Seligman  adds,  "Consciousness  and  emotion  are  there  to  correct  your  trajectory  when  what  you  are  doing  is  seamlessly  perfect,  you  don't  need  them."21  10. Absorption. Nothing else matters. There is no past or future to consider.     This  state  of  mind  has  3  distinct  steps:  struggle,  release  and  peak  flow.  Struggle  begins  by  engaging  the  challenge  and  overloading  the  brain  with  data  as  stress  levels  rise.  Release  is  achieved  through  calm,  controlled  breath  which  triggers  a  release  of  nitroxide  to  decrease stress  hormones  and  then,  releasing  dopamine,  serotonin  and  anandamide  to  usher  in peak flow. Once 

 Ibid.   "Flow and Ultimate Performance," Flow Genome Project video, 2:57,  http://www.flowgenomeproject.com/learn/videos/.   21  Martin Seligman,  Authentic Happiness: Using the New Positive Psychology to Realize Your Potential  for Lasting Fulfillment (New York: Free Press, 2002), 116. 
19 20

 

these  neurochemicals  have been depleted, a return to struggle is necessary to continue the cycle.  (Macroflow  participants  do  not  consciously  see  an  end  or  a  beginning,  believing  it  is  an  overall  way of being.)     1.2 Types of flow and strategies  While  researching  various  sports/activities,  highline  again  proved  useful  by   providing  distinct  categories  of  flow  for  easy  comparison. They include: the relationship between fear and flow, flow   within the environment, and extreme joy through flow.    Fear  is  a  natural  part  of  pushing  one's   boundaries  however, highline incorporates fear of heights   and fear of injury/death. These  additional fears intensify the state by submerging participants in an  immediate  survival  mode. From a young age, we are taught to pivot cautiously around fear and by  adulthood,  "[c]urtailing  fear  is  no  longer  a  conscious  decision  but  an  automatic  response."22  Therefore,  instead of using "[this] potentially meaningful and constructive event in [our] lives"23, we  dismiss  the  opportunity  and  believe  risktaking  athletes  are  genetically  preconditioned  to  do  so.  Highliners  however,  do  not  choose  the  fightorflight  response  urged  by  increasing   adrenaline,  cortisol  and  norepinephrine.  Alternatively,  they  learn  to  cope with apprehension through  repeated  practice.  One  "must  balance  the  natural  state  of  fear   with  knowledge  based  on  personal  capabilities   and  technical  expertise"24  writes  psychologist  Eric  Brymer.  Fear  is  a  conscious  attempt  to  slow  time  down,  "relat[ing]  to   clarity  and  judgement and changes in time perception. [It  is  a]  primal  emotion...to  be  savoured,  confronted  or  broken  through  rather  than  a  stimulus  for 

 Norbert Elias, and Eric Dunning, "Quest for excitement in leisure," In: Elias N and Dunning E (eds)  Quest for Excitement: Sport and Leisure in the Civilizing Process, (Oxford: Basil Blackwell): 6390.  23  Eric Brymer and Robert Schweitzer, "Extreme sports are good for your health: A phenomenological  understanding of fear and anxiety in extreme sport," Journal of Health Psychology 18(4) (2012): 477.  24  Eric Brymer, "Extreme Sports as a facilitator of ecocentricity and positive life change," World Leisure  No.1 (2009): 52. 
22

 

retreat."25  In   rock  climbing, for example, fear increases not necessarily because the action is more  difficult,  but  the  surrounding  aspects  change.  A  BASE  jumper  recounts,  "The  fear  part  of  it  is  an   awful,  sickening  feeling  nobody's there  for that. Some people don't get past it, they walk away."26  What  lies  beyond  fear   is  a  desired  goal,  and  it  is  a  reasoned  decision   to  attempt  to move past it.  "[T]hose  who  do  not  feel  fear  are  a   danger  to  themselves   and  others"27  and  by   crossing  fear's  threshold,  you  are  holding  yourself  100%  responsible. And this responsibility comes with 100% of  the  reward:  the  euphoria  of  succeeding,  the  selfrealization  and  "a  personal sense of harmony."28  Additionally, confronting one fear diminishes the power of other fears.    A  second  type  of  flow  depends  upon  a  deep  connection   with  the  natural  world.  Participants  become  a  component  of  a  system,  "releasing  control  or  surrendering  to  something  greater,  and  exploring  parts  that  were  previously  outside   of  awareness."29  Nature  is  given  inherent  value,  and  human  beings  are  a  part  of  it  with  all  other  animals.30  In  past  studies,  athletes  were  believed  to  consider  nature  "[a]  resource  for  athletic  consumption"31,  and  "a  worthy  opponent   ripe for battling  and  conquering  (Celsi  et  al.,  1993  Millman,  2001  Rosenblatt,  1999)."32  However  this  anthropocentric  perspective,  partially   due  to  selfimposed  segregation  from  the  natural  world  (Stilgoe,  2001)33  is  problematic.  "To  fight  nature  is  to  fight  oneself,  to  understand  nature  is  to  understand  oneself,  to  be  in  the  natural  world  in  all  its   glory  is  to  be  in  oneself  in  all  one's  own 

25

 Eric Brymer and Robert Schweitzer, "Extreme sports are good for your health: A phenomenological  understanding of fear and anxiety in extreme sport," Journal of Health Psychology 18(4) (2012): 482.  26  Ibid, 480.   27  Ibid, 482.  28  Ibid, 483.  29  Eric Brymer, "Extreme Sports as a facilitator of ecocentricity and positive life change," World Leisure  No.1 (2009): 50.  30  Eric Brymer and Tonia Gray, "Developing an intimate `relationship' with nature through extreme sports  participation," Leisure/Loisir Vol. 34, No. 4 (November 2010): 363.   31  Ibid, 361.  32  Ibid, 363.  33  Ibid, 363. 

 

glory."34  A  whitewater  kayaker  recalls,  "You  cannot  conquer  a  river.  How  can  you   defeat  something  that  is  never  the  same   twice,  that  is  unaware  of your presence? "35 Nature is clearly in  charge  and  participants  feed  off  this  interconnectedness  by  embedding  themselves  and   reestablishing a primal connection. "Adventure sports form a  modern Tao," explains kayaker  Doug   Ammons,  "allowing  us  to  take  part  in  the  very  forces  that  sculpted  and  shaped  the  world  around  us."36    The  last  type  of  flow  is  a  playful,  jovial flow. Once fear has been harnessed and a state of calm is  achieved  within  the   surrounding  environment,  enjoyment  steps  in.  As  one  highliner  explains,  "Everything  is  clear.  Life  makes  sense.   Complete  happiness.'"37  The   activity  becomes  autotelic.  There  is  no  thought  of  failure  and  uninhibited  creativity  sets  in.  Boston Celtics player, Bill Russell  describes  this  change in a competitive environment. "When it  happened...[joy] would surround not  only  me  and  the  other  Celtics,   but  also  the  players  on  the  other  team...At  that  special  level,  all  sorts  of  odd  things  happened  in  the   white  heat  of  competition,   and  yet   somehow  I  wouldn't  feel  competitive."38    In  order  to  access  these  variants  of  flow,  there  are  established   strategies.  Controlled  breath   and  selftalk  create  a  basis  for  an  internal  rhythm,  and  alleviate  fear.  Too  much  selftalk  and   you  develop  psychosis  but "[g]aining psychological distance enables selfcontrol. The language switch  also  minimizes  rumination,  a  handmaiden  of  anxiety  and  depression,  after  we  complete  a 

 Ibid, 363.   Ibid, 367.  36  Doug Ammons, Whitewater Philosophy (Montana: Water Nymph Press, 2009).  37  Julien Desforges and Dhanae AudetBeaulieu, "Highlining California", Documentary video, 52:00,  2009,  http://highliningcalifornia.com/movie.html.  38  Susie Cranston and Scott Keller, "Increasing the `meaning quotient' of work," McKinsey Quarterly  (January 2013), accessed June 1, 2016.  http://www.mckinsey.com/businessfunctions/organization/ourinsights/increasingthemeaningquotientof work. 
34 35

 

task...[W]e  gain  perspective,  focus  deeply,  plan  for  the  future,"39  explains  psychologist  Ethan  Kross.  Pain  and  exhaustion  are  other  noted  entry  points,  popular  with  distance  runners  and  adventure  enthusiasts  as  the  mind  is   immediately  hushed.  An  unpredictable,  rich,  and  isolated   environment  can  also  set  the  groundwork.  "Big  rivers  accelerate  you  in  every  direction   at  once",  explains  Ammons.  "This  puts  the  vestibular  system  into  overdrive...[and]  suddenly  your  entire  body  is  paying  attention.  When  this  happens,  it's  outside  our  conscious  capabilities."40  The  voice  of  intuition  then  ushers  in  fluid   decisionmaking,   "giv[ing]  instructions  on  what  to  to  do  next.  Not   necessarily words or rational thinking. More of a feeling,"41 explains highliner Julien Desforges.    1.3 The full potential of flow.  Participants  in  search  of  this  optimal  state  of  consciousness  are  looking  for  two  things:  greater   spirituality  or  a  higher  level  of  performance.  Highline  can  be  viewed  as  a mixture of both pursuits  and  can  experience  the  following  consequences:  further  complexity  of  self,  dangerous  flow,  an  addiction to flow, a comfortable `being' in f  low and lastly, group f  low.    In  The  Book  of  Five  Rings,  Miyamoto  Musashi  provides  insight  with  a comparable flowlike state.  Zen,  "a  method  of  learning,  of  observing,   and  of  experiencing  what  you  do  every  day...[where]  you  must  learn  to  depend  on  yourself"42  creates  similar  deep  awareness  leading to a greater and  content  sense  of  self,  a  reduced  ego,  and  a   realization  of  potential.  Flow  too  can  develop  alterations  in  one's  personality  which  are  "permanent,  instant  and  unexpected."43  A  newfound 

 Pamela Weintraub, "The Voice of Reason,", Psychology Today (June 2015): 534.  https://www.psychologytoday.com/articles/201505/thevoicereason.  40  Steven Kotler, The Rise of Superman: Decoding the Science of Ultimate Human Performance,  (Boston: New Harvest, 2014), 106.  41  Julien Desforges (highliner/owner of Slackline Montreal) in discussion with author, October 2015.   42  Miyamoto Musashi, The Book of Five Rings, (New York: Bantam Books, 1992), xxxxi.  43  Eric Brymer, "Extreme Sports as a facilitator of ecocentricity and positive life change," World Leisure  No.1 (2009): 49. 
39

 

humility  "characterised  by  an  accurate   assessment  of  one's  characteristics,  an  ability   to  acknowledge  limitation,  and  a  forgetting  of  the  self"44  is  favoured  in  the  highline  community.  "When  you're  arrogant  and  egotistical,"  explains  writer  Steven  Kotler,  "you're  shutting  out  complexity,  novelty,  and  unpredictability  to preserve a distorted selfimage...Humility moves in the   other  direction,  it  opens  us  up  and  increases  incoming  information...more  opportunity  for  pattern  recognition,  more  dopamine,  and  less  need  for  judgemental  metacognition."45  You  are  more   aware  of  your  mortality  and  fragility,  becoming   a  more  sympathetic  individual.  "We  look  at  things   through  all  these  filters,  and  we  judge  without  even  being aware of it" writes a BASE jumper. And  then   suddenly  "[y]ou're  not   bound  by  the  constraints  of  a  physical  body  anymore...[Y]ou   can  go  places  that  other  people  can't  go."46  This  consciousness  also  ushers  in   enhanced lateral thinking  where  expanding  an  activity  is  far  more  exciting  than  an  adrenalin  rush.  Climber  Jimmy  Chin  explains,  "The  greatest  athletes  aren't  interested  in  the  greatest  risks...physical  risks  are  a  byproduct  of  a  much  deeper  desire  to  take  creative  risks."47  "If  you  consistently  use  that  state,"  reports stuntman Travis Pastrana "you get confident in your ability to do the impossible. You  begin  to expect it." 48    But  what  happens  to  selfcontrol  and   selfpreservation  if  you  continually  rely  on  your   subconscious  to  decide  "the  best  thing  to  do"? 49 Flow  walks  a  fine line between endless potential  and  possible  injury.  "You  can  feel   so  much  in  the  zone  and  so  focused  that  nothing  can  really  happen",  describes  Joseph  Huard.  "But  physically...mother  nature  can  be  stronger  than  your 

44 45

 Ibid, 48.   Steven Kotler, The Rise of Superman: Decoding the Science of Ultimate Human Performance,  (Boston: New Harvest, 2014), 108.  46  Eric Brymer and Tonia Gray, "Developing an intimate `relationship' with nature through extreme sports  participation," Leisure/Loisir Vol. 34, No. 4 (November 2010): 369.   47  Steven Kotler, The Rise of Superman: Decoding the Science of Ultimate Human Performance,  (Boston: New Harvest, 2014), 143.  48  Ibid, 17.  49  Anass Ajh (student/highliner) in discussion with author, August 2015. 

 

mental  state."50  On  the  highline,  one  can  increase  risk   by  wearing  a  swammie  belt51  and  automatically  you  can  achieve  a  higher  level  of  flow.  Pain  alerts  are  minimized  or  reprioritized,  and  participants  learn  to  "use  the  bad   to  fuel  the  good."52  Soloing53  is  the next step.  Dean Potter  acknowledged  this   choice  saying,  "I  can  sit   on  my  ass  and  meditate  for  two  hours  to  get  a  15  second  glimpse  ...[o]r  I  can  risk  my  life  and  get  there  instantly  and  it  lasts  for  hours.54  "If  I  die,  what  a  beautiful  death"  muses  Philippe  Petit  in  Man  on  a  Wire (2008). It's a  dark choice to glorify  death  but  risk  is  a  personal  choice,  discloses   Mike  Horn.  "A  lot  of  people  said...you  will  not  survive...because  it's  dark.  You'll  get  depressive.  You'll  eventually  commit  suicide.  But  what  people  forget  was  that,  that's  where  I  wanted  to  be."55  The  addictive  qualities  of  flow  are  particularly  pronounced  once  the  neurochemical  high  is  over.  Suddenly  "[a]n  enormous  gap  sits  between  the  ecstasy  of the zone and the alltoofamiliar daily toil waiting for us on the other end"56  reported Flow Genome Project executive director Jamie Wheal.    While  hooked  on  the  sensation  of  growing  potential  (along  with  the  effects  of  dopamine  and   norepinephrine),  flow  demands habitual momentum: pushing ourselves a little or a lot farther each  time.  In  2011,  ESPN  recorded  at  least  one  proathlete  death  every  3  weeks,57  and  investigative  

 Joseph Huard (student/highliner) in discussion with author, August 2015.    A swammie belt refers to a 1.5 inch webbing tied twice around your waist with a knot, with the leash  behind your back.  52  Steven Kotler, The Rise of Superman: Decoding the Science of Ultimate Human Performance,  (Boston: New Harvest, 2014), 168.  53  Soloing refers to absence of safety gear during an activity, particularly rock climbing and highline.  54  Steven Kotler, The Rise of Superman: Decoding the Science of Ultimate Human Performance,  (Boston: New Harvest, 2014), 57.  55  "Flow and Ultimate Performance," Flow Genome Project video, 2:57,  http://www.flowgenomeproject.com/learn/videos/.   56  Steven Kotler, The Rise of Superman: Decoding the Science of Ultimate Human Performance,  (Boston: New Harvest, 2014), 160.  57  Devon O'Neil, "No One Is Immune to Risk," ESPN, December 28, 2011, accessed June 1, 2016,  http://espn.go.com/action/story/_/id/7393518/actionsports2011athletesmemoriam. 
50 51

 

report,  Red  Bull's  dark  side  (2013)  chronicled  five  extreme  athlete  deaths  at  Red  Bull  events.58  Professor  Christoph  Breuer  of  the  German  Sports  University in Cologne stated, "the vicious cycle  of  always  going  farther  leads  to  a  situation where risks for the subject cannot be  reduced  rather,  the opposite."59    There  is  however,  another  option:  a  comfortable  `being'  in flow which requires more  discipline as  it  does  not  have  sudden  entry  points  or  significantly  increasing  levels  of  risk.  GIQ's  highline,  for  example  is  considered  "totally  safe"60  with  a  harness,  leash  and  backup  line.  Most  participants  have  little  to  no  desire  to   endanger  their  lives  by  soloing  as  they  "find  this  state  of  mind  everywhere".61  Potter  also  believed  in  managing  risk  saying,  "I  want  to  be  a  wizard  of  strategy,  know myself and comfortable enough to say naah, I'm not going. I want to live."62    Group  flow  is  another  essential  offshoot.  As  a  subjective  experience,  "[y]ou  cannot  really  share  this  state  of  mind  but  you  can  influence  others."63  Inspired  by  Super  Terminal  (2005)64, a team of  freeBASE  jumpers  successfully  accessed  group  flow  by  cutting  out  individual consciousness and  learning  to  predict  group  patterns.65  Working  together,  social  bonding  deepened  flow  further.66  A  common  goal  shared  through  a  common  language  made  the  experience  more  tangible  and 

 Stephanie Hoppner, "Red Bull runs into criticism over extreme sports," Deutsche Welle, November 5,  2013, accessed June 1, 2016,  http://www.dw.com/en/redbullrunsintocriticismoverextremesports/a16807269.   59  Ibid.  60  Joseph Huard (student/highliner) in discussion with author, August 2015.   61  Anass Ajh (student/highliner) in discussion with author, August 2015.  62  "Flow and Ultimate Performance," Flow Genome Project video, 2:57,  http://www.flowgenomeproject.com/learn/videos/.   63  Joseph Huard (student/highliner) in discussion with author, August 2015.   64  "Superterminal FULL movie," YouTube video, 13:36, posted by "Gladki007," February 3, 2014,  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8fsAp90otdw.  65  Steven Kotler, The Rise of Superman: Decoding the Science of Ultimate Human Performance,  (Boston: New Harvest, 2014), 62.  66  "Birdmen Fly Through Chicago for `Transformers,'" CBS News video, 5:03, June 28, 2011,  http://www.cbsnews.com/videos/birdmenflythroughchicagofortransformers/. 
58

 

created  `communitas':  "a  deep  solidarity  and togetherness that result[s] from shared transcendent  experiences."67  This  group  mentality  also  eliminates  psychological  barriers  and  increases  shared  knowledge.    1.4 Identifying motivation  The c  ulture of risk  "In  slightly  more  than  2  decades,  action  and  adventure  sports  have  ballooned  from  barely  a  blip  on  our  collective  radar  to  the  most  popular  sports  in   the  world  save  football,  soccer,  and  autoracing."68  "[N]ot  just  a  `flash  in  the  pan'  but  a  sign  of   the  times."69  We  are  reconfiguring  our  respective  definitions  of  health  and  fitness  by  normalizing  the  culture   of  risk  and  `positive'  pain.  What  is  behind  this  desire   for  physical  extremism  and  where   are  the  safeguards?  Back  in  1892,  geologist  and  climber  Albert  Heim  wrote  about  a  climbers'  high  and  NDEs70  in  Remarks  on Fatal  Falls,  describing  the  wonder  of  extreme  awareness,  spatial  distortion  and  time  dilation.  Philosopher  and  psychologist  William  James  detailed  possible  alternative  consciousness  saying,  "Our  normal  waking  consciousness,  rational  consciousness  as  we  call  it,  is  but  one  special  type...parted  from  it  by  the  flimsiest  of  screens,  there lie potential forms of consciousness entirely  different.  We  may  go  through  life  without  suspecting  their  existence  but  apply  the  requisite  stimulus,  and  at  a  touch  they  are  there  in all their completeness."71 Abraham Maslow wrote about  intrinsic  motivation  in  high level achievers in the 1940s, uncovering alternate consciousnesses via  `peak  flow'  with  events  so  `selfvalidating,  selfjustifying...[t]hey  give  meaning  to  life  itself."72  Today,  New  York  Times  writer  David  Brooks  adds,  "[P]eople  who  live  with   passion  start   out  with 

 Richard Celsi, "Transcendent Benefits of HighRisk Sport," Association for Consumer Research, 19,  (1992)1982, accessed June 1, 2016, http://www.acrwebsite.org/volumes/7366/volumes/v19/NA19.  68  Ibid, 192.  69  Eric Brymer and Robert Schweitzer, "Extreme sports are good for your health: A phenomenological  understanding of fear and anxiety in extreme sport," Journal of Health Psychology 18(4) (2012): 478.  70  NDEs refers to Near Death Experiences.  71  William James and Henry James, The Letters of William James (New York: Atlantic Monthly Press,  1920), 253.  72  Abraham Maslow, Motivation and Personality (New York: Harper & Row, 1970), 164. 
67

 

an  especially  intense  desire  to  complete   themselves.  We  are  the  only  animals  who   are  naturally  unfinished. We have to bring ourselves to fulfillment, to integration and to coherence."73    This  idea  that  human  drive  that  has  no  limitations74  explains  our  evolving cultural beliefs, and our  often  fractious  relationship  with  the  environment,  technology,  consumerism  and  selfidentity.  Sigmund  Freud  believed  civilization   is  based  upon  the  repression  of  individual  desires in order to  keep  social  order.75  Society  decides  on  appropriate  rewards  and  punishments,  and  all  other  pleasures  are  considered  fringe  and   unwarranted.  It  is  true  that   most  societal  pleasures   are  predictable  and  reflex  responses  however,  deep  flow  practices  rely  on  individual  choice  and  finding  joy  wherever  possible.  Sport  Sociologist  Howard  L.  Nixon  II  optimistically  states,   "Culture  is not a set of imposed ideas but a set of ideas and symbols available for use." 76    According  to  Sociologist  Anthony  Giddens,  we  are  now   developing  higher  risk  through  an  oversupply  of  technology,  and   doing  little  research  to  minimize  pain.  Sport  Sociologist  James  H.  Frey  charges  the  low  status  of  athletes  with   halting  safety  changes  in  sport  however,  I  believe,  alongside  Nixon  that  the  embedded  belief  system  within  the  individual  is  the  ultimate  culprit  and   only  strict  governmental  laws  will  alter  the  culture  of  risk.  Sociologist  Francesco  Duina  expands  pessimistically,  "Winning  and  losing  are  artificial  and  logically flawed concepts that put us at odds  with  the  world  around  us  and  ultimately  ourselves."77  However,  that  may  be  the  exact purpose of  

 David Brooks, "Lady Gaga and the Life of Passion," New York Times, October 23, 2015, accessed June  1, 2016, http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/23/opinion/ladygagaandthelifeofpassion.html?_r=0.  74  Steven Kotler, The Rise of Superman: Decoding the Science of Ultimate Human Performance,  (Boston: New Harvest, 2014), x.  75  Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience (New York: Harper Modern  Classics Ed., 2008), 17.  76  Howard L. Nixon II, "Accepting the Risks of Pain and Injury in Sport: Mediated Cultural Influences on  Playing Hurt," Sociology of Sport Journal 10 (1993): 155.  77  Francesco Duina, Winning : The American Obsession (New Jersey: Princeton University Press,  2013). 
73

 

activities like highline: a chance to respond to the ultimate internal challenge.       

 

2. THE SCIENCE OF FLOW:    The  missing  piece  or  counterbalance  to  the  certainty of flow  practitioners is science. Highline had  drawn  me  in  with  its  visual  certitude,  and  now  science  was  seemingly  justifying  their  convictions  with its greater knowledge of neurotransmitters and a realtime map of flow in the brain.    2.1 Neurochemicals  The  five  neurochemicals  which  contribute   to  flow  include: dopamine, norepinephrine, endorphins,  anandamide and serotonin. (Appendix 2)    2.2 Observing flow in the brain  A  visual  representation  of  flow  in  the  brain  was  first  documented  by  otologist  and  neurotologist  Charles   Limb  at  John  Hopkins,  using  the  highpowered   imaging  device,  fMRI.78  fMRI  recorded  neurological  structure  and  an efficiency exchange of energy79 in the brain to produce a footprint of  flow.  Now  Dr.  Arne  Dietrich  is  studying  the  prefrontal  cortex  (PFC)80  where  one  would  expect  hyperawareness  via  hyperactivity  however,  the  exact  opposite  is true. Temporary deactivation of  neuronal  structures  called  transient  hypofrontality  is  redistributing  energy  and  altering  our  perceptions  of  time  and  space.  Basically,  the  body  is  turning  off  higher  cognitive  functions  to   increase  the  performance  of  attention  and  awareness.81  Specifically,  the  superior  frontal  gyrus  which  is  responsible  for  our  selfawareness  along  with  the  dorsolateral  prefrontal  cortex  which  monitors  one's  actions  and  impulse  controls  (by  creating  doubt  and  hesitation)  are  temporarily 
 fMRI stands for functional magnetic resonance imaging.   The efficiency of exchange of energy refers to the stealing of energy from one area for another.  80  The hub for higher cognitive abilities and enhanced decision making.  81  Arne Dietrich, "Functional Neuroanatomy of Altered States of Consciousness: The Transient  Hypofrontality Hypothesis," Consciousness and Cognition 12 (2003): 23156, accessed June 1, 2016,  http://avierfjard.com/PDFs/Cognition/General/Functional%20neuroanatomy%20of%20altered%20states% 20of%20consciousness%20The%20transient%20hypofrontality%20hypothesis%20Cons.pdf. 
78 79

 

deactivated.  Dr.  Limb  writes,  "The  result  is  liberation.  We  act  without  hesitation.  Creativity  becomes  more  freeflowing,  risk  taking  becomes  less  frightening...[but]  the  medial  prefrontal  cortex  is  activated,  allowing  people  to  still  experience  selfexpression."82  Temporal  hypofrontality  also  alters  temporal  awareness as complex immediate data overwhelms the areas responsible for  experiencing  the  passage  of  time.  Likewise,  the   superior  parietal   lobe,  including  the  orientation  association  area  is  partially  deactivated  and  its  function  of  "judg[ing]  angles  and  distances,  map[ping]  course  trajectories,  and  keep[ing]  track  of  our  body's  exact  location"83  are  suspended,  causing   spatial  ambiguity between self and environment. These variations could  now be observed  in Limb's jazz musicians, freestyle rappers, and soccer players in realtime    If  these  findings  are true, flow can increase performance indefinitely. "With our sense of self out of  the  way  we  are  liberated  from  doubt  and  insecurity"  states  Kotler.  "With  time  gone,  there  is  no  yesterday  to  regret  or  tomorrow  to  worry  about.  And  when  our  sense  of  space disappears, so do  physical consequences."84   

 Monica LopezGonzales and Charles Limb, "Musical Creativity and the Brain," Cerebrum v.2012,  (2012), accessed June 1, 2016 (2012), http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3574774/.  83  Ibid, 56.  84  Steven Kotler, The Rise of Superman: Decoding the Science of Ultimate Human Performance,  (Boston: New Harvest, 2014), 57. 
82

 

3. PROJECT METHODOLOGY AND DISCUSSION:  3.1 Preconception stage  My  initial idea85 changed after I began my research within the weightlifting community. Few people  wanted  to  talk  about  their  experiences  with  pain  thresholds,  and preferred to discuss their mental  approach.  My  fieldwork  had  also  begun  to  feel   more  investigative   than  cerebral,  venturing  into  existing  power  dynamics   and  financial  compensation.  Therefore  I  decided  to  take  my  subjects'   lead  with  a  broader  approach  to  mental  preparedness  and  asked:  what  constitutes  the  drive  of a  high  performance  athlete  and  what  enables  her/him  to  push  beyond  their  mental  and  physical  boundaries?  The  word,  flow  began  popping  up  in  conversation  along  with  references  to  visualization  and  meditation.  Flow  described  a  state  of  mind  which  catapulted  you  into  complete  absorption,  and  a  deep,  almost  meditative  posture.  Was  flow  the  mystery  ingredient  of  recent  accelerated human performance?    I  began  my  fieldwork  by  interviewing  and   filming  triathletes,  kayakers,  yogis,  aerialists  and  rock  climbers  with  first  hand  knowledge  of  flow.  Not  everyone was aware or comfortable with the word  but  they  used  similar  descriptors.  While  filming  at  Jackalope  in  Montreal,  I  happened  upon   a  highline   demonstration  and  immediately  knew  I was witnessing quintessential flow. Suddenly flow  had  more  credence  and  a  purity  of  form.  Even  though  I  had  experienced  my own nonintentional  moments  of  flow,  similar  to  Maslow's  peak  experience,  I  continued  to  grapple  with  my  subjects'  absolute  faith  in   the  unconscious  mind.  Highline  presented  a   world   where  participants  singlehandedly  confronted  fear,  learnt  to  control  fear  and  then  arrived  in  a  place  of  tranquility.  Both  mysterious  and  riveting,  explaining  this  concept  to  an  audience  seemed  a  daunting  task  as  many  dismissed  it  as  empty  New  Age  jargon  or  simply  inaccessible.  The  occurrence  of flow also 
 Refers to examining the relationship between the growing acceptance of `positive pain' and accelerated  performance in mainstream sport. 
85

 

appeared  to  be  far  more  complex   with  its  consistently  dynamic  nature  and  therefore  the  perfect  subject matter for my first venture into moving image.    Before  commencing  fieldwork,  my  intention  was  always  to create an installation far removed from  a  typical  sports  documentary.  The  subject's  voice  accompanied  by   a  less  familiar  cinematic  lens  was  essential.  After  experiencing  Leviathan  (2012)  (Figure  8),  I  could  see  the  Gopro's  ability  to  access  unexpected  spaces  and  to   present  a   strong  physical  presence.  This  seeing  eye  had  a  body  and  could  experience  physical  trauma.  My  Hero  +3  Gopro  on  a  Feiyutech  gimbel  and  attached  to  a  monopod  provided  three  things:   an  aqueous  method  to  mirror  fluid  flow,  access  to  hard  to  reach  spaces  (which  emphasized  a  state  of  wonder),  and  the  ability   to  be  close  to  the  subject  one  second  and  far  away  the  next  (simulating an outofbody experience). Leviathan  also  inspired  me  to  keep  the  audience's  full  attention  without   the  use   of  characters,  plot,  dialogue,  or  music. These restrictions were always in the forefront of my mind during filming.    3.2 Field work  In  the  field,  I  encountered  a  variety  of  problems,  particularly  as  I  was  working  alone.  Firstly,  I  couldn't   always  keep  up  physically  with  the  athletes  who often achieved flow far into their training  session  and  at  an  accelerated  speed.  If  I  was  able  to  keep  up  with  them,  my  own  laboured  breathing  frequently compromised sound recordings. Secondly, I may not have had the necessary  technical  abilities  to  follow their skillful moves. My past rock climbing experience,  for example was  insufficient  to  achieve  the  close  tracking shots I desired even with additional repelling classes. My   third   obstacle  was  juggling  both  visuals  and  sound  as  a  one  person  team.  Initially  I  mounted  a  microphone  below  the  Gopro  on  the  monopod  (as  the   internal  Gopro  sound  was  inadequate)  however,  the  microphone  could  not  mirror  the  camera's  movements.  As  I  watched  my  footage,  I 

 

quickly  realized  that  to  capture  flow  on  screen,  I  needed  to  be  completely  fluid   with  my  own  movements.  Constant  microphone  adjustments  became  too  cumbersome  and  time  consuming,  therefore sound quickly lost its leading role.     I  often  questioned  my  decision  to  work  alone  but  never  regretted  the  choice.  It  allowed  me  to  move  more  freely,  connect  easily  with  subjects  and  remain  as   unobtrusive  as  possible.  I  also  choose  not  to  interfere  with  any  of   the  training  sessions,  and   worked  around  their schedules and  restrictions.  In  the  case of kayaking, this made for many long, cold and unproductive sessions in  a  motor boat which was not under my control.    Finding  highline  was  a  great  piece  of  luck   as  flow  on  the  line  was  easily  recognizable  and  could  exist  for  unlimited  amounts  of  time.  My  contiguous   perspective   however,  was  now  an  impossibility  due  to  the  increased  distance  from  the  subject.  At  first  this  felt  like  a  failure  and  a  telephoto  lens  was  needed  however,  I began  to see this limitation as  an advantage. A wider view  of  the  scene  accentuated  the  connection  between  the  highliner  and nature, as well as an exterior  state  of  observation.  The  inner  thoughts of the  athlete  overlapping a removed viewpoint created a  compelling tension.    Each  activity  was  filmed  handheld,  intuitively  jumping  from one person to the  next without any set  characters.  This  spontaneity  often  lead  to  video  clips  that  were  too  short  and  impatient,  but  also  captured  a  few  truly  singular  moments.  I  experimented  with  camera  movement  to accentuate  the  feeling  of  space   within  the  frame,  such  as  spins   or  mirroring  subject  movement  but  this  worked  only  a  small percentage of the time. Slow pans were most effective at enveloping the environment  while more ambiguous shots spoke to the state of mind. 

 

  On  my  last  day   of  filming  highline,  I  was  invited  on  to  the  line  to  experience  the  feeling  of  emptiness  hundreds  of  feet  up.  Unfortunately,  I  opted  out  due  to  a wrist injury and missed out  on  the  firsthand  experience.  Expanding  my  own  understanding  of  highline  would  have  been  immensely helpful to the project and I hope to reconcile this shortly.     3.3 Finding Form  After  filming  highline  in  St.  Anne's  Canyon  and  Kamouraska,  I  continued  to  film  triathlons,  rock  climbing,  kayaking,  and  kundalini  yoga.  I  hoped  to  create  multifarious  flow  travelling  through  air,  under  water  and  along  the  ground.  This  larger  vision  of  the  project  would  represent:  kundalini  yoga  as  group  flow,  triathlons  as  technologicallyaided  flow,  and  both rock  climbing and kayaking  as  flow  in  nature.  However,  flow   was  not  only  difficult  to  capture,  it  failed  to  look  as  distinct  as  I  expected.  It  was  not  always  fluid,  its   beginning  and  end  points  were  blurred,  and  it  needed  a  strong  supplementary  voice.  In  the  end,  these  activities  were  cut  from  the  film  as  additional  environments,  subjects  and  equipment  raised  too  many  questions  and distracted from the overall  concept.    How  to   use  voiceover  without  negating  the  observational  experience  was  my  next  hurdle.  I  refused  to separate my subjects from their fluid movement (via formal interviews), wanting  to keep   flow  accessible  rather  than  abstract.  Visiting Professor Jonathan Kahana recommended talking to  video artist Sarah Friedland. Friedland's immersive  4channel installation, The Rink (2012) (Figure  9)  revealed  a  roller  rink  in  Newark,  New  Jersey  where  viewers  were  submerged  into  the skaters'  world  of  circular  flow.  Friedland  echoed  my  hesitation  stating,  "a  [s]ubject  voiceover   helps  us  understand  perspective,  but  it  takes  the  viewer  out  of  a  transformative  visceral  experience.  If  we 

 

are  only  observing  visuals  and  sound  then  we  are  only  generating  our  own  perspective  on  the  characters,  blink  of  what  they   may  actually  think of themselves."86 Her solution was to use sparse  voiceover and long stretches of observational scenes. This became my starting point.    The  voice  needed  to  be  calm  with  no  clear  distinction  between  insider  or  outsider  perspectives,  and  to  supply  contrasting  observations.  I  decided to  ground the  narration with onscreen text over  top  of  an  ambiguous  image   for  the  first  two  minutes. This subtle form of selftalk which "g[ave the  state]  a  more  tangible  form"87  was  my   first  success.  The  words  were  both  intimate  and  informative,  set  a  comfortably  slow   pace  and  invited  the  audience  to  participate.  I  found  myself  drawn  to the  voicework in Terrence Malik's  films, and immediately saw the need for a tighter script  and  appropriate  reader.  Highliner  Chantal  Therrien,  who  had  spoken  so  eloquently  and  from  the  heart  was  always  the  voice  I  intended  to  use  and  continued  to  hear  in  my   head.  My  December  screening  response  to  voiceover  was  partially  successful  with  a  favourable  60/40  split,  and  it  proved  there  was  something  to  be  exploited.  There  was   room  for the voice among the immersive  visuals and an internal monologue was crucial for further understanding.     After  researching  the  installation  of  Sweetgrass  (2009)  (Figure  10),  I  began  to  consider  my  own  installation  design.   Their  rear  projection   screen   stood  in  the  middle  of   the  room  encouraging  participants  to  explore  the  space  while  watching  onscreen  movement.  I  could  expand  this  treatment  by  including  four separate  voiceover zones (around the screen) and a separate area for  an  ambientonly  experience.  The  installation  would  become  an  experiential,  exploratory  documentary. 

 Personal email between Sarah Friedland and the author.   Pamela Weintraub, "The Voice of Reason,", Psychology Today, June 2015: 534.  https://www.psychologytoday.com/articles/201505/thevoicereason. 
86 87

 

  My   next  development  came  through  Professor  Pierre   Tremblay's  suggestion  to  visit   the  retrospective  exhibit  of  EijaLiisa  Ahtila  at  the  AlbrightKnox  Gallery.  Suddenly  everything  changed.  Multiscreen  completely  fed   into  the  idea  of flow  ­ playing with time and space between  screens,  and  intensifying  the   immersive  practice.  Ahtila's  darkened  environment  with  a  directive   soundscape  was  a  powerful  device  for  a  layered  and  often  jarring  message.  Her  gallery  presentation  was  elegant  and  straightforward,  and  I  wanted  to  mirror   this  simplicity  and  the  narrative  control  of  the  spectator.  Most  of  Ahtila's  work  created  disruption  however,  I  hoped  to  create  the  opposite   effect:  a  seamless  flow  and  a  sense  of  calm.   After  observing  various  configurations,  I  believed  a  3channel  zigzag  rear  projection  would  best  serve  my  content  and  to  dismiss the use of restrictive and isolating headphones.    My   ensuing  challenge  involved  lessening  the  viewer's  fear  and  creating  a  state  of  calm.  But how   does  one  minimize anxiety and maintain intensity? "I'll never understand these adrenalin junkies ­  they  are  crazy!"  was  often  overheard  on  the  viewing  platform  at  St.  Anne's canyon and a similar  reaction  in   the  gallery  was  possible.  Would   an  internal  monologue  have  enough  of  a   calming  effect?  Tremblay  suggested  a  staging  area  with   more  familiar  examples  of  flow  before  transitioning  into  highline  while  artist  Althea  Thauberger  favoured  immediate  immersion.  In  the  end,  a transitional area was abandoned to  keep focus on the main piece, minimize form and throw  participants  straight  into  flow.  Additionally,  a  friend  suggested  requesting  observed  silence  in  the  gallery  however,  I  believed  the  level  of  awareness  (required  in  flow)  needed  to  be  freely  given.  The art must earn the participant's heightened attention.    As  I  began  sourcing  installation  material,  I  encountered  two  obstacles.  Beaver  Hall  Gallery  had 

 

weight  restrictions  on   its  ceiling  support  frame  and   a light wooden frame could possibly warp with  a  tensioned  fabric.  (An  aluminum  frame  was  considered  but  fabric  was  difficult  to  adhere.)  Secondly,  the  grey  screen  fabric  which  produced  the  best  colour  results  wa  s  restricted  to  a   120  degree  viewing   cone  while  twin  white  fabric  offered  a  superior   180  degree  viewing   cone.  This  larger  viewing  angle  was  essential  to  afford  greater  audience  movement  and  Rosco  kindly  donated the twin white fabric.     I  hired  recommended  installer  John  Verhaeven   to deal with  the synchronization of projectors, and  soon  learnt  that  his  preferred  media  player  system,  BrightSign  was  quite  costly.  My  initial  equipment  choice,  Ryerson's  Matrox  system  could  handle  a  singlesuper  wide  file  to  span  the   three  screens  however,  this  system  meant  a  reduction  from  1920x1080   to  1360x768. This lower  resolution  was  considered  for  easy  syncing  and   financial  reasons   however,  I  finally   decided  to  purchase three BrightSign media players to maintain the highest possible resolution.    Editing  for  multiscreen  came  next  and  it  did  not  feel  intuitive.  Unsure  which  should  lead  in  importance,  I  went  back  and  forth  between  visuals   and  script  while  working  inefficiently  with  renamed  digital  folders.  Exasperated,  I  took  an  old  school  approach  and  began  arranging  and  rearranging  diptychs  and  triptychs  on  a  cork  board.  I   soon  found  myself  on  familiar  ground  but  how  much  context  was  necessary  to  enter  the  world  of  flow?  Were nonflow moments necessary  to  identify  flow?  Should  the  three  screens  remain  cohesive  to  one  specific  scene,  or  should  they  be  in  conversation?  Ahtila's  The  House  (2002)  was  shot  with  multiple   cameras and a large crew,  following  detailed  storyboards  and  scripts.  I,  on  the  other  hand,  had  worked  alone  and  without  a  storyboard.  At  times  I  attempted  to  recreate  Ahtila's  three  screen  structure,  but   it  was  by  no  means seamless. 

 

  I  began  experimenting  with  editing  devices  such  as  repetition,  mirroring,   inverting,  desaturating  and  slow  motion.  However,  I  worried  that  these  attention  grabbing  techniques  could  also  be   selfdefeating  as  the  audience  needed  to  stay  connected  to  the  moment.  Another  concern  was  duration.  Three  minutes,  claimed  editor  Ian  Thompson  is  the  attention  span  of  your  average  viewer.  Flow  however,  required  greater  commitment  and  the  necessary   time  would   vary  per  viewer.  How  much  time  does  one   need  to  forget  about  time?  To  get  lost  in  the  moment?  Andre  Almeida  and  Heitor Alvelos ponder, "Duration is a tricky issue and the answer depends entirely on  the  goal  of  the  work...maybe  it's  an  experience  that  can  last  for  several  days...[and  d]oes  [it]  require  full  attention  throughout  the  whole  piece?"88  In  the  end,   I  realized  the  final  length  was  somewhat  arbitrary  and  the  ending  did  not  need  to  be  neatly  choreographed.  I  kept  the  final  dialogue open ended and included breath as an invitation for the viewer to join in the practice.    My   final  effort  at  finding  form   involved  sound.  Location  sound  proved  problematic  with  a  thunderous  waterfall  in  one  location  and  strong  winds  in  the  other.  Neither  obstacle  seemed  prohibitive  as  I  could  manipulate  and   minimize  ambient  sound  in  my  final  cut  however,  I  did  not  predict  these  problems.  My  informal  interview  style  in  field  also  captured  multiple   unwanted  sounds.  Professor  Dafydd  Hughes  was  an  excellent  resource  regarding  soundscape  treatments  and  proper  voiceover  techniques.   Glenn  Gould's  multivoice  documentary,  The  Idea  of  North  (1967),  for   example,  was  audibly   overwhelming  however,  it  presented  a  rich  wellspring  of  contrasting  ideas  and  personalities.   This  multiplicity  played  into  the  dynamic  nature  of  flow,  and  the  voices  of  doubt  and  intuition.  GIQ  experimented   with this treatment however, test screenings 

 Andre Almeida and Heitor Alvelos, "An Interactive Manifesto," Interactive Storytelling v.6432 (2010):  127,  accessed June 1, 2016,  http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2F9783642166389_16#page1. 
88

 

(of  multiple  narrators) proved too overwhelming for viewers. Instead complete silence represented  peak flow, and additional foley emphasized and forged heightened awareness.    In  conclusion,  three  separate  soundscapes  were  created  by  layering  ambient  sound,  voiceover,  foley  and  minimal  electronic  music.  The  script  brought  together  twelve  different  interviews  under  one  voice  with  ambient  sound  mirroring  the  subject's  current  intensity  and  encouraging   viewer  cognition.  Music  built  an  immediate  emotional  connection  while  fading  screens  generated  ample  breathing  space  for  additional  auditory  information  and  variances.  According  to Ihde, artists need  to recapture audio information and its patterns to achieve the effect of whole body sensation.    3.4 Considering Presentation  Could  GIQ  create  an  embodied  experience?  Could a temporary pass into a secret world  immerse  viewers  with  very  little  formal  prompting?   Shows   such  as  Villa  Villa  (1998)89  by performers De La  Guarda  involved  active  participation  by  (literally)  expanding  the performance space and engulfing  the  audience  into  its  energetic  practice.  Frank  Lloyd  Wright's  Guggenheim  with  its  circular  hallways  also  created an endless parade of art goers in a hypnotic swirl above its central hall. The  viewers  essentially  become  part   of  the  art  as  they  explore  new  and  interesting  spaces.  Csikszentmihalyi  believes  that  "a  sense  of  participation  in  determining  the  content  of  life  comes  as  close  to  what  is  usually  meant  by  happiness  as  anything  else  we  can  conceivably  imagine."90  Psychologist  Charles  Walker  agreed,  "the  more  social  an   activity,  the  higher  flow   enjoyment."91  GIQ was designed with these factors in mind. 

 Villa Villa. "Villa Villa/De La Guarda". YouTube Video, 4:18. Posted October 28, 2007.  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oFURao4K1hw.  90  Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience (New York: Harper Modern  Classics Ed., 2008), 4.  91  Steven Kotler, The Rise of Superman: Decoding the Science of Ultimate Human Performance,  (Boston: New Harvest, 2014), 132. 
89

 

4. DOCUMENTARY RELEVANCE  This  project  has  and  continues   to  be  influenced  by  a  wide  variety  of  installations  and  films.  Beginning with an interest in `positive' pain, human limitations and the messiness of life, it reached  a  place  of  tranquility  and  potential.  My  influences  can  be   divided  into  the  following  seven  categories.    4.1 Sensory ethnography and the nonlinear form: L  eviathan (2012) and Sweetgrass (2009).  The  salvage  ethnographic  work  of  Lucien  CastaingTaylor  and  Verena  Paravel  in  Leviathan  was  the  initial  inspiration  for  this  project.   Within  the  Sensory  Ethnography   Lab  (SEL)92 ,   they  create  immersive  experiences  by  enforcing  serious  limitations.  Without  plot,  music, main  characters and  a  human  hierarchy,  the  audience  is  fully  immersed  in  experiential   documentary.  By  rejecting  traditional  narrative  framework,  and   authorial  control  Leviathan  embraces  "immediacy   and  corporeal  subjectiveness",  and  "innovative   combinations  of  aesthetics  and   ethnography."   Their  creative  use  of  technology  and   deconstructive  editing  create  a  sophisticated  intimacy  full  of  complexities  left  otherwise  unseen.  CastaingTaylor   admits  to  resenting  the  coercive  nature  of  cinema  with  its  distractive  spectacle  and  scripted  solutions  which  discourage  creative  and  intellectual audience participation.    To  be  fair,  SEL's  objective  of  combining  ethnography  and  aesthetics  also  pushes  back  on  anthropological  and  scientific  study  by  refusing  a  journalistic  style  and  "decid[ing]  not  to  impart  information   in  what  felt  like  an  artificial  or  extraneous  way."94  SEL  projects:  Sweetgrass  and 
 Sensory Ethnography Lab, "Sensory Ethnography Lab", accessed December 5, 2015,  https://sel.fas.harvard.edu/.  93  "Projects and Resources," Sensory Ethnography Lab, accessed December 5, 2015,  http://sel.fas.harvard.edu/.  94  Lucien CastaingTaylor, "Lucien CastaingTaylor (in his Installation Work on "Sensory Ethnography")  "Lucien CastaingTaylor and Véréna Paravel (on Leviathan)," in AvantDoc: Intersections of Documentary  & AvantGarde Cinema, ed. Scott MacDonald (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015): 392. 
92

93

 

Foreign  Parts  (2010)  are  founded  on  a  holistic  view  of  the  world  through  long  takes,  open  interpretation,  contemplating  representation  of  place,  and  affirming   site  specific  art.  Leviathan  reveals  both  "qualities  of  rigorous  purity  ...and   a  casual  disregard  for  the  importance  of  the  image."95    The  success  of  sensory  immersion  appears  to   rest  precariously  between  maximum  sensory  tolerance  and  sensory  overload.  Oversaturation  can  create  "situated  learning  and   transfer"  (Clarke  et  al,  2007)  through  multiple  perspectives  however,  it  can  also  provide  a   confusing  message  of  estrangement  and  abstraction.   We  are  simultaneously  expanding  and  equalizing our  idea of subject, redefining authorial control, and  exhausting the senses. Immersion can "define the   point  at  which  language...doesn't  so  much  fail  as  reach  its  limit."96  It  is  a  return  to  prelinguistic,  embodied  sensory  experience97  and  lies  parallel  to  flow  itself.  Paravel  admits  that  a  clear  message  was   never  the  ambition  of  Leviathan  and  her  audience's  unease   "only  speaks  to  how  infrequently  life   today  requires  us  to  engage  this  sensually."98  The  messiness  of  the  world  is  the  message.         

95 

William Jenkins, "Introduction to the New Topographics." in Readings into Photography: Selected  Essays 19591980 (Albuquerque: University of Mexico Press, 1980): 52.  96  Chris Chang, "Rock in a Hard Place," Film Comment, January/February 2013, accessed June 1, 2016.  http://filmcomment.com/article/leviathanreviewluciencastaingtaylorverenaparavel.  97  Giovanni Fazio, "In the ethnographic realm of the senses: An interview with Verena Paravel and Lucien  CastaingTaylor," The Japan Times, August 20, 2014, accessed June 1, 2016,  http://www.japantimes.co.jp/culture/2014/08/20/films/ethnographicrealmsensesinterviewverenaparavel luciencastaingtaylor/#.VS1hKBPFts.  98  Phil Coldiron, "Blood and Thunder: Enter the Leviathan" Cinema Scope: Expanding The Frame of  International Cinema, issue 52 (2012), accessed June 1, 2016,  http://cinemascope.com/features/bloodandthunderentertheleviathan/ (accessed April 10, 2015). 

 

4.2  The  phenomenological  approach:  Leviathan,  Sweetgrass,  and  The  Diving  Bell   and  the  Butterfly (2007).  Edmund  Husserl's  words,  "erase  the  world  of  speculation  by  returning  the  subject  to  his  or  her  primordial  experience  of  the  matter"99,  is  an  excellent  starting  point  for  examining  a  stream  of  consciousness.  How   true  as  I  careened  over  the  edges  of  cliffs  and  tempted  gravity.  The  cinematic  approach  of  Leviathan  makes  you  believe  it  is  happening  to  you    to  your  eyeballs,  to  your  ears,  to  your  skin.  You  go  in  and  out  of  vastly  different  worlds  with  the greatest of ease and  with  extreme  abruptness.  You  feel  the  heaviness,  "not  only  [of]  the  labour  of  the  fishermen,"  explains  critic  Scott  MacDonald  "but  the  labour  of  the  filmmakers  themselves,  from  inside  their   experience."100  Paravel  leans  over  the  side  of  the  boat,  balancing  her  body  weight  while  trying to  capture  sensation  with  a camera plunged ten feet beneath the waves. Phenomenology is after  all,  an  objective  study  of  the  subjective,  and we can observe an explicit stream of consciousness that  returns  to  both  Lebenswelt 101  and  shared  experience.   By  accessing,  and  understanding  experience, you are not only validating but creating it.    In  Sweetgrass,  we  watch  sheep  cross  a  stream,  and  start  to  notice personalities, wondering who  is  going  to  make  it  easily  and  who  will  struggle.  We  experience  "a  deeper  and  a  different  kind  of  spectatorial  attention  to  the  work,  one  less  attuned  to  narrative  chains  of  meaning  than  to  sheer  manifestations  of being and to forms of figural expressivity that are more ambiguous and opaque."
102

  We  experience  a  disruption  of  the  hierarchy  of  senses.  When  a  bird's  damaged  wing brushes 

up  against  the  GoPro  in  Leviathan,  we  feel  its  presence  and  its  vulnerability.  We  observe  touch 
99 

Robert Sokolowski, Introduction to Phenomenology (Cambridge, University Press, 2008).  Scott MacDonald, "Review: Leviathan" Framework: The Journal of Cinema and Media, (2012),  http://www.frameworknow.com/#!reviewleviathan/cr6o (accessed April 10, 2015).  101  Translates as the lifeworld.  102  Lucien CastaingTaylor, "Lucien CastaingTaylor (in his Installation Work on "Sensory Ethnography")  "Lucien CastaingTaylor and Véréna Paravel (on Leviathan)," in AvantDoc: Intersections of Documentary  & AvantGarde Cinema, ed. Scott MacDonald (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015), 396. 
100 

 

which  leads  to  sensation.  Edits  are  not  intended  to  be  overly   reflective,  or  reworked  but raw. "[A]  sensation  that  is  more  bodily  than  cerebral...a  specific  function  of  touch  that  is  uniquely  its  own,  distinct  from  its  optical  function."103  "For  Delueze,  this  haptic  sense  can  only be achieved through  a kind of violence, a deformation of the senses."104    In  Julian   Schnabel's  The  Diving  Bell  and  The  Butterfly  (2007)  (Figure  12),  we  also  gain  a  phenomenologicalbased  experience  of  the  ultimate  "insider",  a  stroke  victim  who  is  physically  trapped  within  his  almost  completely  paralyzed  body.   Schnabel's  movie  is  based  on  the   journals  of  JeanDominique  Bauby,  powerful  soundscape  and  a  first  person  POV  to  share  this  immersive  experience of lockedin syndrome.    4.3 The power of beauty and surrealism: Elaine Scarry and Richard Mosse.    "Th[e]  willingness  continually  to  revise  one's  own  location  in  order  to   place  oneself  in  the  path  of  beauty  is  the  basic  impulse  underlying  education.  One  submits  oneself...to  increase  the  chance  that  one  will  be  looking  in  the  right  direction  when  a  comet  makes  its  sweep  through  a  certain  patch of sky."105    No  matter  how  you  define  beauty,  theorist  Elaine  Scarry  believes  that  beauty  has  the  ability  to  stop  you  in  your  tracks  and  change  your  behaviour.  It  is  arresting,  magnetic,  and  most  importantly, can lead to behavioural change.106   

103 

Leo Goldsmith, "The Violence of Sensation" Reverse Shot: Museum of the Moving Image, (February  2013), http://reverseshot.org/reviews/entry/1682/leviathan (accessed April 10, 2015).  104  Ibid.  105     Elaine Scarry, On Beauty and Being Just (New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1999).   106   Ibid. 

 

The  surreal  landscapes  of  artist  Richard  Mosse's  The  Enclave  (2013)  (Figure  11),  with  its  rolling  hills  of  vivid  pinks  and  lavenders107  mesmerize  viewers  who absorb a living hallucination. "Beauty  is  a  main   line  to   make  people  feel  something.  It's  the  sharpest  tool  in  the  box",108  claims   Mosse  who  draws  attention  to  the  war  torn  landscape  and  absent  media  coverage  in  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo.  His  movingimages  are  projected   on  six  double  sided  screens  in   a  darkened  gallery  with  12   point  surround  sound  showing  people  fleeing,  a  house being moved by hand, the  militia  preparing,  and  a  child  being  buried.  "It's  really   about  using  the  potential  of  contemporary  art,  the  faculty  of  the   sublime"109  to  grab  attention  and  challenge  viewers   perception  of  seeing.  Scarry  offers  great  legitimacy  for  aestheticizing  the  victim's  situation  stating,  "[b]eauty  makes  us  eligible not only to look at the things that seize our  attention, but makes us eligible to go on and be  caring  about  other  objects  as  well."110  According  to   Plato,  there  is  a  clear  connection  between  beauty, truth and justice with beauty being our visual call to create something better.111    4.4 The use of multiimage: EijaLiisa Ahtila  The  work  of  visual  artist EijaLiisa Ahtila provides vast possibility for documentary installation. Her  multiscreen  configurations  place  the  viewer  in  the  center  of  the  action  and   offer  a  deeply  personal,  immersive  experience.  Adjusting  one's  standing  or  seated  position,  the  viewer  controls  the narrative by carefully and chaotically piecing together information to create their  own stream of  consciousness.  An  emotional  osmosis  rather  than  a  didactic  experience.  At  first,  this  encounter 

 The vivid pinks and lavenders are created by the discontinued Kodak Aerochrome III Infrared Film  1443. An infraredsensitive, falsecolour reversal film featuring medium resolving power and fine grain,  rendering chlorophyll a bright pink or lavender colour, used for vegetation surveys, camouflage detection  and earth resources.  108   Frieze., "Richard Mosse: The Impossible Image", Vimeo video, 7:21 min Accessed [2013]  https://vimeo.com/67115692.  109  Ibid.  110  David Bowman, "Does Beauty really equal truth?" Salon Media Group, November 9, 1999,  http://www.salon.com/1999/11/09/scarry/.  111  Elaine Scarry, "Elaine Scarry: Beauty and Social Justice," YouTube video, 55:50, posted by "The  Univeristy of Cambridge", May 21, 2010, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GhlOwhlxSEw. 
107

 

may  appear  too  unsettling  for   effective  understanding  of  the  heavily  scripted  work  however,  it  is  both   a new language to learn and Ahtila's intention. In Where is Where? (2008) 112 (Figure 13), she  intentionally  disrupts  the  viewer's  sense  of  perception  and  logical  narrative  with  four  surrounding  screens,  making  it  impossible  to  attain  all  pertinent  information.   The  messiness  of  the  world  with  endless interpretations is her point.    Ahtlia  also  plays  across  different  time  periods, interjecting a realistic human drama in present day  with  archival  newsreels,1956  crime scenes and surreal war reenactments. Characters freely roam  in  and  out  of  each  other's  environments  and  time  periods.  Mixtures  of  fragmented  `truths'  and  fiction  remove  the   role  of  the privileged viewer. "It denies a certain perspective" explains Ahtila. "It  denies  a  certain  order  to  knowledge,  It  denies  that  there  is  one  certain  truth  to  history  and  it  emphasizes  the  fact  that  we  really  have  to  choose."113 Ahtila  describes this approach as breaking  a  story  across  a  space  where  time  and  space  are  significant  characters.  The  two  tenets  of  flow:  time  dilation,  and  the  loss  of  selfconsciousness  in   a  space  are  therefore  perfectly  rooted  in  the  multiscreen form.    Ahtila's  refusal  to  present  a  privileged  perspective  also reflects Trinh T. Minhha's Reassemblage  (1982).  Minhha's  film  rejects  the  premise  of  speaking  about  or  for  another  group  and  advocates  for  the  practice  of  speaking  nearby.  "The  best  we  can  do  is  to  standby,"  explains  Ahtila  "stand  next  to,  coexist  and  communicate  from   being  there  with  our  own  context,  our  own  background,  our  own  language,  our  own   means  of expressing...We should accept our limitations. We all live in 

 Based on true events in Algeria in 1956, two Algerian boys murder their young French playmate  following a French massacre of 40 Algerian men in Meftah.  113  Moderna Museet. "EijaLiisa Ahtila Moderna Museet 2012." Filmed [2012]. YouTube video, 14:55 min,  Posted [February 2012] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bg9IEa9uNGU. 
112

 

different worlds that exist simultaneously."114    4.5 The use of soundscape and voice over: Ben Frost, Ernst Karel, and Terrence Malick.  Music  is  a  particularly  hard  avenue  to   overlook  when  you  have  only  moments   to  engage  the  viewer.  It  can  take  you   anywhere,  awaken  old  memories,  make  emotional  connections,  or  add  richness  to  a  scene  in  a  most  authentic  and  unconscious  manner.   Walter  Murch  describes  our   first  experience  with  sound  saying, "[W]e luxuriate in a continuous bath of sounds: the song of our  mother's  voice,  the  wash  of  breathing,  the  piping  of  her  intestines,  the  timpani  of  her  heart."115  SEL  however,  labels  music  a  crutch,  an  easy  manipulation  of   human  connection  to  melodic  sound  and  association  with  emotions  and  memories.  But  it  works.  The  partnership  between  composer  Ben  Frost and Mosse in The Enclave for example is particularly successful in lifting the  veil  of  invisibility  (of  war)  with  its  minimal  electronic  sounds  across  an  unearthly  landscape.  Wild  sound,  vocal  performances and dialogue work together to pinpoint the crisis. Director of The River  Where  We  Live  (2010),  Sylvain  L'Esperance  believes,  "Sound  is  a  real  language  that  should  be  developed.  Each  film  must  find  it's  own".116  No  longer   used  for  recognition  alone,  sound provides  transformative sensory input which can produce a robust sense of being.    Professors  Selmin  Klara  and  Alanna  Thain  refer  to  Leviathan's  soundscape  by  Ernst Karel as an  immersive  sound  bath  where  many  events  are  occurring  simultaneously  and  each  has  its  own  rightful  place.  Writer  Trevor  Johnston compares the sonic tapestry to a "visceral `body genres' like  horror,  heavily  depend[ent]  on   the  power  of  sound  to  emphasise  the  embodied  nature  of 

 Moderna Museet. "EijaLiisa Ahtila Moderna Museet 2012." Filmed [2012]. YouTube video, 14:55 min,  Posted [February 2012] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bg9IEa9uNGU.  115  Walter Murch, "Stretching Sound to Help the Mind to See," FilmSound.org, accessed June 1, 2016,  http://filmsound.org/murch/stretching.htm.  116  "Capturing Reality: The Art of Documentary," YouTube video, 1:36:55, posted by "Schweppes Smash  7," (2008), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OE7ZtJXG0kU. 
114

 

perception...[while  striving]  to  access  the  deepest,   darkest  truths  about  man  and  his  environments."117  GIQ  finally  found  its  own  language  with  complete  silence,  highline  equipment  foley,  and  the  visceral  sounds  of  the  Gopro  making  contact  with  the  highliner's  body.  Now  flow  has discernibility.    Skillful  voiceover  can  also  provide  additional  dimensionality and perspective. Mainstream fictions:  Taxi  Driver  (1976)  Clockwork  Orange  (1971),  Fear  and  Loathing  in  Las  Vegas  (1998)  and  Fight  Club  (1999)  take  us  directly into the minds of their characters, presenting an alternative world that  never  existed  on  a   purely  observational  level.  Writer  Ally   Sinyard explains, "Some writers will use  voiceover  to  add  a  bit  of  reality  to  a  situation  that  seems  fantastical...  [or]  to  create  ironic  tension...[or]  lull  the  viewer  into  a   false  sense of security."118 The  only danger is in knowing which  verbal  information  is  better  off  left  unsaid.  Director  Barry  Stevens  of The Bomber's Dream (2006)  counters,  "It  can  be  an   invocation   to  a  dream...a  voice  in  your  ear." 119  A  way  to  emphasize  a  subtle world with little more precision.    The  calm,  opulent  voices  found  in  Terrence  Malick's  films:  The  Thin  Red  Line  (1998)  and  The  Tree  of  Life  (2011)  appear  to  retain  the  most  helpful  elements.  A   serene,  intimate  voice elevates   emotion  while  balancing  a  little   detachment  and   complete  tenacity.  Actress  Jessica  Chastian  describes  her  character's  voice  as  slow,  deliberate  and  emotionally  open,  referencing  the pacing  and  timbre  of  Lauren  Bacall's   speaking  style.  There is a crucial combination of authenticity, purity 

 Trevor Johnston, "Sonic Ethnographies," in Music and Sound in Documentary Film,  ed. Holly Rogers  (England: Routledge, 2015), 183.   118  Ally Sinyard, "Top 10 VoiceOvers in Film," The Script Lab, accessed December 13, 2015,  http://thescriptlab.com/features/thelists/1014top10voiceoversinfilm.  119  "Capturing Reality: The Art of Documentary," YouTube video, 1:36:55, posted by "Schweppes Smash  7," (2008), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OE7ZtJXG0kU. 
117

 

and  distance.  Nevertheless,  Malick  does  not  believe  in  tight,  natural  storytelling120  and  uses  dialogue sparingly to keep us within the moment.    Sensory  documentary  is  a  construct  we  need  to  exploit  and  balance  with  our  intuitive  love  of  traditional  storytelling.  By  permitting  the   audio  to  lead  the  visuals,   and  by  "build[ing]  bridges  between  the  external  world  and  the  internal  one"121  we  can   form  tighter  bonds   with  our  subject  matter.     4.6  The  active  participant  in  the  gallery  space:  The  Rink  (2012),  Very  Nervous  System  (19821992), Force of Nature (2015), R  ain Room (2012) and T  ransfinite (2011).    "The  space  of  viewing  is also a place of time, both  the artwork's  temporality and of the spectator's  time  as  an  experience  of  duration  and  change  which  engages  her  in  a  work  of   memory...The  spectator is both a subject of imagination and an embodied subject."122    For  filmmaker  Sarah  Friedland,  this  possibility  exists.  By  surrounding  the   viewer  in  a  cube  of  screens  in  The  Rink,  Friedland  envelopes  her  audience  in  the  ongoing  movement of a roller rink  for  20  minutes.  Friedland  provokes  the  viewer  to  flow  and  move  with  the  skaters  ­  `twisting  and  turning'  while  simultaneously  experiencing   the  role  of   the  nonintegrated  bystander.  This  unique,  positional  duality  and  physical engagement reinforces  the importance of sound in directing a  gaze  and tests the sensory limits of an individual.    David Rokeby's Very Nervous System (VNS) (Figure 14) provides another example of viewer 

 DR/30: The Oral History of Hollywood. "DP/30: The Tree of Life, actor Jessica Chastain", Youtube  video [2011] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x93br2iu2Tg.  121  Andy Glynne. "Drawn From Life: The Animated Documentary." Brian Winston (ed.) The Documentary  Film Book. (London: Polgrave MacMillan, 2013): 74.  122  Elizabeth Cowie, "On documentary sounds and images in the gallery," Screen 50:1, (Spring 2009): 125. 
120

 

participation  however,  it  requires  active participation for functionality. VNS is an interactive sound  installation  where  body  movements  create  sound  and  selfcomposed  music  by  using  computer  image  processors.  VNS  creates  a  direct  and  visceral  relationship  between  body,  sound,  space  and  technology  with  an  interface  that  "is  invisible  and  very  diffuse,  occupying  a  large  volume  of  space,  whereas  most  interfaces  are  focused  and  definite.  Though  diffuse,  th[is]  interface  is  vital  and  strongly  textured  through  time  and  space."123  Essential interaction with direct feedback was a  component  GIQ  initially  hoped  to  incorporate.  Perhaps  a  change  in  film  tint  or  accelerated  film  speed  with  an  increasing  amount  of  viewer  movement.)  However,  initial  tests  proved  too  distracting.    Force  of  Nature,124  (Figure  15)  created  by  Londonbased  Studio  Field  for  Nike  Immersive Art  is a  sensorial  experience  which  amplifies  the  sensation  of  a  runner's  high  with  immediate  and  immersive  visual  effects.  The  effect  is  called  Kinect  interaction  and  it  takes  runners  on  a  visual  journey  of  onscreen  colour  and  particle  explosions.  This  effect,  controlled  by  the  participant's  output on the treadmill beautifully mirrors the immediate feedback of f  low.    Lastly,  Rain  Room  (Figure  16)  by  rAndom  International and Transfinite  (Figure 17) by Ryoji Ikeda  provide spectacular feedback  on an even  larger scale. Rain Room offers  an unworldly experience  as  viewers  stand  inside  a  continual  rainfall  but  never  get  wet.  Motion  sensors  monitor  the  participant's  location  and  prevent  rain  from  falling  directly   upon  them.  Transfinite,  a  moving  illustration  on  54x40'  cyc  displays  projected  and  synchronized  data  in  infinite  motion  makes  you  stop  and  consider  your  small  presence  within  a  world  of  endless  information.   GIQ  falls  closer   to 

 David Rokeby, "Works: Very Nervous System 19861990," David Rokeby, Accessed December 13,  2015, http://www.davidrokeby.com/vns.html.  124  Nike. Accessed December 13, 2015. http://www.field.io/project/nikeforceofnature/. 
123

 

the  effect  of  Transfinite  as  the  viewer  is  left  to  consider  the  experience  rather  than  alter  the  qualities of the installation itself.    4.7  Awakening  the  image  with  postproduction  devices:  Simulacra  (2015),  An  Afternoon  Unregistered on the Richter Scale (2011), and B  ones of the Forest (1995).  The  following  contrasting and expanding treatments "shake us out of our dogmatic and perceptual  slumbers,"125  and bring us into the dynamic present.    An  Afternoon  Unregistered  on  the  Richter  Scale  (Figure  18)  by  Raqs  Media  Collective  illustrates  the  dynamic  relationship  that  can  exist  between   still and moving imagery, time and space. A slow  moving  ceiling  fan  and  the  gradual  appearance  of   a  constellation  of  stars  awaken  an  archival  photograph  with  the  use  of  After  Effects.  Luring  the  viewer  into  another  world,  the   1911  image  entitled,  "Examination  Room  of  the  Duffin  Section  of  the  Photographic  Department  of  the  Survey  of  India"  playfully  and  significantly  create  "a  meditation  on  the  condensation  of   time  in  the  photographic  image  as  well  as  a  gentle,  whimsical   disturbance  in  the  serious  enterprise   of  recording  and  commemorating  the  imposition  of  order  on  a  fractious  landscape."126  Raqs  Media  Collective  pokes  fun  at  the  rigid  definition  of  documentary  and  finds  an  opportunity  to  awaken  important research on India's continually consequential colonial past.   

 Lucien CastaingTaylor, "Lucien CastaingTaylor (in his Installation Work on "Sensory Ethnography")  "Lucien CastaingTaylor and Véréna Paravel (on Leviathan)," in AvantDoc: Intersections of Documentary  & AvantGarde Cinema, ed. Scott MacDonald (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015), 405.  126  Monica Narula. "An Afternoon Unregistered on the Richter Scale, 2011" Filmed [2012]. Vimeo video,  3:33 min, Posted [2012] https://vimeo.com/84205912. 
125

 

Another  After  Effect's  creation,   Simulacra127  (Figure 19) presents  `cubism in motion' and we again  entered  the  hallucinogenic  zone.  Created  by  director  Mustard Cuffins,128 this hypnotic aerial video  combines  moving  landscape  with  objects  of   curiosity  and  endless  reflection.  Pushing  and  multiplying  the  finite  representation  toward  the  fantastic, Simulacra reinvents a still image within a  moving document and then allows it to transform again into screen in screen motion to enthrall the  viewer. This wonderment garners continual attention and a wider audience.    Lastly,  filmmaker  Velcrow  Ripper  describes  his  film,  Bones  of  the  Forest  and  his  postproduction  devices.  "We  want[ed]  to  go  beyond  the  standard  palette  of nature shots, to show you the time of  the  forest,  it's  own  pace.  Timelapse  photography.  It's  not  eye  candy...It's  really  about  trying  to  breakthrough  patterned  thinking  and  allow  us  a  fresh  perspective on something."129 Inspired, GIQ  attempted a similar unsettling of image  by using visual  repetition, twosided screens, slow and fast  motion, and synced and unsynced mirroring to strong effect.     

 Mustard Cuffins. "Simulacra" Filmed [2015]. Vimeo video, 3:56 min, Posted [2015]  https://vimeo.com/123006429.  128  "Art, Motion, Branding + Visual Innovation," accessed June 1, 2016, http://www.theotagholm.com/.  129  "Capturing Reality: The Art of Documentary," YouTube video, 1:36:55, posted by "Schweppes Smash  7," (2008), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OE7ZtJXG0kU. 
127

 

5. PROJECT ANALYSIS AND ASSESSMENT  5.1  Judging  the  efficacy  of  the  installation  to  create  presence  through  an  embodied  experience  After  a  five  day   run,  it  was  clear  that  multiscreen  had  a  strong   emotional effect on the audience.  Not  only  did  it  provide  a  surprising  visual  delight,  floating  in  a  minimally  dressed  gallery,  but  it  assisted  participants'  understanding  of  flow.  "[It]  took  me  on  my  own  expansive  journey"130  wrote  one  participant  and   highliner  Martin  Hamm  recorded,  "[I]n  Kamouraska,  I experienced... an outer  body  experience...I  can feel it again when watching this documentary."131 "[It] brought out all of my  fears  and  then  some!"132  wrote  one  viewer  while  another  cited  "a  sort   of dreamlike buoyancy."133  "If  I  close  my  eyes,  listen  to  your  sounds,  experience  your  images.  I  can  smell  nature.  Body  and  soul  are  in  perfect  harmony  with  your  universe  and  the  story  you  narrate  is   a  feast  for   the  senses...  I  travelled  out  of  myself  into  this   powerful  and  yet  delicate  world  of  light." 134 Many  felt  they could not have experienced it on a single screen and a meditative state was achieved.    5.2  Judging  the  efficacy  of  the  installation  to  create  an  active  audience  and  flow  within  a  confined space  Incorporating  gallery  seating  was  a  crutch  similar  to  the  musical  soundtrack of the film. It was not  necessary,  but  it  helped  bridge  the  gap  between  a  sometimes  casual  interest  and  a  complete  immersion.  Most  people  found  a  comfortable  spot,  and  remained  seated  on  the bench, the chair,  the  floor,  or  leaning  against   a wall. Viewers more  familiar with multimedia  art explored the space,  moving  freely  around  the  screens.  There  was  a  playfulness  in  their  movement,  but  always 

 Anonymous, June 9, 2016, comment on Frances Juriansz, "Gravity is Quiet", June 6, 2016.   Martin Hamm, June 6, 2016, comment on Frances Juriansz, "Gravity is Quiet", June 6, 2016.  132  Lori Bollinger, June 10, 2016, comment on Frances Juriansz, "Gravity is Quiet", June 6, 2016.  133  Jordan Kawai, June 11, 2016, comment on Frances Juriansz, "Gravity is Quiet", June 6, 2016.  134  Eduardo Jansen, June 9, 2016, comment on Frances Juriansz, "Gravity is Quiet", June 6, 2016. 
130 131

 

introverted  and  reverent.  Rarely  did  anyone   approach  the  screens  closer  than  three  feet,  preferring  to  view  a panoramic over details. Stillness was the preferred state, and surprisingly, the  majority of  viewers chose to  watch the loop multiple times,  sinking into their chosen  perspective.  A  retired  naturopath  wrote,  it  was  "asking  to  connect  deeply  with  self,  with  other  and  becoming  the  observer,  the  experience,  the  witness  observing  changing.  For  me flow is beautiful, profound, the  sweet spot of existence  heaven and earth entwined."135    I  urged  many  to  wait  for the beginning of the film for a greater chance of immersion however, this  was  unnecessary  for  those  who  remained  for  multiple  viewings.  Their  engagement  required  silence  with  most  people  respecting  the  spontaneously  observed  silence,  and  then  moving  outside  the  gallery  to  talk.  Viewer  movement  may  have  occurred  occasionally   however,  GIQ  worked  well  as  a  social  interaction.  Spontaneous  group  silence  increased  the  overall  intensity,  and each person had to heighten their own awareness to block out unwanted noise.    Most  people related to the piece through their own experiences of flow: driving, swimming, writing,  playing  competitive  sport,  saying  prayers,   sculpting  etcetera.  I  was   most  excited  by  the  nonphysical  comparisons  such  as  the report:  "I feel `flow' when I am thinking about a  new idea or  concept  to  study  or write about."136 Or "[t]hat feeling when your creative urges are fulfilled in a flow  of ideas that you can't work fast enough to materialize as they come to you."137  The  installation   did  not  include  anything  concretely  tactile,  but  several  found  their  own  tangible  comparison.  "Flow  is  experienced  by  me  when  I'm   underwater,  hearing  nothing  and  yet 

 Virginia Martin, June 10, 2016, comment on Frances Juriansz, "Gravity is Quiet", June 6, 2016.   Diana Humphrey, June 10, comment on Frances Juriansz, "Gravity is Quiet", June 6, 2016.  137  Anonymous, June 10, comment on Frances Juriansz, "Gravity is Quiet", June 6, 2016. 
135 136

 

everything.  Feeling  the  water,  touching  every  surface  of  my  body."138  Inclusion  of  water  in  the   piece was highly successful with the report, "I feel the current pulling me and my mind switches off  and I let the `flow' of water pull me."139    6. CONCLUDING REMARKS:  Describing  gravity  as  quiet,  refers  to our inability to control the sheer power of nature yet finding a  viable  opportunity  to  quiet  the  forces  acting  upon  us.  Quiet  our  doubts  and  insecurities  by  accepting ourselves and our surroundings, and to move through sensation with grace.    GIQ  is  meant  to  encourage  open  ended  interpretations  of  a  `livedin'  moment  as  it  unravels  realtime  potential  on  screen.  There  is  no  particular  end  or  defining  statement.  Stealing  from  the  mission  statement  of  the  SEL,  I  hope  to  "[harness]  perspectives  drawn  from  the  arts,  the  social  and  natural  sciences,  and  the  humanities,  [and  encourage]  attention  to  the  many  dimensions  of  the  world,  both  animate  and  inanimate,  that  may  only  with  difficulty,  if  at  all,  be  rendered  with  propositional prose."140    The  goal  of  GIQ  is  to  create  an  immersive  documentary  in  a  space  that   is  both  surprising  and  illuminating  to   the  audience.  It  might  encourage  participants  to  move,  to  be  still,  to  follow,  to  ignore,  to  listen,  to   recognize  patterns,  and  to  let  go.  Either  an  individual  experience  or  a  social  experiment,  the  audience  must  decide.  By  definition,  GIQ  is  not  an interactive documentary (as it  offers  no  computer  interface)  however,  it  attempts  to  steal  many  attributes   of  interactive  

 Rob Radinov, June 11, comment on Frances Juriansz, "Gravity is Quiet", June 6, 2016.    Shivanya Mulekar, June 8, comment on Frances Juriansz, "Gravity is Quiet", June 6, 2016.   140  Sensory Ethnography Lab, "Projects and Resources" http://sel.fas.harvard.edu/ (accessed June 15,  2016). 
138 139

 

documentary  manifesto.141  These  include:  nontraditional  linear  structure,  an  unexpected  visual  space,  strong  audio  cues  for  a  wider  spatial  experience,  simplicity,  continuity  before  interaction  and  most  importantly, using a medium that inherently suits the material. Specifically, "[t]he relation  between format and subject needs to be resilient."142    As  a  final  piece,  I  feel  that  GIQ  achieves  an  intimate,  and  intense   connection  with  the  audience.  There  is  enough  freedom  built  into  the  experience,  balanced  with  my  own  intent  to  narrow  awareness  at  particular  moments.  "[I  became]  more  a   designer  of  a  pattern  of  trails  through  a  landscape of images, [and] less the tour bus driver."143    In  the future, I hope to present this installation in a  variety of venues where selfimposed silence is  possible  and to widen the audience. An outdoor venue such as Brickworks  or the Leslie Spit could   underscore  the  significance  of   nature  and   infinite  possibilities.  The  Hearn  Generating  Station  or  Pearson  International  Airport  would  also make interesting "containers" for  nonlinear format and its  nomadic, and accidental viewers.      "The  Gravity  in  this  film  may  be   for  you  a  health  problem,  a   work  situation,  a  relationship  gone  sour.  Step  on  the  rope  of  life.  Swing  in  the  face  of  whatever  is  deep  in  the  gulch,  test  your  feet,  stand up, maybe fall but get up again."144      words: 11,510 
 Andre Almeida and Heitor Alvelos, "An Interactive Manifesto," Interactive Storytelling v.6432 (2010):  125,  accessed June 1, 2016,  http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2F9783642166389_16#page1.  142  Ibid.  143  Ibid.   144  Gerry Okimi, June 9, comment on Frances Juriansz, "Gravity is Quiet", June 6, 2016.  
141

 

FIGURES:  Figure 1.  3D rendering of installation of G  ravity is quiet (2016) 

    Figure 2.  Title wall of Gravity is quiet   

   

 

Figure 3.  Artist's Statement for Gravity is quiet 

    Figure 4. Gravity is quiet 

 

 

Figure 5. Gravity is quiet 

    Figure 6. Gravity is quiet 

 

 

Figure 7. Gravity is quiet 

    Figure 8.  Leviathan (2012) 

 

 

Figure 9.  The Rink (2012) 

    Figure 10. Sweetgrass (2009) 

 

 

Figure 11. The Enclave (2013) 

  Figure 12. The Diving Bell and The Butterfly (2007) 

 

 

Figure 13. Where is Where? (2008) 

    Figure 14. Very Nervous System (19821992) 

 

 

Figure 15.  Force of Nature (2015) 

    Figure 16.  Rain Room (2012) 

 

 

Figure 17.  Transfinite (2011) 

    Figure 18.   An Afternoon Unregistered on the Richter Scale (2011) 

   

 

Figure 19.  Simulacra (2015) 

           

 

APPENDICES:  APPENDIX 1:  DESCRIPTION OF INSTALLATION:  Gravity is quiet (GIQ) is a 3channel  video installation, engaging a sensory ethnographic approach   through  a  fragile  mergence  of  distant  spectacle  and  first  person  pointofview.  The  nonlinear  sixteenminute  loop  is  supported  by  a  combination  of  voiceover  and  directive  soundscape  within  an  intimate,  darkened  gallery  space.  The  translucent  rear  projection  screens  each  measuring  approximately  3.4'  high  x  5.3'   wide  are hung from the ceiling in a zigzag formation in the  center of  the  room.  (Figure  1)  Viewers  are  permitted  to  walk  around  the  screens,  encouraging  a  more  immersive  participatory  experience.  Minimal  surroundings  are  intended  to  make  the  viewer  simultaneously  aware  of  movements  on  and  between  screens,  and  clearly  aware  of  their  own  movements within the space. Limited seating is provided.    The  title  is  printed  on  one  wall alongside four intersecting lines (Figure 2) which represent various  tensioned  highlines,  and  a  short  artist's  statement  is  posted  to  the  right.  (Figure  3)  The  multiscreen  visuals  begin  with   introductory  text  across  the  three  screens,  gradually   introducing  the  audience  to  an  expansive  view.  The  film  begins  at  a  slow,  deliberate  pace  with  a  mixture  of  voiceover,  ambient  sound and minimal electronic  music as one screen fades slowly into black and  another comes to life. (Figures 47).         

 

APPENDIX 2:  NEUROCHEMICALS:  1)  Dopamine  arises  when  we take risks  or encounter something new  immediately increasing our  attention by "reduc[ing] noise in neural networks"145 and enabling chunking.146  2)  Norepinephrine  keeps  us  focused  and  collecting  more  appropriate data. It triggers a release of  glucose   which  increases  heart  rate  and  respiration.  Eventually,  norepinephrine  will be overrun by  a  release  of  nitric  oxide  (which  triggers  the  release  of  dopamine  and  endorphins)   which  means  "the  blood  vessels  [will]  dilate,  the  heart  rate  [will]  decrease,  the  stress  response  [will]  fade,  and  inner tranquility [will] take over." 147  3) Endorphins block our pain receptors, increasing pleasure.  4)  Anandamide  increases  lateral  thinking,  social  bonding  for  effective  problemsolving  and  reduces fear.  5) Serotonin elevates mood.       

 Steven Kotler, The Rise of Superman: Decoding the Science of Ultimate Human Performance,  (Boston: New Harvest, 2014), 64.  146  Chunking refers to strengthening one's pattern recognition by making other factors less important.  147  Steven Kotler, The Rise of Superman: Decoding the Science of Ultimate Human Performance,  (Boston: New Harvest, 2014), 712. 
145

 

BIBLIOGRAPHY:    Ammons, Doug. Whitewater Philosophy. Montana: Water Nymph Press, 2009.  Beck, Ulrich. Risk society: Towards a new modernity. London: Sage, 1992.  Blackshaw, Tony and Tim Crabbe. New Perspectives on Sport and `Deviance': Consumption,  Performativity and Social Control. London and New York: Routledge, 2004.  Bridel, William Francis. `"Finish... Whatever it Takes" Considering Pain and Pleasure in the  Ironman Triathlon: A SocioCultural Analysis", dissertation, Queen's University, 2010.  Brohm, J.  Sport: A prison of measured time. London: Ink Links Ltd, 1978.  Brooks, David. "Lady Gaga and the Life of Passion." N  ew York Times, October 23, 2015.  Accessed June 1, 2016.  http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/23/opinion/ladygagaandthelifeofpassion.html?_r=0.   Brymer, Eric. "Extreme Sports as a facilitator of ecocentricity and positive life changes." World  Leisure 1 (2009): 4753.  Brymer, Eric and Robert Schweitzer. "Extreme sports are good for your health: A  Phenomenological understanding of fear and anxiety in extreme sport." J  ournal of Health  Psychology 18 (4) (2012).  Brymer, Eric and Tonia Gray. "Developing an intimate `relationship' with nature through extreme  sports participation", Leisure/Loisir  34, 2010. 361374.  CastaingTaylor, Lucien. "Lucien CastaingTaylor (in his Installation Work on "Sensory  Ethnography") "Lucien CastaingTaylor and Véréna Paravel (on Leviathan)." In A  vantDoc:  Intersections of Documentary & AvantGarde Cinema, edited by Scott MacDonald. Oxford:  Oxford University Press, 2015. 

 

Coakley, Sarah. "Introduction." In Pain and Its Transformations: The Interface of Biology and  Culture, edited by Sarah Coakley and Kay K. Shelemay. Boston: Harvard University Press,  2007.  Coffey, Maria. Explorers of the Infinite: The Secret Spiritual Lives of Extreme Athletes  and What  They Reveal About Near Death Experiences, Psychic Communication, and Touching the  Beyond. New York: Tarcher, 2008.  CohenGewerc, E. and Stebbins, R. S  erious Leisure and Individuality. Kingston, Ontario:  McGillQueen's University Press, 2013.  Cowart, Jack and Juan Hamilton. Georgia O'Keeffe: Art and Letters. New York: New York Graphic  Society, 1990.  Cranston, Susie and Scott Keller. "Increasing the `meaning quotient' of work." M  cKinsey Quarterly  (January 2013), accessed June 1, 2016.  http://www.mckinsey.com/businessfunctions/organization/ourinsights/increasingthemeaning quotientofwork.  Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly. Creativity: Flow and the Psychology of Discovery and Invention. New  York: Harper Perennial, 1996.  Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly. Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience. New York: Harper  Perennial Modern Classics Ed., 2008.  Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly.  "Flow, the secret of happiness," T  edTalks video, 18:55. February 2004,  https://www.ted.com/talks/mihaly_csikszentmihalyi_on_flow?language=en.   Desforges, Julien and Dhanae AudetBeaulieu. "Highlining California." Documentary video,  52:00.  2009. http://highliningcalifornia.com/movie.html.     Duina, F. Winning: Reflections on an American Obsession. Princeton, New Jersey. Princeton  University Press. 2010. 

 

Dunning, Eric. "Culture, civilization and the sociology of sport". I  nnovation 5, (1992): 718.  Dunning, Eric and Chris Rojek. Sport and Leisure in the Civilizing Process: Critique and  CounterCritique. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1992.  Eckstein, R., Moss, D., and Delaney, K. "Sports Sociology's Still Untapped Potential", S  ociological  Forum 25, (2010) 3: 500518.  Epstein, David. The Sports Gene: Inside the Science of Extraordinary Athletic Performance. New  York: Penguin Group, 2013.  Fine, Gary Alan. Tiny Publics: A Theory of Group Action and Culture. New York: New York, 2012.  Fowler, Catherine. "Room for experiment: gallery films and vertical time from Maya Deren to  EijaLiisa Ahtila." In Screen 45:4, Winter, edited by John Logie Baird Centre, 324343.  Glasgow: Oxford University Press, 2004.  Frey, J. "Social risk and the meaning of sport. " Sociology of Sport Journal 8 (1991): 136 145.  Gladwell, Malcolm. Outliers: The Story of Success. Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 2008.  Gratton, Chris and Ian Jones. Research Methods for Sports Studies. London: Routledge, 2010.  Humphrey, N. Soul Dust: The Magic of Consciousness. Princeton, New Jersey.: Princeton  University Press, 2011.  Ihde, Don. "Postphenomenology: Sounds beyond Sound." Keynote presentation at Philosophy in  Practice'  Ryerson Graduate Philosophy Conference, Toronto, Ontario, February 2782,  2015.  Jablonski, N. Skin: A Natural History. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2013.  James, William and Henry James. The Letters of William James. New York: Atlantic Monthly  Press, 1920.  Jarvie, Grant and Joseph Maguire. Sport and leisure in social thought. London and New York:  Routledge, 1994. 

 

Jenkins, William. "Introduction to the New Topographics." in R  eadings into Photography: Selected  Essays 19591980. Albuquerque: University of Mexico Press, 1980.  Kotler, Steven. The Rise of Superman: Decoding the Science of Ultimate Human Performance.  Boston: New Harvest, 2014.  Little, David E. The Sports Show: Athletics as Image and Spectacle. Singapore and Minneapolis:  Tien Wah Press, 2012.  Maguire, J. Performance efficiency or human development? Reconfiguring sports science. Paper  presented at the Idrett, Samfunn og Frivillig Organisering Conference, Oslo, 2002.  Maslow, Abraham. Motivation and Personality. New York: Harper & Row, 1970.  McFee, Graham. Sport, Rules and Values: Philosophical investigations into the nature of sport.  London: Routledge, 2004.  Morris, David B. The Culture of Pain. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991.  Musashi, Miyamoto. The Book of Five Rings. New York: Bantam Books, 1992.  Niedzviecki, H. Hello, I'm Special: How individuality became the new conformity. San Francisco,  CA: City Lights Books, 2006.  Nippert, A. `"I have four months to compete, eight months to heal": Playing through pain and  injuries in girls' interscholastic gymnastics', dissertation, University of Minnesota, 2005.  Nixon, H.L. (1992). "A social network analysis of influences on athletes to play with pain and  injury." Journal o f Sport and Social Issues, 16 (1992), 127135.  O'Doherty, Brian. Inside the White Cube: The Identity of the Gallery Space. Berkeley, California:  University of California Press, 1999.  O'Hear, Anthony. Philosophy and Sport. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013.  Sarai Programme at CSDS. "Sarai Reader 09: Projections," Sarai Reader, accessed December  13, 2015, http://sarai.net/saraireader09projections/.  

 

Scarry, Elaine. The Body in Pain: The Making and Unmaking of the World. Oxford: Oxford  University Press, 1985.  Seligman, Martin. Authentic Happiness: Using the New Positive Psychology to Realize Your  Potential for Lasting Fulfillment. New York: Free Press, 2002.  Shavizky, A. "Tackling the measurability problem of physical pain in personal injury cases: The  case for remembered pain and for disregarding race and gender", dissertation, University of  Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, 2008.  Sicart, Miguel. Play Matters. Cambridge:   The MIT Press, 2014.  Sivonen, Pauli. EijaLiisa Ahtila: In the Woods There Is a Bird. Helsinki: Suomalaisen  Kirjallisuuden Seura, 2015.  Sokolowski, Robert. Introduction to Phenomenology. Cambridge, University Press, 2008.  Solnit, Rebecca. "The Invisibility Wars." In T  revor Paglen, Invisible: Covert Operations and  Classified Landscapes. New York: Aperture Foundation, 2010.  Sontag, Susan. Regarding the Pain of Others. New York: Picador, 2003.  Sparkes, A. "The fatal flaw: A narrative of the fragile bodyself." Q  ualitative Enquiry, 2 (1996):  463494.  Steyerl, Hito. "Can Witnesses Speak? On the Philosophy of the Interview," Eipcp.net  05 (2008),  accessed June 1, 2016, issn 18111696. h  ttp://eipcp.net/transversal/0408/steyerl/en.   Tarzwell, K. "Dying with your boots on: A Nietzschean analysis of highrisk skiing", dissertation,  Queen's University, 2010.  Walsh, Maria. "EijaLiisa Ahtila." Art Monthly 335 (April 2010): 267.  Weintraub, Pamela. "The Voice of Reason.", Psychology Today (June 2015): 534. Accessed  June 1, 2016, https://www.psychologytoday.com/articles/201505/thevoicereason.  

 

Young, Kevin and Michael Atkinson. D  eviance and Social Control in Sport. United States: Edward  Brothers, 2008. 

 


