Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2008

Exclusion in public education : the experiences of parents with young children with special needs
Gurjeet Dhillon
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Disability and Equity in Education Commons Recommended Citation
Dhillon, Gurjeet, "Exclusion in public education : the experiences of parents with young children with special needs" (2008). Theses and dissertations. Paper 171.

This Major Research Paper is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

EXCLUSION IN PUBLIC EDUCATION: THE EXPERIENCES OF PARENTS WITH YOUNG CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS

by

Gurjeet Dhillon "-----c--ilachelorof:Arts;Chitd -andYouthCare,RyersouUniversity, 2004 Child and Youth Worker Diploma, Centennial College, 2000

A Major Research Paper presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts In the Program of Early Childhood Studies

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2008

© Gurjeet Dhillon 2008

PROPERTY OF RYERSON UNIVERSITY UBRARY

Author's Declaration

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this major research paper.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this paper to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

SignatUre

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this paper by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

_ Signature

111

::,1

'

i~XCLUSION IN PUBLIC EDUCATION: THE EXPERIENCES OF PARENTS WITH

YOUNG CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS
© Gurjeet Dhillon, 2008 Master of Arts Early Childhood Studies Ryerson University

ABSTRACT

. There has been widespread interest amongst scholars and activists in researching the concept of inclusion of young children with special needs in early childhood settings and public education. This qualitative research study provides insight into the lives of Canadian parents who have children with special needs in public education. Two interviews were conducted with three parents, all of whom have children with special needs in kindergarten and grade one. Key findings were interpreted from a social justice perspective which indicated that children with special needs are excluded in the public education system in a variety of ways. They do not have opportunities for inclusion with their typically developing peers. Parents become advocates as a result and struggle with accessing appropriate services for their children with special needs. . Recommendations are made for implementing change within the education system and areas for future research are identified.

KeyWords: 'inclusion', 'inclusion of children with special needs', 'elementary school inclusion', 'parent's perspectives on inclusion', 'parent's experiences of exclusion'

v

