IGNITING SOCIAL COMMERCE: USING INSTAGRAM FOR MOBILE RETAIL SHOPPING   

by Ryan Christopher Perez BA (Hons), Communication Studies, McMaster University, 2015

A Major Research Paper presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Digital Media in the program of Digital Media Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2017

© Ryan Christopher Perez, 2017

Author's Declaration for Electronic Submission of an MRP I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this MRP. This is a true copy of the MRP, including any required final revisions. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this MRP to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this MRP by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my MRP may be made electronically available to the public.

i

IGNITING SOCIAL MEDIA: USING INSTAGRAM FOR ONLINE RETAIL SHOPPING Master of Digital Media, 2017 Ryan Perez Master of Digital Media, Ryerson University Abstract Social media can act as an invaluable tool that businesses can use as a means of reaching out and engaging with current and potential customers. Instagram, a Social Network Service known for its predominance as a photo-and-video focused sharing platform, is often used and even presented by the company as a tool to drive awareness about a business and pique interest in the products or services that they offer to its over 700 million users. However, this particular platform is being employed as more than just an advertising and marketing agent outside of Canada and the USA. In particular, Instagram in South Korea has transformed into an even more multifaceted experience, from being used as a product catalogue for retail startups to operating as a mobile online marketplace where direct, transactional exchange occurs. While social media platforms are continually being modified to suit the behaviours and attitudes of this technologically advancing world, Instagram has evolved into a more dynamic online forum for commercial exchange, further expanding the capacities of Social Commerce. This major research paper engages in qualitative observations on how Instagram is being utilized in South Korea for the purposes of marketing, advertising and mobile commerce. Furthermore, several best practices are outlined on how Instagram can be organized for businesses, particularly startup companies, through the use of case studies on current South Korean companies.

ii

Acknowledgements I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my academic supervisor, Wojtek Kawczynski, for the continuous support of my major research paper and related research, for his patience, motivation, and immense knowledge. His guidance helped me in all the time of research and writing of this paper and I am sincerely grateful. Besides my advisor, I would like to also thank Parco Sin and Aye Win for their insightful comments and for sharing expertise, guidance and encouragement throughout my writing process as I worked towards the completion of my paper. My sincerest thanks to Chanwoo Kim for his guidance and help with translation throughout my research; your support made the research process much easier; I could not have done it without any of you. Finally, thank you to my parents, brothers and to Julia Papp for their continuous and unwavering support as I pursued this milestone in my academic career.

iii

Table of Contents Author's Declaration ................................................................................................... i Abstract ...................................................................................................................... ii Acknowledgements ................................................................................................... iii Table of Contents ...................................................................................................... iv List of Figures ........................................................................................................... vi I. II. III. IV. Introduction ................................................................................................................ 1 Thesis ......................................................................................................................... 7 Methodology .............................................................................................................. 8 Literature Review A. Social Media Trends in South Korea ........................................................... 10 B. Instagram in South Korea ............................................................................ 13 C. e-Commerce Trends in South Korea........................................................... 14 D. Comparing the Use of Instagram in Canada & the USA with South Korea ..................................................... 17 V. VI. Content Analysis Results ....................................................................................... 19 Case Studies A. Instagram to Enhance Customer Service Relations ..................................... 24 B. Instagram as a Marketing Platform .............................................................. 26 C. Instagram as a Product Catalogue ................................................................ 29 VII. Key Findings A. Photo Staging ............................................................................................... 32 B. Online Transactional Security...................................................................... 35 C. Cataloging .................................................................................................... 36 D. Key Techniques and Best Practices 1. Using Instagram to create a visual catalogue ................................... 37 2. Incorporation of a third-party e-commerce tool............................... 38 3. Using Hashtags/Caption Placements ............................................... 38 VIII. Conclusion A. Summary ...................................................................................................... 39 B. Research Limitations ................................................................................... 40

iv

C. Future Research ........................................................................................... 40 D. Funding ........................................................................................................ 40 IX. X. Appendix .................................................................................................................. 41 References ................................................................................................................ 54

v

List of Figures Fig. 4.1 ­ Social Media Penetration by Country .................................................................. 10 Fig 4.2 ­ Social Media Penetration Rankings ..................................................................... 11 Fig. 4.3 ­ Mobile Social Media Penetration by Country ..................................................... 12 Fig 4.4 ­ Social Media Subscription Status in South Korea ............................................... 14 Fig 4.5 ­ Weekly Use of Social Media in South Korea ...................................................... 15 Fig 4.6 ­ Mobile Share of Retail e-Commerce Transactions by Country .......................... 16 Fig. 4.7 ­ Share of Mobile Transactions versus Share of Mobile-Friendly Sites ................ 17 Fig 5.1 ­ #Purses Search Results ........................................................................................ 20 Fig. 5.2 ­ # Search Results .......................................................................................... 21 Fig. 5.3 ­ #ShoppingMall Results ....................................................................................... 22 Fig. 5.4 ­ # Results .................................................................................................. 22 Fig. 6.1 ­ @x.x.x.y's Instagram Page .................................................................................. 25 Fig. 6.2 ­ @na_kong1's Instagram Page ............................................................................. 26 Fig. 6.3 ­ @wannabej_official's Instagram Page ................................................................ 27 Fig. 6.4 ­ @projectgoldseoul's Instagram Page .................................................................. 28 Fig. 6.5 ­ @_mantory's Instagram Page ............................................................................. 30 Fig. 6.6 ­ @doljabi33's Instagram Page .............................................................................. 31 Fig. 7.1 ­ Comparison of Photo Staging Techniques among South Korean IG Accounts .. 33 Fig. 7.2 ­ Comparison of Website Catalogues with Instagram Catalogue Accouts ............ 36

vi

I - Introduction While social media has been around as early as 1997, a new social media renaissance was ushered through with the advent of Facebook, the technological brainchild of a Harvard dropout that has pioneered the form of social media that users are most familiar with today. What perhaps set the Social Networking Services (SNS) beginning with Facebook apart from their older predecessors was how these platforms exhibited a capacity to adapt and incorporate various attributes that are subject to the needs of the user and that continues to be the case today. Forms of social media before Facebook offered very limited functionalities. Certain platforms only performed Instant Messaging functions, while others offered blogging features; ultimately, forms of social media before the arrival of Facebook behaved like menu choices, where a user would choose a platform based on their wants and needs. However, social media applications now exhibit a propensity for flexibility and modification, and this can be exemplified in how they function and in what they offer users today. Although each platform features an identifying key feature, most platforms also offer similar functionalities as their competitors, such as instant messaging functions, a `story' feature and camera filters. Nonetheless, as a result of SNS' popularization, it made logical sense for businesses to want to utilize these platforms to aggrandize their own venture objectives and social media organizations are quickly strategizing on how they can continue flexibility by modifying the services that they offer to include business tools. Now, social media in general has become a new stream for businesses to capitalize from and enterprises and organizations of all sizes are utilizing social media platforms as a tool for ecommerce. Within the last decade, social media has reformed into multidimensional platforms that still maintains its original functionalities for personal networking and online sharing, but with added components appropriate for business and enterprise use. (Hajli, 2015). Instagram is a popular mobile smartphone application that has evolved into a userbase of over 700 million users since its launch in 2010 (Instagram, 2017). Perhaps the most distinct difference that sets Instagram apart from its social media counterparts is the fact that it is centralized on the use of photos and visual images rather than text, branding itself as a "home for visual storytelling" (Instagram, 2017). Considering user experience designs that would be more practical for mobile device use as an adoption to smartphone technology occurred, UX designers needed to consider how content would be displayed to users, especially now since content that would normally be displayed on a regular desktop computer would be difficult for users to read

1

and comprehend. SM Kosslyn (1994) rationalized how it takes much less time and mental effort is required in seeing a picture than in reading a thousand words, and this particular ideology may be the determining factor that can be attributed to Instagram's success as a social media platform that is unrivaled by its more verbiage-based counterparts (Kosslyn, 1994). Hence, part of the reason why Instagram is such a popular SNS platform is because of its ability to portray a personal story without the use of rhetoric. The company's acquisition by Facebook for $1 billion in 2012 further solidifies their success as a SNS platform and even more as a strong contender in the social media world (Brownell, 2016). Since its inception, Instagram has expanded its functionality offerings without straying away from its defining function as a visual-based social media experience. Keeping in mind of how these photos and videos are representative of the account and, in a sense, portray a personal `story' or image that they want other users to see, Instagram has developed more multifaceted functionalities that are centralized around this foundational component. In 2014, Instagram offered advertising functionalities specifically for businesses, where companies were able to insert posts into the newsfeeds of users who did not actively follow them (Brownell, 2016). How social media is used for commerce is arguably different among various regions around the world. As well, the level of the effectiveness of social media for business purposes can be dependent on several factors. While Canada and the United States have relatively moderate Internet speeds in comparison to other countries, visitors from Europe and Asia see the digital and mobile infrastructure in Canada as a `backward mobile ecology' in comparison to what is present in their countries (Zwick, 2006), while Samuelsson et al. (2006) foresee many opportunities ahead in the United States that have still yet to be tapped. Yet, South Korea excels not only in a more advanced digital infrastructure, but the attitudes and behaviours of its population have embraced mobile technology, further encouraging South Korean companies to pursue more cutting-edge mobile technological innovations. When it comes to the utilization of social media as a business tool, various enterprises employ social media in various ways, depending on their needs and target goals. What is already an established asset that comes with social media is the potential to tap into a mass number of users. However, being able to effectively utilize social media to meet an enterprise's needs and goals is the challenge. Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn have established their reputations as the leading social media platforms, creating new avenues for e-vendors, effectively creating a new

2

form of interactive media known as Social Commerce (Hajli, 2015). The realization is that the role of social media is constantly being redefined and new channels are constantly being made in using social media more effectively in e-commerce activity and the identifications of newer functionalities directly influences how e-commerce is being conducted and vice versa (Liang et al., 2011). Previously, the defining factor that transforms social media into Social Commerce is when social media helps to further develop closer relationships with potential and existing customers, thereby increasing product sales and even encouraging customer loyalty (Hajli, 2015). Now, increased accessibility in a growing mobile world can be argued as one of the factors redefining Social Commerce and it is up to the enterprise to try and determine the functionalities of social media that can be most beneficial to their commercial success. New technologies and advancements have proven the ability to influence the way societies function all over the world. With the realization that the Internet carried the potential for business to be conducted online, brick and mortar businesses began to extend commercial transactions with their customers online, resulting with either a combination of physical and online stores or online only. This transition continued further with the rise of smartphone technology, evolving e-Commerce into a much another global phenomenon known as Mobile commerce, or m-Commerce. This has become the preferred medium for online shopping and the development of smartphones that are capable of performing functions easily and more conveniently than desktop computers has dramatically impacted the purchasing behaviors of consumers (Ozuem, 2016). Now, with the even more progressive functions that smartphones are capable of performing, shoppers are now even more intertwined with the consumer goods sector, essentially holding the stores that they enjoy in the palms of their hands (Ozuem, 2016). Consequently, a shift from the traditional form of shopping in physical, standalone retail stores to shopping from the comfort of one's own home with the literal click of a button is arising; even still, a shifting of consumer behaviors even in terms of the devices they use to engage in online shopping is taking place, with a heavier preference towards the use of smartphones as opposed to desktop computers (Ozuem, 2016). With this shift, the m-commerce experience has been conceived as an extension of e-commerce and this will continue to diversify as more and more innovations are discovered. Perhaps the most obvious functionality for e-Commerce is Instagram's ability for visual advertising. Businesses can create Instagram accounts and their current customers can follow their accounts and be updated with uploaded posts on sale periods,

3

featured items or services, promotions and events. In fact, in the United States, it is predicted that almost three quarters of American businesses with 100 employees or more will utilize Instagram for the purposes of marketing and advertising in 2017 (Kulp, 2016). Other companies use their Instagram to feature their outreach efforts and community impact, such as Wells Fargo's involvement with Habitat for Humanity in building homes for veterans (Wells Fargo, 2017) or Procter & Gamble's launch of a clean drinking water program in Pakistan (Procter & Gamble, 2017). However, in South Korea, Instagram has created more utilization out of the popular social media than just as a channel for advertising and marketing to Instagram users everywhere. While South Korean companies, particularly smaller fashion companies, also upload advertisements and showcase feature items and promotions, many companies also use Instagram as a visual catalogue of the products that they sell; if a single post were to show up in an individual's feed that captures their attention and appeals to their particular taste in fashion, that individual might be influenced to view the company's account and there, they would have access to many other styles that they can browse through and may be interested enough to make a purchase. In a sense, the ability to stay within the Instagram platform to browse and peruse through items a retail store is selling allows that individual to invest enough interest in their products and deciding what they would want before moving to the company's external website in order to make any purchases. While social media networks like Instagram have helped facilitate the transition toward more mobile commerce, SNS platforms have always acted as an engagement tools, connecting customers with retail stores and never having acted as a medium for direct commercial transactions. In other words, SNS networks operate more as a channel for online advertising, since the key functionality that would allow it to function as an official e-Commerce website is the capability for customers to input payment information and purchase items or services. With that being said, one factor that is critical to the success of electronic commerce is the website and this should be taken into consideration, as the usability of websites can impact customers' intention of returning in order to partake in other transactions (Al-Rabayah et al, 2017), and while some retail websites are still not set up for mobile device compatibility, most, if not all social media platforms, are mobile-friendly and can be accessed through a mobile web browser or through an official downloadable app. If one were to examine the UX design of Instagram, it's layout offers the same simplicity and intuitiveness of a typical mobile retail website - a platform

4

that is much more conducive for online commerce when compared to other SNS networks, such as Twitter or Snapchat. Although it lacks a payment system, Instagram can be used for more than advertising, and is currently being utilized by small businesses in South Korea as their central online-shopping destination for their customers, with the payment system being transacted by a third party program. Nonetheless, because of the more advanced technological landscape in South Korea, businesses, particularly new companies, are able to launch their company and market their main Instagram account as their website, saving on financial resources until they are able to upgrade to a standalone, mobile-optimized website. While Instagram is one of the fastest growing social media apps, surprisingly, it is one of the most underutilized channels by marketers (Gillett, 2014). Instagram has evolved to a platform that is more than just a place where one can create a visual personal story; in South Korea, it also acts as an open marketplace, where one can peruse through and essentially `window shop' until they find something intriguing enough to make a purchase. This growing connection between the use of social media for the purposes of both e-commerce and mcommerce contributes towards this continuously developing notion of Social Commerce, which is where social media and networks, inclusive of web 2.0 tools such as blogs and wikis, assist in conducting e-commerce (Turban et al., 2017). However, Instagram demonstrates how it has a more rooted influence in the transactional activity between buyers and sellers beyond disseminating information or acting as a conduit for marketing or advertising. Instagram does this through its ability to simulate a working mobile retail website and its extensibility in allowing third-party applications to conduct the financial aspects when buying and selling online. Thus, while Social Commerce is not a relatively new concept, the way it is being conducted now and how social media platforms such as Instagram are taking on a more direct role in the buying and selling of goods and services, Social Commerce is gradually redefining how and where consumers shop online. This research paper will discuss the varying digital landscapes between Canada and the United States in comparison to South Korea, which has a contestable higher level of infrastructural advancement as well as a more prolific cultural attitude towards technological mobile applications in comparison to its North American counterparts. This paper will also explore and critically analyze existing literature, specifically focusing on three areas of research: first, a comparison of the digital infrastructures in both Canada and the USA with the infrastructure that exists in South Korea. Second, the attitudes toward social media and e-

5

Commerce trends will be compared in these three regions. Finally, the consumers and attitudes of South Koreans towards social media, the use of electronic devices and e-Commerce will be reviewed in detail. Case studies on South Korean accounts will be compiled and examined to demonstrate how Instagram is being utilized in South Korea as a major e-commerce platform in their business strategy to engage and potentially sell items to interested customers.

6

II - Thesis This major research paper investigates how Instagram is being utilized by organizations for the purposes of e-commerce, with a particular emphasis on strategies used to capture the interests of existing and potential customers as well as the strategies used for engagement and for direct commercial exchange. This major research paper seeks to answer two research questions: RQ1 - How are South Korean businesses utilizing Instagram as their digital media storefront and are there significant differences in the way South Koreans are using Instagram for the purposes of business versus North Americans? RQ2 - Are there online tools available in North America that can be utilized to transform Instagram into a mobile commerce-ready experience within these North American countries? RQ3 - What are some best practices that South Korean businesses are using that could potentially be beneficial to Canadian and American businesses, particularly small businesses? This research paper will analyze statistics on various aspects of social media usage within these three countries, with a particular focus on the digital climate of South Koreans. Case studies on several South Korean Instagram accounts will be examined for any trends that particularly stand out as a resourceful method in the creation of interest among customers towards the buying of selling of goods through Instagram.

7

III - Methodology Observational research taken from secondary sources is the main quantitative research method utilized in this major research paper. Recent statistical data conducted and compiled by major data insight and consultancy groups based in Canada, the United States and South Korea, were also investigated in order to establish a current profile of each region. Since South Korea is being argued in this paper as having utilized social media platforms through more approaches for the purposes of e-commerce, as well as the argument that they are more technologically advanced as a country, a particular emphasis was placed on analyzing the trends and behaviours of their population towards several aspects related to social media, mobile usage and online shopping through statistical data and research. From this research, a literature review was created to outline any key findings and their relevancy to the research questions posed through this paper, followed by a listing of best practice suggestions that organizations may consider utilizing for their own strategic objectives. Several South Korean Instagram accounts were examined as case studies and both qualitative and quantitative observations were noted in order to understand how Instagram is being utilized as a medium for facilitating electronic commerce. These case studies were divided into several categories, based on the intended purpose and function as utilized by Instagram users. This paper used content analysis on the use of hashtags in both English and in Hangul, the Korean alphabet, to see how many personal and business-related accounts would be yielded upon searching. The sample consisted of 100 recent accounts after searching the hashtag #ShoppingMall and 100 recent accounts after searching the hashtag #, which is the phoentic translation of `shopping mall' in Hangul, for a total of 200 accounts. The content analysis was conducted on August 17, 2017. These accounts were compiled using Microsoft Excel and sorted by the following cateogires: whether they were qualitatively observed to be a personal or business account and the type of business industry. For example, any account that was related to clothing and fashion was categorized as a fashion retail company. These accounts were also analyzed for certain characteristics, such as: (1) the presence of a web link to an external website, (2) whether that website was an e-commerce website, (3) whether they used their account to catalogue their products, and (4) whether they utilized their account to display advertisements. For the results yielded by the hashtag #ShoppingMall, the observed country of

8

origin, if explicitly indicated, was recorded. The social media analytic tool Keyhole was also utilized to obtain quantitative insights for each account, inclusive of the total number of posts uploaded, their total number of followers, the total number of accounts they are following, the average number of likes per post and the average number of comments per post. Each Instagram account counted as one entry, and any accounts that appeared two or more times during the analysis were disregarded, as the account has already been considered.

9

IV - Literature Review A. Social Media Trends in South Korea When observing the social media penetration by a country, which is defined as the number of monthly active accounts on the top social network in each country, South Korea's penetration was second highest in the world at 83%, while the United States ranked 8th at 66% and Canada at 11th at 63% (Kemp, 2017). Moreover, four countries in the Asia-Pacific region were in the top 5 positions, further justifying the steady growth of social media use in Southeast Asia compared to other regions in the world (See Fig 4.1) (Kemp, 2017).

Fig. 4.1 - Social media penetration by country/monthly active accounts on the top social network in each country, compared to population (Source: Kemp, 2017)

When examining the highest social media penetration within a country's population, South Korea is is the only Asian country to make it in the top 10 at 6th highest, with over 83% of its population utilizing a form of social media (see Fig 4.2). This translates to approximately over 41 million individual users using social media in South Korea alone (Kemp, 2017).

10

Fig. 4.2 - Social media penetration rankings based on social media penetration in countries with a national population of 50,000 people or more (Source: Kemp, 2017)

In terms of Mobile social media penetration within a population, which is characterized as the use of a social media platform on a mobile device, South Korea again takes the 2nd highest position, at 83% of its population, sitting significantly higher than the United States, who sits at 8th place with only 58% penetration and Canada at 12th place with 55% penetration (see Fig 4.3) (Kemp, 2017). It is important to note that South Korea maintains a penetration level of 83% in both social media penetration and Mobile social media penetration, demonstrating how a majority, if not all of those users, are more than likely utilizing their social media accounts through their mobile devices (Kemp, 2017).

11

Fig. 4.3 - Mobile social media penetration by country/active accounts on the top social network in each country accessing via mobile, compared to population (Source: Kemp, 2017)

In a separate 2017 analysis report on social media usage behaviors and advertising attitudes in South Korea by the Digital Media & Marketing Intelligence Center, a South Korean convergence company that conducts research on the advertising and marketing industry nationwide, several integral findings were discovered in terms of the current social media attitudes in South Korea. First, approximately 86.6% responded that smartphones were the main device used to access various social media platforms, followed by 8.6% who use desktop PC's, 4.4% who use laptops and 0.4 who use tablets (DMC Media, 2017). With respect to smartphone utilization, this is an increase from the previous 2016 report, where 78.5% reported using their smartphones for social media use (DMC Media, 2017). Subsequently, the use of the other three digital devices decreased, thus verifying how smartphones are becoming the more favoured digital device. In a related study conducted by the same company, 9.9 out of 10 users reported that smartphones were the digital device they utilized most during their everyday commute (DMC Media, 2017). In addition, accessing social media during a commute was the second most common digital activity performed while internet shopping was the seventh (DMC Media, 2017). With that said, lower age groups had more of a tendency to access social media, use mobile messenger platforms and perused in internet shopping activities more (DMC Media, 2017).

12

Even at home, 9.7 out of 10 users reported that they utilize their smartphones to engage in various digital media activities, although a higher percentage of respondents reported using laptops and tablets more at home compared to the digital devices used during commutes as well as the inclusion of desktop PC use, which was ranked as the third most utilized digital device at home (DMC Media, 2017). However, at home, internet shopping became the third most engaged digital activity, while accessing social media became fourth (DMC Media, 2017). These statistics validate how in South Korea, there is a higher propensity for its population to engage in forms of social media via their mobile smartphones over other countries. There is also a growing intimacy between Internet shopping and social media engagement, having been ranked sequentially as the third and fourth most engaged digital activity. Thus, South Korea can be considered as having established a precedent in terms of behaviors and attitudes towards mobile technologies that other populations worldwide might eventually attain, specifically in how mobile smartphones are being used and in what digital activities are being engaged. B. Instagram in South Korea When it comes to the frequency of Instagram usage as a social media platform, a 2016 trend study conducted by Global Web Index found that Instagram was the fifth most used social platform service in the world, preceded by WhatsApp, Facebook, Wechat and Youtube (Global Web Index, 2017). This supersedes other popular social media platforms, including Facebook Messenger, Twitter and Snapchat (Global Web Index, 2017). Within Korea, The penetration rate of Instagram among South Koreans has increased to 68.7% in 2017, a 12.9% increase from 55.8% in 2016 (see Fig. 4.4) (DMC Media, 2017). In contrast, the penetration rates of all other social media platforms, inclusive of Facebook, Twitter, as well as two South Korean-based social media platforms known as KakaoStory (#) and Band (#) have decreased in 2017 from the previous year's reported data (DMC Media, 2017).

13

Fig. 4.4 - Social media subscription status in South Korea (Source: DMC Media, 2017)

In terms of which social media platform was most used on a weekly basis, the 2016 report found that Facebook had a 64.6% prevalence rate, while Instagram was at 3.8%; however, the weekly user rate for Facebook dramatically decreased in 2017 to 40.5% while Instagram increased to 21.9%, making Instagram the second most used social media platform by users on a weekly basis (see Fig. 4.5) (DMC Media, 2017). KakaoTalk, the most popular mobile app for instant messaging services in South Korea (Mac, 2015), also portrayed an increase in usage, exhibiting growth by 8.8 percent, however Instagram showed greater advancement, expanding by 18.1% (DMC Media, 2017).

14

Fig. 4.5 - Weekly use of social media in South Korea (Source: DMC Media, 2017)

Furthermore, the average time spent on Facebook per day was approximately 19.1 minutes, while the average time spent on Instagram was approximately 18.8 minutes per day (DMC Media, 2017). Hence, while Facebook continues to play the dominant role as the most popular social media platform, Instagram has quickly risen as a contender as a popular digital social activity. Additionally, in analyzing social media patterns throughout the day, Instagram was found to be the most commonly accessed platform, being accessed between the hours of 00:00 to 3:00, 6:00 to 9:00, 12:00 to 15:00 and most heavily accessed from 21:00 to 00:00 (DMC Media, 2017). In terms of the digital activities performed most during the hours of 21:00 to 00:00, Instagram was found to be the social media platform preferred for various posts such as images, texts, making it the most popular platform for social content viewing (DMC Media, 2017). C. e-Commerce Trends in South Korea According to a 2016 statistical analysis on mobile commerce trends by marketing research group Kantar TNS, in reference to preferred channels when asking product or service related questions, South Korea was found to rely on online communities, particularly through social media, as their top-rated channel, while Canada and the USA only went as far as emailing

15

the brand (Kantar TNS, 2017). Moreover, in the same report, 31% to 40% of South Koreans enjoyed reading or watching content from preferred brands online, compared to 21% to 30% of Canadians and Americans who followed this preference. On the subject of e-Commerce transactions being executed through mobile devices, South Korea is third highest in the world at 48%, just 2% shy of surpassing the parity average of e-commerce purchases being transacted through a desktop computer (see Fig. 4.6) (Criteo, 2017). In the same report, the United States ranks 7th at approximately 35% (Criteo, 2017).

Fig. 4.6 - Mobile Share of Retail e-commerce transactions, by country (Source: Criteo, 2017)

Also, Criteo also analyzed the relationship between sales being conducted through mobile devices and the availability of mobile-friendly websites and found, as expected, that as more retailers design mobile-friendly sites, the number of mobile e-Commerce transactions increases (Criteo, 2017). South Korea exhibits a significantly stronger correlation in comparison to the United States, attributing over close to 50% of mobile sales to the fact that over 95% of ecommerce websites are mobile-friendly (Criteo, 2017).

16

Fig. 4.7 - Share of mobile transactions versus share of mobile-friendly sites (Source: Criteo, 2017)

This research shows how there is a higher propensity for South Koreans to engage in ecommerce transactions, not only in comparison to Canada and the USA, but with countries all over the world. It also shows how there is an extremely high tendency for South Korean consumers to perform online transactions through their mobile phones rather than through a desktop computer. In conjunction with the fact that the overall attitudes and behaviours of South Koreans towards the use of social media is significantly high, as evident through the number of active social media user accounts being third highest in the world. South Korea was also found to have the strongest use and the strongest appetite for e-commerce services, meaning that a majority of the population relied heavily on day-to-day services such as online shopping as well as online reordering & subscription services, and even going as far as to have a button or voiceactivated service installed in their home in order to quickly buy previously-purchased items online (Kantar TNS, 2017). This could be due to the more advanced technological infrastructure in South Korea when compared their North American counterparts; thus, a Bloomberg report that ranked countries based on their technological innovations, South Korea ranked #1, while the United States ranked #6 followed by Canada at #12 (Coy, 2017). Furthermore, technology and social media in particular has increasingly become more and more a part of the customer journey and the experience of shopping no longer takes place in the `traditional' form, where customers travel to physical, standalone stores to make purchases or interact face-to-face with store employees with product or service inquiries. In a marketing monitor report in the Asia-Pacific region, social media was found to be dominating the customer
17

journey (Leopold, 2016). In consideration of the foregoing, technology has proven to advance at a much faster rate in the Asia-Pacific region compared to North America, directly influencing ecommerce in particular. One of the triggers that influenced what is being called "The Asian eCommerce Explosion" are the innovations that surround how e-commerce operates in Asia and the payment solutions that supplement this digital sector (Barron & Elsby, 2016). These observations can suggest that South Korea dominates when it comes to the use of mobile innovation and m-commerce activity in comparison to the United States and Canada, who although show a steady growth rate, is still considerably behind other more digitally-progressive regions in the world. D. Comparing the Use of Instagram in Canada & the USA with South Korea Instagram as an online platform for advertising is an obvious qualitative observation; according to Kim & Co, 2012, social media today plays an integral role in influencing the marketing operations of a company. Thus, it is logical for an organization to utilize social media as an extension of their visual marketing and advertising platform. While Visual Communication may seem like a matured form of dissemination, Online Visual Communication is a relatively new field when it comes to Communication Sciences (Russmann & Svensson, 2016). In particular, the focal point of Visual Communication has evolved over the years, where more emphasis has been placed on visual elements rather than on rhetoric as the focus, effectively presuming the audience to be more of a casually browsing viewer rather than as an attentive reader (Russmann & Svensson, 2016). However, there are distinct differences in their utilization when comparing businesses in Canada and The United States with businesses in South Korea. The first apparel company to appear on the Fortune 500 list is Nike, and their first thirty Instagram uploads mostly feature athletes who are endorsed by the company and new product releases to their over 70 million followers (Nike, 2017). Fossil Group, a company known for their timepieces and leather goods, also appears in the Fortune 500 list and their Instagram account also features new product developments and advertisements featuring their products (Fossil Group, 2017). Even J.P. Morgan Chase, a multinational banking and financial services company, maintains an Instagram account with over 24,000 followers and features the activities and travels of their employees in their posts (J.P. Morgan Chase, 2017). In contrast, smaller startup companies also utilize their Instagram for the purposes of advertising. Four Fifty Five, a start-

18

up company based in Toronto, Ontario that offers custom suits and accessories (Four Fifty Five, 2017) and Palm Angels, a new, high-end American fashion company that debuted in 2015, upload posts of featured pieces in their collections, upcoming events (Ragazzi, 2017). In contrast, KEB Hana Bank (@kebhana), one of the largest banks in South Korea, only has 4,555 followers on Instagram, a significantly lower number than J.P. Morgan Chase's figure of over 24,000 (KEB Hana Bank, 2017).Their utilization of Instagram, however, is considerably different than J.P Morgan Chase; through their account, their posts aim towards inciting more social interaction with their customers and build up their follower base by offering promotions and prizes, as well as promoting their banking products and services (KEB Hana Bank, 2017). Beanpole (@beanpole_official) is one of South Korea's largest apparel companies; however, their follower base is also relatively low, at just about 15,600 followers (Beanpole, 2017). As well, they utilize their Instagram account to showcase key features of their collections - a different social media strategy when compared to Nike (Nike, 2017). Hence, from a qualitative observational perspective on how both regions utilize Instagram as part of their business strategies, companies in North America in comparison to those in South Korea show noticeable differences in their methods of engagement with Instagram users worldwide.

19

V - Content Analysis Results The Use of Hashtags Another interesting difference is how language is used for hashtags. The use of strong keyword hashtags is a great way to attract new customers, as many individuals search specific hashtags in order to find content they are interested in (Rahim, 2017). Hashtags through Instagram are similar to any other SNS platform; with that said, when searching specific hashtags using english words versus korean words, the results that are pulled are quite different, signalling a difference in how Instagram is utilized among South Korean users. As an example, a search for the hashtag `purses' was entered into the search bar, resulting in 607,213 results. Upon clicking that particular hashtag, the screen shifts to show nine top posts, followed by the most recent uploaded posts by individuals who used the `#purses' hashtag. When examining the top posts, several of the posts were by users who took a photo with their purse in the photo. One out of the nine posts was by an individual who uploaded a photo of purses being sold at Costco, but none of these top posts redirected to an Instagram account used for m-commerce.

Fig 5.1 - `#Purses' search results (left), and the top posts for `#Purses' (right) (Source: Instagram, 2017)

The same search was conducted again, but for the word `#', which is a direct Korean translation for the world `purse'. Out of the nine top posts, five were of online retailers who were featuring items on Instagram. Now, there is a trend on Instagram in South Korea to add the suffix

20

`-stagram' at the end of any keyword; thus, a search for `#', or `pursestagram', was conducted, and six out of the nine of the top posts were of online retailers who were selling bags.

Fig. 5.2 - `#' search results (left), the top posts for `#' (centre) and top posts for `#' (right) (Source: Instagram, 2017)

To test the first research question, two hashtags were searched on Instagram: one in English and one in Hangul, the official native script of South Korea, for the purposes of comparing the type of posts that would appear and the types of accounts that utilize these hashtags. Searching #ShoppingMall resulted in 389,765 posts that utilized this hashtag. In the first 100 recent posts, 28 posts were uploaded by an account that can be identified as a business (see Fig. 5.3). Of those 28 posts, 12 of those Instagram accounts were of shopping centres, while 16 posts were from other industries, mainly fitness, jewelry, textiles, photography services, cosmetics and manufacturing services. 22 of these accounts featured a link to an external website, however, only five were to a website that was set up for e-commerce. It is interesting to see that two out of the five e-commerce websites were based in the USA, while the other three were based in the Netherlands, Thailand and South Korea. Searching ##, which is a direct phonetic transcription of the English phrase `shopping mall', yielded significantly different outcomes, with 926,674 posts that utilized this hashtag. In the same analysis as the previous search, 67 posts were uploaded by an account identifiable as a business. 64 out of those 67 accounts linking directly to an external website,

21

with 41 of these websites set up for direct e-commerce and all of these websites being based in South Korea. A significant observation found was how approximately 70% of businesses in this sample group were related to the fashion industry and utilized their Instagram to feature the clothes that they are selling (see Fig. 5.4). As well, over one third of these fashion-related accounts were also identified for personal use, with several accounts directly utilized by business owners. Furthermore, all of the accounts that had an e-commerce website utilized an e-commerce website tool created by Naver Corporation, an Internet content service provider based in South Korea, called Naver Storefarm. This e-commerce is setup to be both desktop- and mobile-devicecompatible, such that users who navigated to the external link provided in an Instagram account are able to shop directly online, while still remaining within the Instagram app.
Fig. 5.3 - #ShoppingMall Results

# of Instagram Type of Account Total (out of 100) Accounts with External Sites Business 28 21

# of Instagram Accounts with External ecommerce Sites 5

Fig. 5.4 - # Results

# of Instagram Type of Account Total (out of 100) Accounts with External Sites Business 67 64

# of Instagram Accounts with External ecommerce Sites 41

These two hashtags were selected based on the popularity of # as a popular argot used on Instagram for products that are for sale. Overall, the results that were yielded through the hashtag # were significantly different from those produced by the hashtag #ShoppingMall, where the South Korean hashtag produced Instagram accounts that were more prolific in several

22

aspects, including more use of e-commerce websites, particularly e-commerce websites that were mobile ready, making it easier to engage in online retail shopping. Furthermore, results yielded by the hashtag #ShoppingMall were more informational and promotional, while those yielded by the hashtag # were more sale-oriented. It can thus be inferred that Instagram hashtags are utilized quite differently by those who use Hangul-based hashtags in comparison to accounts who utilize English-based hashtags, particularly with how Hangul-based hashtags are used in Instagram for the purposes of mobile commerce. This is a major contributor to how Instagram, being a popular social media platform, is helping to define Social Commerce and how it can act as a platform for online shopping.

23

VI - Case Studies A. Instagram to Enhance Customer Service Relations @the_x.x.x.y, @na_kong1 Having established a large global user base makes social media an obvious channel for businesses and organizations to maintain one-way and even two-way communication with their customers, both current and potential. In a recent study, it was discovered that customer participation in organizations' social networking sites increases the frequency of customer visits and thus, it was suggested that these organizations invest in the integration from the transactional relationship of their customers with their social media platform participation as a means of improving their relationships with their customers and in better understanding their customers' wants and needs (Abedin, 2015). With Instagram, as a predominantly photo-and-video-based experience, the interaction and feedback process is much more simplified in comparison to its more text-based adversaries. As an Instagram Business account, companies are able to modify the button options of their account so that users can call, send an email with questions or concerns and find directions to their physical store, should they have one (Instagram, 2017). Since these options are built-in by Instagram, many businesses both in North America and in South Korea utilize this feature. However, another way viewers can seek responses to any questions or concerns they have is to leave comments directly onto a specific post. This is particularly useful to business accounts who use their Instagram account as a product catalogue, as demonstrated by many South Korean businesses. As businesses upload specific products per post, potential and current customers can view the photo and directly comment on this post with any questions or concerns that they may have. Companies can in turn publicly reply back to the comment, in which might address the question or concern of other customers, or they can send a private, direct message to the commenter, allowing them to send the commenter a notification in either case. One case study is the instagram account @the_x.x.x.y, an online clothing shop that sells couple-themed clothing. On one of their photos, a user made the comment that if she had a boyfriend, she would always buy from this store @the_x.x.x.y replied back to their comment, telling them that there is the option to buy clothes separately if you like the style. The user then commented back in surprise, saying how they did not realize items could be bought separately, to which @the_x.x.x.y replied

24

that many people purchase single items and some items are purchased more as a single piece rather than as a couple set.

Fig 6.1 - @the_x.x.x.y's IG landing page (left), an individual IG post dated December 5, 2016 (centre), and comments section for that specific post (right) (Source: the_x.x.x.y, 2017)

This two-way dialogue is no different from other social media platforms, however, the comments or replies are chronicled to the individual post that it references and these comments do not detract from the primary focus, which is the product or service posted, thus allowing the post to remain as the prominent visual and any comments made are contained within the post they pertain to. As well, there is a level of intimacy established through this dialogue exchange that can almost offers reassurance to the commenter, building up a level of trust. Another way that South Korean companies engage in customer relations is through the inclusion of an Open Kakao link in their Instagram profile, which allows users to utilize KakaoTalk services to ask questions and make product inquiries. 34% of businesses in the hashtag search for #(#ShoppingMall) were found to have included a KakaoTalk link or KakaoTalk account ID in their profile in place of an e-Commerce website link. Upon clicking the link, Instagram opens up the link in an internal browser within the app where users can engage in

25

a two-way conversation with the Instagram account they are interested in. Consumers are then able to ask questions directly and even make direct purchases through this method.

Fig 6.2 - @na_kong1's IG landing page with a KakaoTalk link in the account description (left), a recent post (centre) and item details in the caption (right) (Source: Instagram, 2017)

These observations, in which Instagram is utilized for the purposes of customer service and customer relations either directly through Instagram or through third-party apps like KakaoTalk, which harmoniously function with the Instagram app, are new methods that help foster a consumer relationship between sellers and buyers using social media. B. Instagram as a Marketing Platform @wannabej_official, @projectgoldseoul social media is a direct avenue for enterprises to engage in Dialogue Marketing (DM), which describes a structured approach to ongoing, interactive communication in order to form relationships with people (Steinmetz, 1997). Thus, one form of discourse between an enterprise and their customers is mediated through social media platforms, which they use as a strategy to induce sales with customer prospects. However, of the 90% of businesses who use social media to engage in some form of communication with their clientele, it was found that only 50% are using social media effectively (Webster, 2016). This could be due a growing number of factors, such as inexperience with social media in general, utilizing the wrong platform in order to
26

achieve their marketing goals or ineffectively utilizing a certain platform's capabilities effectively, resulting in little effectual contribution to an enterprise's profit goals or even consumer engagement. Apart from the official use of Instagram for business, where the SNS company sells advertising opportunities that appear in the news feeds of their users, one of the ways fashion retail businesses promote themselves is through a method that is similar to the concept of a Lookbook, which is a popular concept where a model, a style or particular articles of clothing are shown off in a picture; the difference is that company CEOs act as the model in the photos rather than hired models. To exemplify, one of the accounts that appeared in the hashtag search conducted in this paper is @wannabej_official, a fashion retail business with over 10,000 followers. In her account, the CEO is shown modeling her fashion line in very stylized photos (wannabej_official, 2017). Should viewers be interested in making a purchase, they are able to click on a link available at the top of her account page and be redirected to an e-commerce store to make a purchase.

Fig 6.3 - @wannabej_official's IG landing page (left), photo feed (centre), and most recent post (right) (Source: wannabej_official, 2017)

With respect to photo stylization, another way Instagram photos are staged is similar to @wannabej_official's account, but photos are cropped so that the model's head are not within the frame of the photo. One account that exemplifies this trend is @projectgoldseoul. By
27

cropping the photo to show the model's body starting from the neck downward, emphasis is placed more on the clothes. Several accounts that appeared during the hashtag search # (#ShoppingMall) utilized this photography style when marketing their clothing lines on Instagram.

Fig 6.4 - @projectgoldseoul's IG landing page (left), photo feed (centre), and a recent post (right) (Source: projectgoldseoul, 2017)

For the purposes of Dialogue Marketing, Instagram users are able to both `like' and comment on the particular combinations of styles and of the clothes themselves through this platform and at times, account owners publicly reply back, giving way to this more avant garde approach of dialogue between buyers and sellers that fosters a seemingly more courteous and friendly sentiment which can be openly observed due to the public setting of how this dialogue occurs. Accordingly, with Instagram being a predominantly visual social media platform, it makes sense for business owners, especially businesses in the fashion retail industry, to use Instagram as a platform for marketing their clothing lines. With that said, the way in which their clothing lines are presented in a public sphere such as Instagram is helping to transform this particular Social network into one with the capacity to act as a visual marketplace, where direct commercial exchange between potential buyers and sellers can take place.

28

C. Instagram as a Product Catalogue @_mantory, @doljabi33, @na_kong1 When it comes to the user experience design of a mobile retail website, what has been found is how users place great value in the accuracy of the reliability and simplicity of mcommerce applications (Choi & Stivila, 2013). Thus, application developers take several factors into consideration in order to create better designs in delivering m-commerce services (Chen, Li, Chen, & Xu, 2011). Many South Korean accounts follow this method and heavily utilize Instagram as a major component of their mobile commerce venture. One case study is @_mantory, who has over 50 thousand followers and 1,546 posts. Upon visiting their account, users will find posts of various clothing pieces modeled by the same individual. Although this particular account is setup to simulate a product catalogue, upon clicking on any post, there are no specific details, such as the item number, style, size, etc.. However, if an individual clicks on the available URL on their main page, an interactive browser pops-up within the Instagram application that redirects users to an m-commerce website that exhibits the same photos used in Instagram, but with the option to pick sizes and make purchases. Thus, @_mantory uses this cataloguing technique to capture the attention of users who visit this page by showcasing the styles that they sell in order to pique interest strong enough so that users will click onto their mcommerce website. Also, the photos that he uses through their Instagram are the exact same photos used on their website, indicating a dual-purpose when they were creating these photos.

29

Fig 6.5 - @_mantory's IG landing page (left), uploaded posts on their IG page (centre) and m-commerce website (right) (Source: _mantory, 2017)

Another case study that takes the use of Instagram as a product catalogue further is @doljabi33, a smaller company with 479 followers and 127 posts. This business also utilizes their Instagram as a product catalogue, with posts featuring pieces in their jewelry collection. The one difference is that in each post, a caption is written with a specific item number. Similar to @_mantory, there is a URL on their main account page redirecting them to a m-commerce website where purchases can be made, with the same photos used in This way, if individuals expressed interest, but were unable to locate the same piece they found on Instagram on the mcommerce website or if they had questions about a specific item, they could either do a search on the website for the item number or make a direct inquiry with the company via phone call, message or as a comment on the specific post.

30

Fig 6.6 - @doljabi33's IG landing page (far left), IG posts (second from left), an individual post (second from right), and m-commerce website (far right) (Source: doljabi33, 2017)

As mentioned previously, KakaoTalk links are used in place of a link that directs to an eCommerce website and the use of KakaoTalk is used for more than just customer relations. One account that appeared when searching for the hashtag # and previously mentioned was @na_kong1, who also used their Instagram for the purposes of cataloguing and for customer service, uses KakaoTalk to engage in direct buying and selling (na_kong1, 2017). Upon starting an open dialogue through KakaoTalk, customers are to send the product name as well as the size, colour and quantity of the product of interest, along with the customer's full name and contact address. In turn, a bank account number is exchanged and given to the customer along with the seller's full name and once all the required information has been received and payment has been sent, the items will then be delivered within a specified timeframe, as was requested by @na_kong1 during a direct conversation with them. This method is particularly interesting, since any transactional fees and service charges are avoided, which would have been incurred by the seller if they used an e-Commerce website tool such as Naver Storefarm. As well, the South Korean online payment ecosystem is quite different when compared to what is in place in the West, and a strong mobile fraud prevention system and very low cardholder fraud rates makes this way of direct commercial exchange a feasible method of buying and selling (Mercado, 2015).

31

VII - Key Findings A. Photo Staging With Instagram being a visual-focused Social Networking Service, it has a higher propensity to draw the attention of users much faster than other types of social media platforms. When it comes to the comparison between the use of visuals rather than verbatim, much less time and mental effort is required in seeing a picture than in reading a thousand words (Kosslyn, 1994). This ideology thus reinforces the approach of utilizing more images rather than long strings of text on mobile devices so that users can grasp information within seconds, thereby lowering the risk of losing their attention. At this time, Instagram is the only predominantly imagery-based social media platform and therefore businesses, particularly businesses with an account on Instagram that sell products or services, have a higher probability in capturing the attention of current and potential customers, while establishing and building upon their perceived value and brand equity among their existing and even potential customers much more effectively than with social media platforms that are more rhetoric-based. As with any corporate social media account, simply opening an account and posting content is not enough to be an effective tool to help achieve one's goals or purpose; a social media account can be interpreted as an organization's online presence that can represent a personal image or brand that they want to portray to their online audience, and organizations strive to maintain such. With Instagram preeminently being a visual-focused social media platform, the overall creative aesthetic of the image and video content being posted can influence how a viewer perceives a single post can leverage how their overall Instagram presence is regarded and this can effectively determine whether a short-term or long-term connection can be established between the viewer and the original Poster. Hence, posts on Instagram can be meticulously `staged' and this is particularly evident through the Instagram accounts of several South Korean e-vendors who utilize Instagram for business. Although certain aspects are considered, such as the placement and alignment of the subject in the frame of the photo, the image controls such as the brightness, contrast and saturation, one distinct pattern that was noticeable is in how these photos were staged; aside from the avoidance of `professional' models in staged poses you would normally find in a fashion campaign or magazine, these photos evoked a more casual, `everyday' look in common settings and positions, such as sitting at a cafe or outside on a street, that consumers could potentially relate better with. One particular setting

32

that is utilized is in a `dressing-room' type background or a `mirror-selfie', where a photo is taken of a person or object's reflection in the mirror.

Fig. 7.1 - Comparison of photo staging techniques among South Korean Instagram accounts (Source: Instagram, 2017)

In essence, potential posts are treated as if they were components in an advertising campaign, but are conducted in a way that is more engaging to one's everyday activities and lifestyle. One perceived notion as to why photos are staged in an `everyday' setting this way is to emulate how anyone can wear these clothes and in a sense simulate to viewers and potential customers the versatility of the clothes being sold as looking stylish in any situation. Another perceived notion as to why photos are cropped to display a model from the neck downward is to bring focus onto the clothes themselves and again, express the versatility of the clothes, where anyone can wear them. All these elements are usually considered with every image posted due to the fact that each and every post in an organization's Instagram account has the potential to make a `firstimpression'; in other words, a viewer might come across one of any visuals posted and the overall visual aesthetic could be the determining factor as to whether or not a viewer likes the post or even advances to the main account, views the other uploaded posts, establishes a `relationship' by becoming a follower or even makes a purchase. From the perspective of a new business or an online startup company, this is also one way of saving financially, since photos can be taken using a smartphone nor do they have to be professionally staged or require the services of a professional photographer.

33

The use of e-commerce web tools is also an effective method of facilitating financial transactions through Instagram, especially since Instagram now allows the use of external web links without having to exit the app via a built-in web browser. Naver Storefarm ( ) was found to be the most popular web tool used among businesses identified in the # (#ShoppingMall) search conducted in this paper and is set up to be compatible on both desktop computers and on mobile devices. Furthermore, Naver Storefarm comes from the same organization who created Naver Pay, a payment storing application that allows users to make purchases online and is currently being utilized by over 11 million users (Kim, 2017). These two Naver applications, hailing from the same parent company, work seamlessly together and so, when incorporated into an Instagram account, customers can almost effortlessly make purchases without having to exit the app or download any other platform in order to buy products online. This collaborative function further expands the definition of Social Commerce and is helping to set a precedent by creating a payment-active social media environment that businesses looking for a more cohesive way of incorporating social media developments with their e-commerce strategies can use. The other method of payment exchange between South Korean buyers and sellers via Instagram was through direct correspondence. KakaoTalk is used to facilitate the exchange of information between an e-vendor and a customer in order to complete a transaction. This involves the customer giving details of the product they wish to purchase as well as personal and shipping information, while the e-vendor discloses bank deposit information. In a sense, KakaoTalk assists in drafting an informal contract and this particular method, although involving several extra steps such as having to make a direct bank deposit into another individual's account, does save the e-vendor from having to pay any transaction fees or service charges if they were to use a third-party e-commerce tool such as Naver. This is perceived to be go-to method for commercial exchange on Instagram, as 1 out of every 6 South Korean business accounts investigated in the # (#ShoppingMall) analysis included a KakaoTalk link in place of a link that rerouted to an e-commerce website. This method also saves e-vendors time and effort from having to create and customize another online platform in order to conduct commercial exchange, thus placing their Instagram account as the main platform for buying and selling products.

34

B. Online Transactional Security In terms of safety and security when purchasing online, using credible e-commerce websites such as Naver or Shopify helps alleviate any distrust among customers in terms of using credit cards or debit cards to make purchases online. Shopify, for example, further reinforces a safe and trustworthy online environment with protective measures that safeguard both buyers and sellers from any fraudulent transactions (Shopify, 2017). In the case of consumers wanting to send money directly from their bank account to pay for online transactions, rather than obtaining the bank institution and account details of a seller, PayPal is an online service that facilitates these types of transactions and in turn offers protection to buyers who are victims of scams (PayPal, 2017). Both Canada and the United States have safeguards in place to help protect its citizens from cases of consumer fraud and fraudulent purchases made through the Internet; the Government of Canada has a central agency that works toward the protection of Canadians from forms of Internet fraud (Government of Canada, 2017) while the Federal Trade Commission in the United States in conjunction with domestic financial institutions enforces rules such as The Mail, Internet or Telephone Order Merchandise Rule and the Fair Credit Billing Act to protect American consumers (Federal Trade Commission, 2017). Additionally, individual financial institutions in both Canada and the USA have departments that look after concerns of fraud and billing issues, especially when credit cards are used to make purchases online. All these security protection safeguards are currently in place and their continued use help to encourage a more positive online shopping experience for consumers all over North America.

35

C. Cataloging

Fig 7.2 - Zara's mobile website (top left), H&M's mobile website (top right), @_mantory's Instagram account (bottom left) and m-commerce website via Instagram (bottom right) (Sources: zara.com, hm.com, Instagram, 2017)

The cataloging method observed through retail fashion business accounts on Instagram are perceived to be strikingly similar when compared to the mobile websites of major fashion retailers such as Zara and H&M; moreover, the use of an e-commerce website tool, as demonstrated by all South Korean business accounts in the #(#ShoppingMall) analysis that linked to an external website such as Naver Storefarm, were also set up to be mobile

36

friendly, even when opened directly through Instagram's automatic web browser. Thus, there was the perception of uninterrupted flow in the user experience, from finding an item to purchase to completing a purchase transaction, despite the fact that the process involved third-party collaboration. In other words, this parallels a familiar process when purchasing items from the online stores of more established fashion retailers. Thus, Instagram becomes a social media platform with more of a dual purpose: one where business accounts can actively promote and advertise various products and services followed by the ability to make purchases directly through the platform itself, thus avoiding the need to switch to another app or a web browser in order to make a purchase. D. Key Techniques and Best Practices The techniques exhibited by the South Korean businesses on Instagram demonstrated a working model that would be ideal for new startup companies looking to create a business strategy that incorporates both the marketing and advertising power of social media and the simplicity in conducting online commercial exchange. Businesses in Canada and the United States can create Instagram accounts for their business that are similar to the structural elements portrayed by South Korean businesses on Instagram, as there are several tools that currently exist within North America that are similar to the tools used in South Korea. (1) Using Instagram to create a visual catalogue With the way Instagram's interface is designed, each uploaded post can showcase a singular product. Photos can be taken using a personal camera or smartphone and photos can be staged in a way similar to the photographic method used by South Korean fashion e-vendors, where clothes are modeled in everyday settings or taken as `mirror selfies' with the photo cropped to show the neck down. Consideration should always be taken in how these photos are staged, as these posts also act as a visual advertisement, and so should several of these photos appear in an individual's timeline or in their search, how visually appealing and attractive the photo is can determine whether that individual ventures further into the business account and even makes a purchase. (2) Incorporation of a third-party e-commerce tool

37

The use of an e-commerce tool can be valuable on Instagram, particularly because of how it works cohesively with Instagram's web browser integration. While Naver Storefarm was the most popular web tool used in the Instagram accounts investigated in the #(#ShoppingMall) search, it is currently only available in Hangul and would not be the most effective tool. Shopify is an available e-commerce tool in North America that is equivalent to South Korea's Storefarm and is compatible for both desktop and mobile use. The incorporation of an e-commerce web tool would facilitate much faster payment transactions in comparison with having to exchange banking information for shipping information. (3) Using Hashtags/Caption Placements The consistent use of a set of hashtags would be particularly useful for those using the hashtag search option in Instagram to look for items. While #(#ShoppingMall) is one of several hashtags that are used by e-vendors in South Korea to sell items, there does not seem to be a particular set of hashtags that rivals this functionality in Canada or the United States. Hence, using a consistent set of hashtags will perhaps aid in finding specific items to a particular e-vendor on Instagram and may later help to set a precedent in certain hashtags that can be used to recall posts of items being sold. For the use of captions, it is ideal to incorporate a product or item number in the event that a potential customer would like to inquire about a particular product. It might also be beneficial to include an item's direct web page link on an e-commerce site, should web tools such as Shopify be incorporated. While hyperlinks are not an active feature in captions as they are on a main landing page, this only applies to mobile apps; those using Instagram on a desktop can copy and paste hyperlinks from the comments section into a web browser without drastically hindering on a customer's intent to seek more product information or even make a purchase.

38

VIII - Conclusion A. Summary Instagram has proven to have evolved into a powerful social media tool, demonstrating an ability for advertising and marketing tool as well as the capacity to conduct and facilitate commercial exchange between buyers and sellers - all without having to exit the application. Businesses can present their products and services through a user experience that is familiar and easy to manage through strategies that are both financially economical and trendy. These best practices, in turn, advance the definition of Social Commerce, shifting beyond the interpretation of platforms being primarily used for dissemination and advertising towards having more of a direct involvement in commercial exchange. This transformation also reflects a transition in the consumer behaviors of populations all over the world as well as the adaptive ability of social media platforms such as Instagram to growing trends and attitudes. It is true that Instagram has proven itself to be an ever-evolving and continuously growing community of individuals, each with a story and a brand to tell (Fernando, 2016). However, the capability of acting as an online marketplace that is easily accessible through a desktop or a mobile phone reveals its multifaceted nature, where the channels for shopping and the way consumers make online purchases is expanding. Thus, Instagram can offer more advantages and flexibility to businesses, particularly smaller businesses and startup companies. While it is true that social media platforms allow consumers to foster relation quality in a business, which can lead to increased loyalty (Hajli, 2015), there has always been a grey area between a vendor and their customers when considering the ability to directly buy and sell within an SNS platform. However, Instagram's ability to sell directly to customers without having to exit the app validates the flexibility and adaptability of social media amidst a changing technological landscape, as exemplified through a growing number of South Korean businesses who utilize their Instagram accounts as an extension of their mobile commercial activity. Regardless of technological factors that separate Canada and the United States from their counterparts in Asia, the technologies and tools needed for Instagram to function as an e-commerce tool do exist and are readily available for utilization in the North American consumer market.

39

B. Research Limitations Despite the potential benefits the strategies outlined in this paper present, limited research was available to measure the effectiveness of using Instagram for these purposes. From a qualitative standpoint, it is difficult to make a point of comparison on the popularity growth of the South Korean businesses who commercially engage with the Instagram community without having direct access to key insights of their Instagram account from their inception to its current status. C. Future Directions Currently, there is a limited number of research articles pertaining to Instagram for the purposes of e-commerce and business use. From the insights analyzed in this paper, an extention of this work would be to further investigate the level of engagement and the effectiveness of Instagram as an e-commerce tool. D. Funding The author received no financial support or incentive for the research, authorship and/or publication of this article.

40

IX ­ Appendix Appendix A: Search Results for # on Instagram Legend: B-F = Business Account, Fashion / B-O = Business Account, Other / P = Personal Account
Is External site ecommerce ? Y Y Y N N N Y Y N N Y Y Does account use IG to display ads? N Y N N N N N N N Y N N

# of results yielded after search: 926,674
Instagram Name Personal/ Business Link to external Site? www.wanna bej.com http://www. dolchanggo. co.kr/ www.blackp each.co.kr N KKT KKT www.dibidib i.com/inQma ll/4 http://todays earring.com/ N open.kakao.c om/o/sIhvme x http://www.t hematini.co m/ m.projectgol d.co.kr AND Does account use IG to catalogue? Y Y Y N Y Y Y N N Y Y Y Total # of Posts # of Followers # of Following Average # of likes Average # of comments

wannabej_official dol_chang_go goldrain0802 2_need jbro3440 misscoco1975 inqmall todays_earring raeleyjeane asomshea thematini projectgoldseoul

B-F B-O B-F P B-F B-O B-F B-F P B-F B-F B-F

892 7 357 209 128 2694 243 150 7 54 932 861

10387 9052 1587 3266 205 598 1463 571 615 499 13250 696

1 1712 212 186 181 133 779 90 126 515 56 1

60.4 23.3 116.0 89.2 30.0 11.4 36.1 75.6 123 70.8 70.6 39.0

3.3 1.9 4.3 4.4 0.8 0.4 1.1 5.2 4.3 1.5 3.8 1

41

KKT open.kakao.c om/o/sISdz6 o N open.kakao.c om/o/sjJ6W my blog.naver.c om/urban_er http://storefa rm.naver.co m/thecoming http://shop.a git.kr/mysho p/songmam/ m.storefarm. naver.com/th ecoming N http://storefa rm.naver.co m/velyday http://www. bbibbongunn i.com/ http://storefa rm.naver.co m/imflalfl www.creditstudio.com open.kakao.c om/o/sgKO N9u story.kakao. com/ch/sun0 805/app http://storefa rm.naver.co

bayco_264 lee_mjin plie_room urban_er thecoming_ bubble.mam _thecoming anna._.dim vely_d.a.y sungwoo.m imyoulim j1hyuneeee na_kong1 ms_kim0419 yunaxox

B-O P B-F P B-F B-F B-F P B-F Personal B-F P B-F B-F B-F

N N N N Y Y Y N Y Y Y Y N N Y

Y N Y N Y Y Y N Y N Y N Y Y Y

N N N N N Y N N N N Y N N N N

189 85 209 522 847 38 517 137 259 1150 705 16 1377 50 1306

1065 903 290 12528 7160 2465 466 359 5288 838 2598 397 14364 395 2290

1796 601 917 310 5486 249 593 348 3832 241 522 80 2244 485 315

36.8 104 29.1 89.3 48.3 9.2 40.5 65.1 55.5 78.3 109.0 41.5 322.0 24.4 78.0

1 8.7 1 3.9 0.4 0.2 1.1 0.7 2 4.6 2.4 2.4 0.3 1.1 3.7

42

m/monreve 185.2cm jisunth youngdays_officia l chavely486 shockda_ P P B-F B-F B-F N N youngdays.k r (Dead) KKT http://storefa rm.naver.co m/shockda https://www. brandi.co.kr/ shop/ontheri se http://storefa rm.naver.co m/if_d open.kakao.c om/o/sE9hb 2s http://m.philj a.com/ blog.naver.c om/ccywk12 3 N N http://brakio studio.com/ open.kakao.c om/o/sSKqu dp N N http://www. delightme.co .kr/ http://www.j ustus.kr/ N N N N Y N N N Y Y N N N N N 44 72 3 8 388 4602 1174 223 44 1418 198 0 55 54 149 429 68.3 42 17.9 61.0 10.9 3.4 0 0.3 5.4

e__leena ctrl_xx juns_park philja_com h_heeyeon_s prettyhyony kyung_minion brakiostudio _zzikkoo_ yang_ayan davvv__a delight__me young_lee_go

B-F B-F B-O B-O P P P B-O B-O P P B-F B-F

Y Y N N N N N N N N N Y Y

Y N N N N N N N Y N N Y N

N N N Y N n N Y Y N N N N

1386 666 353 1572 286 764 41 125 154 781 24 45 60

6393 858 407 438 2343 1690 430 209 2517 456 207 427 7061

516 460 99 561 118 811 71 496 339 198 513 99 763

92.1 118 40 6.4 38.9 118 60.1 32.1 182.0 34.2 47.3 77.3 246

4.4 5.4 1.3 0.1 1.8 7.3 5.3 1.2 3.8 1 2.3 5.5 3.5

43

h_jung_ fshcokr

P B-F

sevenpercent.pink monique_hj

B-F P

http://storefa rm.naver.co m/lanemarke t http://www.f sh.co.kr/ https://www. facebook.co m/sevenperc ent.pink/ KKT http://swindo w.naver.com /style/store/1 000013428 N http://www.i n-cro.co.kr/ http://storefa rm.naver.co m/lanemarke t http://jihyesi m.com/ http://astudio.co.kr/ http://storefa rm.naver.co m/ladyment http://www. middleage.co.kr/ https://m.blo g.naver.com/ ara0619/221 065663527 N http://swindo w.naver.com

Y Y

N Y

N Y

594 114

774 71

614 90

104 12.0

4.7 0.5

N N

Y N

N N

404 265

684 2360

870 1145

51.0 106

4.6 2.2

sooo.ming jennydara in.cro

B-F P B-F

Y N Y

Y N Y

N N N

2060 1428 190

1841 8816 8042

148 3491 160

49.4 375 79.5

0.8 3.4 4.3

jeeyurim jihye_sim_ldn a_studio.co.kr lady_ment jk_della

B-F B-O B-F B-F B-F

Y N Y Y Y

N N Y Y Y

Y N N N Y

61 357 87 562 561

273 806 750 7984 3146

220 352 1320 2089 2407

46 50.2 41.4 169.0 364.0

6.6 1.8 1.7 4.3 11.2

bebebox88 chichailing00 xhyejix

P P B-F

N N Y

N N Y

N N N

31 974 255

2602 1539 898

3082 1165 213

121 69.2 107.0

4.5 1.6 5.8

44

love__int dandyshop14 imgonna88

B-F B-F B-F

jji_20 alsdn20619 kimhhana ssadagu_ 950121_sj mey_moon galling_s2 _barbiemi_ thezn_ayeon calinrose_offical bany_unni c._.yuu one1_line

B-F P P B-O P P P B-F P B-F B-F P B-F

/style/store/1 000025313/h ome http://storefa rm.naver.co m/loveint https://story. kakao.com/d andyshop1 http://shop.a git.kr/mysho p/kkuda/ https://m.blo g.naver.com/ jiyoung9808 12?suggestA ddBuddy=tr ue N N KKT N N N https://www. barbiemi.co m/ http://m.blog .naver.com/k hs16032004 http://www.c alinrose.com / https://story. kakao.com/c h/themac N KKT

Y N Y

Y Y Y

N N Y

2039 1498 103

7752 499 2937

2711 1531 3524

125.0 26.3 73.8

3.5 0.7 1.4

N N N N N N N Y N Y N N N

Y N N Y N N N Y N Y Y N Y

Y N N N N N N Y N Y N N N

12 833 124 36 8 7596 61 25 936 32 1182 578 730

463 249 149 150 345 308054 2844 306 1454 66 20087 588 443

21 231 68 340 182 6963 456 1 298 2 266 490 316

28.3 59.1 27.2 13.4 114 8939 78 68.4 68.9 38.1 91.6 64.8 26.5

1.5 8.7 1.4 0.8 5.4 248 1.9 2.4 4 1.6 1.6 3.2 0.9

45

piaoxiangyi kwonsia1004 gillie_0906 artgraphy_kay dowls3582 haren_7

B-F B-O P B-O B-F P

KKT http://newpic nic.blog.me/ N http://www.a rtgraphy.co. kr/ story.kakao. com/ch/dofl 3582/app http://www. dopte.co.kr/ http://storefa rm.naver.co m/josember may https://www. instagram.co m/_barbiemi _/ open.kakao.c om/o/sEJbsL w KKT www.mksmi le.co.kr open.kakao.c om/o/smmT SYo N N m.blog.naver .com/alloveit /2210596113 43 http://storefa rm.naver.co m/triple_six

N N N N N Y

Y Y N Y Y N

N N N N N N

112 340 344 1018 43 238

583 1635 1475 52815 148 10206

429 840 299 85 153 194

46.1 257.0 256 1146.0 24.0 32.1

1.3 3.3 25.5 6.1 1 2.4

s.y________

P

Y

Y

Y

108

8841

6892

436.0

8.3

__tfn i_ddara roitte_s2 yourbeautymentor raysmith501 mi_ny_ing jh_cooing

P B-F B-F B-O B-F B-F P

N N N Y N N N

N Y Y Y Y N N

Y N N N N N Y

724 85 4 514 143 180 217

6050 510 32 1160 2069 6185 314

58 1005 39 944 1122 5611 546

129 31.6 22.5 39.3 125.0 225 27

3.6 0.5 0 1.5 6 3 0.8

allove_it 666_sixbysix

P B-F

N Y

N Y

Y N

235 851

10306 1111

4911 172

317 90.9

4.7 4

46

dinspress taozi_visualism cokkom_shop

B-O P B-F

http://storefa rm.naver.co m/dixpress facebook.co m/taozi.x.hu ang KKT https://story. kakao.com/c h/qpemeks1 11 http://storefa rm.naver.co m/nunas http://www. one-nonly.co.kr/ http://www.e ightiesseoul. com/ pf.kakao.co m/_WixnDd

Y N N

Y N Y

N Y Y

46 492 312

2823 21295 341

1921 595 677

55.9 982 14.7

6.7 32.4 0.2

qpemeks11 nunas_handcraft one.and.only_offi cial 80s_seoul littlemom902

B-F B-F B-F B-F B-F

N Y Y Y N

Y Y Y Y Y

N N Y Y Y

444 941 13 214 362

556 1251 512 1103 1341

594 1613 6 825 2598

24.2 27.8 160.0 100.0 52.5

1.6 0.8 16.5 2.7 1.3

47

Appendix B: Search Results for #ShoppingMall on Instagram Legend: B-F = Business Account, Fashion / B-SM = Business Account, Shopping Mall / B-O = Business Account, Other / P = Personal Account # of results yielded after search: 389,765
Instagram Name Personal/B Country of usiness Origin Does Does Does account Is External account Average # Link to account use use IG Total # of # of Average # site euse IG to # Following of external Site? IG to for Posts Followers of likes commerce? display comments catalogue? personal ads? posts? N N www.tsmmakassar.com N yacostudio.com/sh op Y N N www.sukaspo rt.co.id N N N www.charmej ewelry.com Y N N nordstrom.co m Y N N https://www.f acebook.com/ cccascadas/ N N N N Y Y N 65 4347 81 14121 55 427 11.6 66.8 0.3 0.2

navi_cgowda tsmmakassar

P B-SM

USA Indonesia

yacostudio duddl02 sukasport.id

B-O P B-O

Netherlands

Y N Y N Y N N N

Y N Y N Y N Y N

N Y N Y N Y N Y

443 204 603 136 6644 969 2084 7

2773 18 1693 122 1020 357 1689 109

276 12 966 274 326 324 219 412

103 5.8 123 24.8 22.9 8.3 46.5 31.7

3.4 0.1 2.8 0.8 0.5 0.1 0.6 0.4

Indonesia

o8alisha8o P charme_jewelr y B-O gift_sirinthip P nordstromroose veltfield B-SM mr_newyorker6 9 P

Thailand Thailand USA USA

cccascadas

B-SM

El Salvador

N

Y

N

190

682

178

19.6

0.4

48

andrians.andri2 345 P stlmotovlogs P andrians.andri2 345 P foreverisonesec ond P callecorazon B-SM krexyshinsekyu ng P deeradewi B-O kaasaustin127 P paulo_sousa_a P simliwei94 P itsfabric_officia l B-O threeetrii P

Indonesia USA Indonesia

N N N N

N N N N N N N N N

N N N N N N N N N N Y N N N

N N N N Y N Y N N N Y N N N

Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y

17 164 17 334 1321 17 1770 286 317 128 158 171 790 760

66 162 66 144 597 87 20343 406 257 1116 844 1048 121 820

90 106 90 158 173 311 667 385 293 247 836 490 109 524

5.9 13.6 5.9 20.9 21.2 12.6 214 102 61.2 150 42.4 102 16.7 49.3

0.1 0.3 0.1 1 0.5 0.7 10.2 2.3 1.7 2.8 0.9 5.7 0.6 2.7

Mexico Indonesia Indonesia Japan Malaysia

N N N N N

N N www.itsfabric South Korea .com Y Indonesia Amsterdam Mauritus N N https://ello.co/ mvnu N

mvannu P xavier_fitnessli festyle P

saya_presstheb utton B-O pierremi P gracia_natural_ B-O eddiesubma B-O chrissyincredibl e P namastefestival B-O

N N https://www.f acebook.com/ France/Thaila Sayapresstheb nd utton/ N China Malaysia Russia Indonesia N N N N N N

N N Y N N N

N N N N N Y

Y Y N Y Y N

365 10808 133 322 1114 1126

500 738 229 472 938 4675

1558 157 274 595 930 824

61.3 29.4 41.5 48.3 72.6 24.2

2.1 0.9 1.9 4.2 1.1 0.4

N N http://namaste festival.com/ N

49

alternativaversa til P kingswaymall B-SM sensounicolove rs2 B-F _shelleytaylor_ P

Brazil Canada Japan USA

www.alternati vaversatil.com .br N (DL) http://kingswa ymall.com/ N http://sensounico.jp/shop N N N linkedin.com/i n/bhupinderdev-03017a38 N N N

N N N N

Y (Influenc er) Y Y N N N Y Y

309 2961 310 428

3150 4220 205 92

1889 2338 18 90

296 67.3 40.6 16.9

10.5 1.9 1 1.9

devbhupinder katie_in_red bmews

P P P

Canada USA JAPAN

N N N

N N N

Y Y Y

1824 616 43

458 716 24

412 482 66

15.4 95.1 10.9

0.4 2 0.2

coleodriscoll1 P gabrielreyesgra ms P fashion_bye fikusss0106 B-F P

N N https://coleodr USA/CANA iscoll.wordpre DA ss.com/ N m.youtube.co m/user/gabere USA yestv N http://fashionb USA ye.com/ Y N N https://www.f acebook.com/ CelieMaquich on/ N goo.gl/J3rkD R N N N N N youtu.be/7tua bq88HpE N N N

N

N

Y

128

319

290

28.3

0.6

N N N

N N N

Y Y (reposts) Y

345 703 467

124 2658 152

504 6258 226

21.5 67.4 38.4

1.2 1.3 2.7

celie.maquicho n P filesneakers lolamarvel hiina_1999 jamievlogz smiley1b B-F P P P P

France Indonesia Germany Japan USA UK

N Y N N N N

Y N N N N N

Y N Y Y Y Y

49 876 26 102 130 304

1972 17290 211 470 485 408

99 215 264 541 372 219

87.5 1682 47.8 93.4 55.7 38.9

2.8 0.8 2 0.8 1.8 3.7

50

stafli youme_style brezhnev_art vkazhar

P P P P

Sweden Denmark Russia UAE Russia Russia India

lindemannen.s e/photo N N N N N N N N N N N

N N N N N N N

N N N N N N N

Y Y Y Y Y Y Y

1560 1044 236 66 19 462 194

847 103 185 416 24 765 5317

732 194 184 493 38 84 216

101 19.3 82.9 8.4 49.9 242

3.1 0.5 1.6 0.5 2 1.8

mrrr_meow05 P dariakazmiruk P marshmallowm an18 P

stacey_burski P princess_dresse s1 P teemusale P

Russia

N N www.last.fm/r u/user/staceyb urski N N N

N Y N

N N N

Y N Y

501 94 487

510 149 75

140 84 83

78.8 10.3 7.8

1 0.4 0.2

Finland

magnoliaparkce ntrum B-SM hottopicwem B-F carnecongliocc hi P telykk etalt shopiacovelli gitaristkalove annieloka emmaboj freeecoolinka P P B-F P P P P

Poland USA Italy Ukraine UK USA RUSSIA ITALY Denmark ITALY CZECH

N N https://www.i nstagram.com /magnoliapark centrum/ N N N N N

N N N N N N N N N N N

N Y N N N Y N N N N N

Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y

207 448 530 15 946 24 278 103 186 124 179

1845 580 640 336 488 159 330 110 406 201 106

73 46 1100 133 153 303 183 78 459 386 97

61.1 47.8 29.6 72.1 54.5 68.7 45.5 26.8 48.8 17 10.9

0.7 1.4 0.6 2 2.8 4.8 1 0.4 2.1 0.5 0.6

N N www.etalt.wo rdpress.com N iacovellicoutu re.com N N N N N N N N N N N

ilcaneelettrico P

51

REPUBLIC sv_romanova P RUSSIA N N www.faceboo k.com/gpshare life N N N www.albertob lasetti.com N N N N N Y 299 249 161 45.6 1.1

hsuping0331 jufortheest

P P

Taiwan Germany ITALY

N N N N N

N N N N N

Y Y Y Y (reposts) Y

2264 142 464 35 20

1396 178 5970 39 37

2653 269 817 68 18

69 17.8 119 3 21.1

2.1 0.4 1 0 0.9

alberto_blasetti P infuzija.bg P emiratesweldin g B-O

solandmall B-SM vcut_plasterboa rd B-O stuewe_christia n23pixx P

Middle East N N http://www.m ysouthlandmal USA l.com/ N https://vcut.co UK .uk/ N www.csfotode signer.jimdo.c GERMANY om N

N Y

Y N

N N

448 126

669 2100

297 432

25.7 97.3

0.9 2.6

Y

N

alisa_puma vonangeria ajicipta dara_lewiss wfm.uae

P P P P B-SM

RUSSIA FINLAND Indonesia RUSSIA UAE Canada

N N N

N N N

N N N N N N

N N N N Y N

Y Y (AND REPOST S) Y Y Y N Y

31

21

17

8.5

0.1

264 402 129 93 308 111

397 151 343 348 1971 410

148 172 813 123 57 264

24.2 26.5 45.6 51.8 69.9 43

1 1.2 3.1 1 2 2.1

cloverdalemall B-SM

emmahm92

P

Poland

N N http://waterfro ntmarket.ae/ N www.cloverda lemall.com N www.emmaci ejczyk.blogsp ot.com N

N

N

Y

1626

237

304

17.9

0.5

52

yukikizaki P nappies.in.the.j ungle P yony_felipe sjhae_shoppe suklily33 tirajeh2center P B P B-SM

JAPAN UK

N

N

N N N Y N N N Y N N

N N N Y N Y N Y N N

Y Y Y N Y N Y N Y Y

55 39 384 264 185 2290 230 785 60 122

81 72 819 89 272 5970 322 6469 100 464

102 345 1359 198 596 80 1020 312 90 676

16.9 11.8 29.3 2.5 26.4 50.1 46 179 47.1 80.9

0.5 0.3 0.6 0.1 1.9 0.6 2.9 4.6 1.6 3.2

USA PHILIPPINE S N TAIWAN

N N www.yonyfeli pe.com N N

justinlym P mallofberlin_lp 12 B-SM roses98inbloom P adventuresofda vide P

UAE HONGKON G N GERMANY N N CANADA

N N Www.tirajeh2 .com N N N N

bajur1337 satuylavaara

P P

POLAND FINLAND USA TURKEY

N N hauntedpeanut arcade.tumblr. com N N N N N

N N N N N

N N N N Y

Y Y Y Y N

101 422 11113 100 517

135 132 393 369 13320

157 141 589 96 114

22.8 21.7 8.5 94.7 111

0.7 0.4 0.3 3.2 2.7

gabrielherman_ P viktoriavld P emaarsquarema ll B-SM

N N www.emaarsq uaremall.com N

53

X - References Abedin, B. (2015). Adoption of Facebook for Customer Relationship Management for SMEs: Exploring the Underlying Motivations. In A. Khanlari (Ed.), Strategic Customer Relationship Management in the Age of social media (pp. 60-71). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8586-4.ch004 Al-Rabayah, W., Khasawneh, R., Abu-shamaa, R., & Alsmadi, I. (2017). Strategic Uses of Social Media for Improved Customer Retention (pp. 1-311). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. Retrieved from https://www-igi-globalcom.libaccess.lib.mcmaster.ca/gateway/book/162655 Barron, S. & Elsby, S. (2016). The Asian e-Commerce Explosion. Kantar TNS. Retrieved from http://www.tnsglobal.com/sites/default/files/asian-ecommerce-explosion.pdf Beanpole (2017). Beanpole's Instagram Account. Instagram. Retrieved from https://www.instagram.com/beanpole_official/ Brownell, C. (31 May 2016). Instagram introduces new tools for businesses to help reach its attractive user base. Financial Post. Retrieved from http://business.financialpost.com/technology/instagram-introduces-new-tools-forbusinesses-to-help-reach-its-attractive-user-base/wcm/b74f64e4-d680-4e29-a42be36ef3072509 Cavazza, F. (1 Feb 2012). The Six Pillars of Social Commerce. Forbes. Retrieved from https://www.forbes.com/sites/fredcavazza/2012/02/01/the-six-pillars-of-socialcommerce/#16e9069035b6 Chen, Z. S., Li, R., Chen, X., & Xu, H. (2011). A survey study on consumer perception of mobile-commerce applications. Procedia Environmental Sciences, 11, 118­124. doi:10.1016/j.proenv.2011.12.019 Choi, W., & Stvilia, B. (2013). Use of mobile wellness applications and perception of quality. Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 50(1), 1­ 4. Coy, P. (2017). The Bloomberg Innovation Index. Bloomberg. Retrieved from https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2015-innovative-countries/ Criteo (2017). The State of Mobile Commerce 2016. Criteo Advertising. Retrieved from http://www.criteo.com/resources/mobile-commerce-report/

54

DMC Media (2017). 2017           [2017 Social Media Usage Behavior and Advertising Attitudes]. DMC Media. Retrieved from http://www.dmcmedia.co.kr/ DMC Media (2017).    ()   [Internet Personal Shopping Mall Use Behavior]. DMC Media. Retrieved from http://www.dmcmedia.co.kr/ DMC Media (2017).       [Media Usage Behavior in Everyday Life]. DMC Media. Retrieved from http://www.dmcmedia.co.kr/ doljabi33 (2017). doljabi33's Instagram Account. Instagram. Retrieved from https://www.instagram.com/doljabi33/ eMarketer (11 July 2016). Marketers in South Korea Boost Social Media Budgets as Competition Heats Up. eMarketer. Retrieved from https://www.emarketer.com/Article/Marketers-South-Korea-Boost-Social-MediaBudgets-Competition-Heats-Up/1014191 Facebook Business (2017). Which Insights Can I View On My Instagram. Facebook. Retrieved from https://www.facebook.com/business/help/788388387972460?helpref=faq_content Federal Trade Commission (2017). Mail, Internet, or Telephone Order Merchandise Rule. Retrieved from https://www.ftc.gov/enforcement/rules/rulemaking-regulatory-reformproceedings/mail-internet-or-telephone-order Fernando, A. (2016). The Alexa Impact Factor: Measuring Social Media Impact from Instameets. Toronto, ON: Yeates School of Graduate Studies, Ryerson University. Fossil Group (2017). Fossil Group's Instagram Account. Retrieved from https://www.instagram.com/fossil/?hl=en Four Fifty Five (2017). Four Fifty Five's Instagram Account. Retrieved from https://www.instagram.com/fourfiftyfiveto/ Gillet, R. (22 Apr 2014). How The Most Successful Brands Dominate Instagram, And You Can Too. Fast Company. Retrieved from https://www.fastcompany.com/3029395/how-themost-successful-brands-dominate-instagram-and-you-can-too Global Web Index (2017). GWI Social Summary. Trendstream Limited. Retrieved from http://insight.globalwebindex.net/hubfs/Reports/GWI-Social-Q4-2016-SummaryReport.pdf

55

Government of Canada (15 Aug 2017). Canadian Anti-Fraud Centre. Retrieved from http://www.antifraudcentre-centreantifraude.ca/index-eng.htm H & M Hennes & Mauritz AB (H&M). The Official Website of H&M. Retrieved from http://www.hm.com/ca Hajli, N. (2015). How Social Commerce Emerged: The Role of Social Word of Mouth ­ Social Commerce. In N. Hajli (Ed.), Handbook of Research on Integrating social media into Strategic Marketing (pp. 1-16). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. Hale, Erin (28 Dec 2016). How Instagram Is Changing Southeast Asia's Advertising Game. Forbes. Retrieved from https://www.forbes.com/sites/erinhale/2016/12/28/howinstagram-is-changing-southeast-asias-advertising-game/#13f66e4260ae Industria de Diseño Textil, S.A. (Inditex). The Official Website of Zara.. Retrieved from http://www.zara.com Instagram (2017). About Us. Instagram. Retrieved from https://www.instagram.com/about/us/ Instagram (26 Apr 2017). 700 Million. Instagram. Retrieved from https://instagrampress.com/blog/2017/04/26/700-million/ J.P. Morgan Chase (2017). J.P. Morgan Chase's Instagram Account. Instagram. Retrieved from https://www.instagram.com/jpmorgan Jung, T. H., Ineson, E. M., & Green, E. (2012). Online social networking: relationship marketing in UK hotels. Journal of Marketing Management, 1-28. Kantar TNS (2017). Connected Life. Kantar TNS. Retrieved from http://connectedlife.tnsglobal.com/ Kasemsap, K. (2017). Mobile Commerce Technologies and Management. In J. Pelet (Ed.), Mobile Platforms, Design, and Apps for Social Commerce (pp. 197-218). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. KEB Hana Bank (2017). KEB Hana Bank's Instagram Account. Instagram. Retrieved from https://www.instagram.com/kebhana/?hl=ko Kemp, S. (24 Jan 2017). Digital in 2017: Global Overview. We Are Social. Retrieved from https://wearesocial.com/special-reports/digital-in-2017-global-overview Kim, A. J., & Ko, E. (2012). Do social media marketing activities enhance customer equity? An empirical study of luxury fashion brand. Journal of Business Research, 65(10), 1480­ 1486.

56

Kim, Han-joo (29 Jun 2016). Naver's mobile payment platform attracts 11 mln users. Yonghap News Agency. Retrieved from http://english.yonhapnews.co.kr/business/2016/06/29/53/0504000000AEN20160629008 100320F.html Kosslyn, Stephen Michael (1994). Image and brain : the resolution of the imagery debate. MIT Press. Retrieved from http://cognet.mit.edu.libaccess.lib.mcmaster.ca/book/image-andbrain Kulp, P. (30 Nov 2016). Instagram will have more advertisers than Twitter next year, report predicts. Mashable. Retrieved from http://mashable.com/2016/11/30/instagram-pass-uptwitter/?utm_cid=mash-com-tw-aus-link%23l7p5codLmpqQ#s5L6oAvV_SqB Leopold, A. (2016). Asia Pacific leads the world in mobile payments in latest study by Kantar TNS. Kantar TNS. Retrieved from http://www.tnsglobal.com/asia-pacific/intelligenceapplied/asia-pacific-leads-world-in-mobile-payment Liang, T.-P., Ho, Y.-T., Li, Y.-W., & Turban, E. (2011). What Drives Social Commerce: The Role of Social Support and Relationship Quality. International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 16(2), 69­90. Mac, R. (2 Mar 2015). How KakaoTalk's Billionaire Creator Ignited A Global Messaging War. Forbes. Retrieved from https://www.forbes.com/sites/ryanmac/2015/03/02/kakaotalkbillionaire-brian-kim-mobile-messaging-global-competition/#1b979f97fdd3 Mercado, F. (8 Jan 2015). Understanding Korea's Payments Industry. LinkedIn. Retrieved from https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/understanding-koreas-payments-industry-frankmercado na_kong1 (2017). na_kong1's Instagram Account. Instagram. Retrieved from https://www.instagram.com/na_kong1/ Nielsen KoreanClick (29 Nov 2017).  [Social Media Usage Patterns by Generation]. Nielsen KoreanClick. Retrieved from http://www.koreanclick.com/insights/newsletter_view.html?code=topic&id=422&page= 1 Nike (2017). Nike's Instagram Account. Retrieved from https://www.instagram.com/nike/ Ozturk, Z. K., & Alegoz, M. (2017). E-Retailing from Past to Future: Definitions, Analysis, Problems, and Perspectives. In A. Kumar, M. Dash, S. Trivedi, & T. Panda (Eds.),

57

Handbook of Research on Intelligent Techniques and Modeling Applications in Marketing Analytics (pp. 244-257). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. Ozuem, & G. Bowen (Eds.), Competitive social media Marketing Strategies (pp. 20-49). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. Ozuem, W., & Mulloo, B. N. (2016). Basics of Mobile Marketing Strategy. In W. Ozuem, & G. Bowen (Eds.), Competitive social media Marketing Strategies (pp. 155-172). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. Paypal (2017). PayPal Protection for Buyers. Paypal. Retrieved from https://www.paypal.com/us/selfhelp/article/PayPal-Protection-for-Buyers-FAQ2378 Procter & Gamble (2017). Procter & Gamble's Instagram Account. Instagram. Retrieved from https://www.instagram.com/p/BXWDNvshZ5j/?taken-by=proctergamble projectgoldseoul (2017). projectgoldseoul's Instagram Account. Instagram. Retrieved from https://www.instagram.com/projectgoldseoul/ Ragazzi, Francesco (2017). Palm Angel's Instagram Account. Retrieved from https://www.instagram.com/palmangels/?hl=en Rahim, H. (9 Jun 2017). Three things that businesses should know about using Instagram. Telegraph Media Group. Retrieved from http://www.telegraph.co.uk/connect/smallbusiness/marketing/three-things-to-know-about-instagram/ Russmann, U. & Svensson, J. (2016). Studying Organizations on Instagram. MDPI Information, 7(14). Retrieved from http://www.mdpi.com/2078-2489/7/4/58 Samuelsson, M., Dholakia, N., & Sardana, S. (2006). United States of America: Renewed Race for Mobile Services. In N. Dholakia, M. Rask, & R. Dholakia (Eds.), M-Commerce: Global Experiences and Perspectives (pp. 240-258). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. Retrieved from https://www-igi-global-com.libaccess.lib.mcmaster.ca/gateway/chapter/25609 Shopify (2017). Fraud Prevention. Shopify Help Center. Retrieved from https://help.shopify.com/manual/payments/fraud-prevention Steinmetz, A. (1997). The Art of Conversation: Dialogue Marketing and the Business-toBusiness Relationship. Retrieved from http://www.adlittle.com/downloads/tx_adlprism/1997_q4_27-32.pdf the_x.x.x.y (2017). the_x.x.x.y's Instagram Account. Instagram. Retrieved from https://www.instagram.com/the_x.x.x.y/

58

Turban, E., Whiteside, J., King, D. & Outland, J. (2017). Introduction to Electronic Commerce and Social Commerce. Retrieved from https://link-springercom.libaccess.lib.mcmaster.ca/book/10.1007%2F978-3-319-50091-1 wannabej_official (2017). wannabej_official's Instagram Account. Instagram. Retrieved from https://www.instagram.com/wannabej_official/ Webster, G. B., & Hume, M. (2016). Analysing the Role of social media in Dialogue Marketing and Management as a Contemporary Franchising Local Area Marketing Technique. In W. Wells Fargo (2017). Wells Fargo's Instagram Account. Instagram. Retrieved from https://www.instagram.com/p/BVqDYF8BuUN/?hl=en&taken-by=wellsfargo Wicks, N. (2015). Instagram country spotlight: South Korea. Campaign Asia. Retrieved from http://www.campaignasia.com/article/instagram-country-spotlight-south-korea/396022 Zwick, D. (2006). Canada: M-Commerce in World's Largest Mobile Market. In N. Dholakia, M. Rask, & R. Dholakia (Eds.), M-Commerce: Global Experiences and Perspectives (pp. 15-33). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. Retrieved from https://www-igi-globalcom.libaccess.lib.mcmaster.ca/gateway/chapter/25597 _mantory (2017). _mantory's Instagram Account. Instagram. Retrieved from https://www.instagram.com/_mantory/

59

