UNFOLDING MARGARET MACLEAN'S ORIHON-FORMAT SCRAPBOOK IN THE ROYAL ONTARIO MUSEUM COLLECTION: A FOCUS ON CONTEXT, PRESERVATION AND ACCESS By Celio Humberto Barreto Ramos B.A. (1999), B.F.A. Hons. (2003) University of Windsor, Windsor, Ontario

A thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in the Program of Film and Photographic Preservation and Collections Management Toronto, Canada 2017 ©Celio Humberto Barreto Ramos 2017

Author's Declaration
I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. This is a true copy of the thesis, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my thesis may be made electronically available to the public.

ii

UNFOLDING MARGARET MACLEAN'S ORIHON-FORMAT SCRAPBOOK IN THE ROYAL ONTARIO MUSEUM COLLECTION: A FOCUS ON CONTEXT, PRESERVATION AND ACCESS Master of Arts 2017 Celio Humberto Barreto Ramos B.A., B.F.A. (Hons.) Photographic Preservation and Collections Management Ryerson University

Abstract
My thesis comprises the analysis, cataloguing and preservation of Canadian author and educator Margaret MacLean's Japan Scrapbook at The Royal Ontario Museum. This project uses collections management strategies to describe the scrapbook at the item-level, catalog 597 printed photographs and images for upload to The Museum System database (TMS); attempts to decode the author's compilation and editorial process and finally, make recommendations for suitable handling procedures for access and physical preservation. The objects are affixed onto a large-format, traditional, Japanese, accordion-bound, album-style book called orihon. Together they capture a moment in Japanese history and visual culture in the first decade of the 20th century, and foreshadow MacLean's 1920s education work at The ROM. The scrapbook was compiled sometime between 1904 and 1928, using materials ranging from about 1880 to 1915, illustrating the 1904 to 1908 period when Margaret Maclean and her father resided in Yokohama, Japan.

iii

Acknowledgements
First and foremost I would like to thank Dr. Deepali Dewan, Dan Mishra Curator of South Asian Art & Culture at The Royal Ontario Museum and Dr. Max Dionisio, Head Librarian at the Bishop White Committee Library of East Asia, for their encouragement and expertise. I would like to thank the Far Eastern department's Collections Manager, Ms. Gwendolyn Adams for rediscovering this book after so many decades in the dark, and assistant Collections Manager, Kara Ma for her invaluable help around the collection and its resources.  I would also like to express my sincere gratitude to my teacher and reader, Julienne Pascoe, for her insights and guidance, Robert Burley, Dr. Michael Robinson, Dr. Thierry Gervais, Don Snyder and Professor Marta Braun for their invaluable wisdom. To my F+PPCM cohort and faculty for a great experience these past two years. My appreciation to Western University English Professor Dr. Thy Phu, Lead Investigator of The Family Camera Network project for her advice and interest in my research. I also want to thank Professor William C. Law at the University of Windsor and Ms. Yachiyo Nakao, Director of SoHo Art Gallery, for their unwavering support.

To my daughter Aiko, my wife Eriko, my mother Irma and my father Celio for believing in me.

Dedicated to the memory of that intrepid world traveler; dispassionate chronicler, indefatigable educator, and most spellbinding storyteller: Margaret Sarah MacLean, December 13th, 1871 to May 30th, 1931.

iv

Table of Contents 
Author's Declaration Abstract Acknowledgements Table of Contents List of Images Introduction Literature Survey Margaret Sarah MacLean Scrapbooks and Albums at the Turn of the 20th Century Scrapbook Description Preservation and Access Strategies Conclusions Bibliography Appendix A: Catalog Record Appendix B: Orihon Leafs Appendix C: Integrated Timeline 1903 to 1909 Appendix D: Maps Appendix E: Preservation Recommendations Appendix F: Access Log and Handling Guide
ii iii iv v vi - xv 1-2 3 - 12 13 - 23 24 - 28 29 - 36 37 - 47 48 - 50 51 - 56 57 - 101 102 - 205 206 - 215 216 - 219 220 - 221 222 - 224

v

List of Images

Figure 1  Object No. 1.558  Margaret MacLean strolling through a park, Japan. Gelatin silver print 5.4 x 10.2cm,  c.1906

vi

Figure 2  Object No. 1.458 Margaret MacLean on Motomachi-Dori, Yokohama Collodion print 8.9 x 13.4cm c. 1908

vii

Figure 3 Object No. 1.541 Koma Nosse newlywed to Baron Iwasaki. Relief halftone from The Standard magazine 17.55 x 10.5cm

viii

Figure 4 Presentation to Miss MacLean News clipping, Margaret MacLean Japan Scrapbook, Side 1, Leaf 4. 7.4 x 5.5cm 1904

ix

Figure 5 Canadian Pacific Railway Routes Around The World, Eliza Ruhamah Scidmore, Westward to the Far East, Canadian Pacific Railways, Tenth Edition, 1902, page 3

x

Figure 6 "Deer and Stag" Pure Silk Map of Yokohama, The Kawamata Silk Refining Company, c. 1905 indicating the MacLeans' home and work places in relation to photo studios [added] Japan directory for Tokyo, Yokohama, Kobe, Osaka, Kyoto, Nagasaki, Nagoya ... and Formosa; Yokohama 1905, Japan Gazette, 1905.

xi

Figure 7 Object No. 1.308 Snow Scene, near Nishino-bashi, Yokohama. With hand-written note indicating the MacLeans' home location, likely at 15 Bluff. Hand-tinted collotype picture postcard Unknown photographer. 9 x 13.6cm c. 1905

xii

Figure 8 Object No. 1.204 Japanese and Foreign Volunteer Nurses at Work Rolling Bandages for Casualties of the RussoJapanese War of 1904-05 at The British Hospital in Yokohama. Collodion print. Unknown photographer. 20.9 x 27.6cm c. 1905

xiii

Figure 9 Object No. 1.306 Invitation to meet Mr Lemieux Ozaki Yukio, Nakano Buye and Shibuzawa Eichi Letterpress print 14.3 x 11cm 1907

xiv

Figure 10 Appointment of Alexander MacLean as Canadian Commercial Agent for Japan - Min Tr and C [Minister of Trade and Commerce] 1904/11/19 Series A-1-d , Volume 2780 RG2, Privy Council Office, Series A-1-a. For Order in Council see volume 870, Access Code 90 Item Number: 101500 Library and Archives Canada 1904

xv

Introduction
In-betweenness would be a perfect way to describe the state of Margaret MacLean's Japanese Scrapbook, the object itself, its author, and its trajectory through the museum since 1928. Some may find this object rich with images of a distant land from a long time ago, where cultures, traditions and conflict intertwine with each other in a complex, multi-layered context. This object manifests the intersection of the cultural, familial, professional, religious, political, and social currents in Margaret MacLean's life. It functions as both a chronicle of her life in Japan and as a historical record of events relevant to the people living in Yokohama at the time. Some of these events have been forgotten in the wake of nearly 115 years of natural disasters, wars and reconstruction. Others have been deliberately left out of her record. This object has resided in The ROM collection since 1928, without description or documentation. It was compiled between 1904 and 1928 with materials dating from about 1880 to 1915, and it focuses on MacLean's experience of life in Japan between 1904 and 1908. Using collections management strategies, this project sets out to describe the scrapbook at the item level and catalog 597 photographs and images for upload to the The Museum System database (TMS). It also attempts to decode the author's compilation and editorial process and makes recommendations for its handling and long-term physical preservation.

The object itself, a type of orihon, (a Japanese term where ori means fold and hon means book) has a structure considered as an intermediary step between a scroll and a codex first developed in 9th century China. In the MacLean scrapbook's case, it is a great vehicle where this ancient Asian book form and Western scrapbook traditions fuse together. As an East Asian book with Japanese subject matter, it is in the care of the Bishop White Committee Library of East Asia. It is also a document related to the the museum's history, therefore it is also

1

associated with the museum archives. Its contents; photographs, e-hagaki, ukiyo-e and other visual media, make it appropriate to be part of the Museum's Far Eastern collection. This is a recent development made possible as a result of my work and shifting values in museum collections that have embraced photography, popular culture and ephemera as art objects. These multiple stewardship jurisdictions intersect with multiple access points for different audiences. This condition further reinforces the scrapbook's state of `betweenness' in its institutional context.

Margaret MacLean's biography helps the reader contextualize this object in both time and space. It is a reflection of this singular woman's mind, keen observation skills, meticulous attention to detail and an impressive depth of knowledge. At times she is obvert and spells out her impressions, and at others she is much more succinct, letting her compilations carry her message. The richness of this book depends just as much into what she includes as in what she leaves out. Margaret MacLean was a true educator, genuinely concerned with telling a whole story and at the same time leaving space for discovery, making the journey through her scrapbook both enjoyable and rewarding.

Finally, if we think of family photographs as those images which occupy a special place in the domestic space, beholden to a meaning by the owner, then this scrapbook is also a family album from a time when such an object was not yet formalized1. It is a photo album of massproduced pictures used to weave a very personal narrative of MacLean's life in Japan. Her compilation methodology and hand-written captions sets it apart as a unique object, which she held in high esteem until the end of her life.

Elizabeth Siegel, Galleries of Friendship and Fame: A History of Nineteenth-Century American Photograph Albums, (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2010) 160.
1

2

Literature Survey

This literature survey focuses on sources that expand my understanding of the history and cultural significance of scrapbooks in late Victorian and Edwardian periods, increase my connoisseurship of Yokohama's photographs, photographers and publishers, as well as the cultural, social and political context of early 20th Century Japan; to inform precise item-level cataloguing and the physical preservation of this object and its contents. This survey is therefore divided into three major sections: 1) Histories of Scrapbooks, to understand the role of scrapbooks in North American culture and their interpretation; 2) The History of Yokohama Photography to 1912, to understand the development of commercial, public and private photographic production during the Meiji Period (1868-1912), including press images of the Russo-Japanese War. Finally, 3) a Collections Management for Scrapbooks, photographs and prints section to help me determine the cataloging methodology and controlled vocabularies to use in the apparent absence of established scrapbook cataloging approaches. This section will also inform my initial assessment of preservation strategies to mitigate the impact of repeated handling on this object and its elements.

Histories of scrapbooks and albums: In Scrapbooks: An American History, author Jessica Helfand gives a cursory introduction to the history of scrapbooks, tracing their origin to Renaissance period books that were enriched with commentaries and other bits and pieces that showed the owners intellectual engagement with the book's contents that were called "commonplace book". She then notes that in the late 18th century an English clergyman by the name of James Granger introduced a new kind of book that expanded on this notion, which "...reconsidered scholarship in the context of more

3

varied materials". 2 Extra-illustrated books of this type are also known as "grangerized" books, and were "rebound to include additional engravings, watercolors, manuscripts, documents, and playbills as well as other miscellaneous items". 3 She then talks about the changes taking place in the early 1900s and the cultural shift away from then rigidity and symmetry of Victorian mores expressed in 19th century scrapbooks to the more expressive and experimental aesthetics shaping the new 20th century scrapbooks. This introduction and history however is very brief and does not delve deep.

The Scrapbook in American Life, is a collection of essays edited by Katherine Ott, curator in the Division of Science and Medicine at the Smithsonian Institution, Susan Tucker, curator of books and records at Tulane University's Newcomb College Centre for Research on Women and Patricia P. Buckler, associate professor of English and director of composition at Purdue University North Centreline Westville. These essays explore scrapbooks as both manuscripts of learning and knowing and books of the self. In the essay "An Introduction to The History of Scrapbooks", the editors and contributors explore a number of themes they associate with the book form: Selves in Books, The Genealogy of Memory Keeping, Color Printing and Other New Technologies, An Educational and Moral Tool, The Culture of Capitalism, The Photography Revolution, Private and Unique, Rupture and Reassemblage, Collage: The Scrapbook's Art Form, Ephemeral Ephemera and The Stigma of Mass Culture. This book is more theoretical in scope, with fewer illustrations of the scrapbooks than I expected. Professor Patricia P. Buckler's contribution in this book, the essay titled "Letters, Scrapbooks, and History Books: A Personalized Version of the Mexican War, 1846-48" looks at

2

Jessica Helfand Scrapbooks: An American History. (Yale University Press, New Haven and London, 2008) xviii Ibid.

3

4

the personal correspondence of the authors of a scrapbook at the time of the Mexican War. She examines how these letters help contextualize the various war mementos and ephemera compiled in the Buckler scrapbook. She compares scrapbooks to letters stating that scrapbooks are usually compiled closer to the events depicted than are memoirs; which are generally assembled later and incorporate reflections that are more distanced from events than letters. Buckler conceives of the scrapbook as intertext "the scrapbook ... is literally composed of texts and quotations, intermingled to express metatextual meanings."4 However, Buckler warns that "...the interplay among these texts can be at best speculative."5 The author shows that scrapbooks are not spontaneous documents created immediately following an event, but rather incorporate reflections on the author's part. Buckler summarizes that scrapbooks are cultural products usually authored by women over longer periods of time, with the goal of passing them on to the next generation.

Art History Professor Jennifer A. Jolly's chapter "History in the Making" examines the multiple layers of recording history through Gertrude Raddin's scrapbook of the Columbian Exposition of 1893 in Chicago. In this case study, Jolly argues that Raddin's scrapbook allows access to three levels of history, with the first level populated by the events, people and objects at the Chicago fair and their impact. The second layer is made up of the cultural significance of the scrapbook itself and the third layer is comprised of the writing and recording of history. She further states that her scrapbook reveals some aspects of familial interactions, her involvement with her church, the mass media and popular opinions around her as well as her thirty-five years of life experience.

Patricia P. Buckley "Letters, Scrapbooks, and History Books: A Personalized Version of the Mexican War, 1846-48" Katherine Ott,Susan Tucker, Patricia P. Buckler The Scrapbook in American Life, 65
4 5

Ibid.

5

I could see strong parallels between the Raddin and MacLean scrapbooks right away, at least insofar as the analysis was concerned. Their visual styles and compilation aesthetics and subject matter are mostly unrelated, yet they share so much in common as records of history. What I learnt most explicitly from her essay is that scrapbooks are at the intersection of the personal and the public. I intend to inform my analysis of the Margaret MacLean album with Jolly's analytical framework to reveal what I can of this intersection in her work.

Art Institute of Chicago's Associate Curator of Photography Elizabeth Siegel in her book Galleries of Friendship and Fame: A History of Nineteenth-Century American Photograph Albums examines the shifts in taste American families experienced that brought the obsolescence of carte-de-visite and cabinet card albums in the chapter "The Demise of the Card Album, The Rise of the Snapshot Album." The author shows that the transition of familygathering spaces from the formal parlour to the more casual living room, relegated sentimental objects to private spaces as early as the 1880s. After the emergence of snapshot photography in 1888, portrait photographs no longer represented the person as a whole, and friends and family members displaced the professional photographer and the photo studio from dominance. Snapshot print formats and sizes increased, and the scrapbook was uniquely positioned to gather them both for safekeeping and for display. The scrapbook format reflected the more casual and free way in which snapshots were being made, allowing for new kinds of layouts to take shape. The album had become highly personal, and reflected more on the life of an individual instead of a whole family. Quoting author Marilyn F. Motz, Siegel states: "such albums presented women's constructions of their lives as they saw them and as they wished to have them seen by others".6

6

Elizabeth Siegel, Galleries of Friendship and Fame 165.

6

While MacLean's scrapbook begins with a more general coverage of current events taking place during her time in Yokohama, such as The Russo-Japanese War, the narrative becomes more personal as it progresses, ending with a page dedicated to her father in the last leaf. There are some events which she decided not to cover in her scrapbook, such as the Hibiya Riots of September of 1905, the true purpose of Minister of Labour Rodolphe Lemieux's visit to Japan or more personally, the death of her father in 1908. These omissions reinforce the notion that MacLean presents a construction of this aspect of her life in Japan as she wished to be seen by others.

History of Yokohama photography up to 1912: In the article "Sites of "Disconnectedness": The Port City of Yokohama, Souvenir Photography, and its Audience", Mio Wakita, Professor of Asian art history at Universität Heidelberg, provides a historical context to the international nature of Yokohama. The author also explores the assumptions of "otherness" that both foreign tourists and other Japanese nationals had about Yokohama and its inhabitants. Wakita examines the impact of globetrotter tourism on the transformation of Yokohama photography after the 1860s, driving up the export of hand-tinted, albumen-print albums. The author demonstrates that Yokohama was a cosmopolitan centre and the entry point of technologies and foreign ideas into Japan, that was neither a fully western nor fully Japanese city, giving rise to the manufacture of cultural imagebased products that presented a romanticized ideal view of Japan for the tourist market.

In the exhibition book Art and Artifice: Japanese Photographs of the Meiji Era: Selections from the Jean S. and Frederic A. Sharf Collection at the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, edited by independent scholar Sebastian Dobson, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston Senior Curator of Japanese Art Anne Nishimura Morse and collector Frederic A. Sharf, the authors explore the

7

context in which Souvenir albums arose in popularity in Japan. In his entry "A Traveller's Paradise", Sharf talks about key 19th century developments in politics, transportation and technology that influenced the tourist industry in Japan, and the emergence of visual products designed explicitly for tourist consumption. The authors show that an inverse relationship existed between imaging technology and subject matter, where the traditional media of woodblock prints was used to depict the revolutionary modernization of Japan, and the world's most advanced imaging technology was used to portray a romanticized vision of a traditional Japan unspoiled by modernity. In his essay "Yokohama Shashin" scholar Sebastian Dobson describes a pair of 1872 Japanese photo albums by photographer Uchida Kuichi as "Lavishly bound in two traditional orihon or 'accordion' albums, each decorated with brocade covers and end papers flecked with silver gilt, the photographs are accompanied by handwritten paper labels in Japanese pasted in each mount" (page 20). The MacLean scrapbook corresponds to this general description of the orihon structure, however it appears to lack silver-gilt flecked end papers. The contents pasted in the MacLean scrapbook do not correspond to the above description, suggesting that she may have been working on a blank orihon album or an altered one.

The books Photography in Japan 1853-1912, and Old Japanese Photographs: Collectors' Data Guide by author, researcher and collector Terry Bennett provide a history and a detailed registry of commercial photographers in the Meiji period. Bennett approaches history from a connoisseurship angle, based on his extensive research to chronicle the development of photography in Japan, from 1853 to 1912. He introduces both western and Japanese photographers to the English-language historical record. Bennett's proficient knowledge is indispensable in understanding the booming photographic industry in Meiji Japan. He states that

8

conclusive attribution of commercially produced tourist photographs is still elusive, as photographs stock changed hands when studios went out of business as well as the destruction of records in natural disasters and World War Two bombardments. Bennett also provides a copy of the Japanese Photographic Copyright Regulations established in 1887, and a detailed photography timeline of people and events.

The MacLean album's photographic and photomechanically reproduced images largely draw from the tourist photograph. The albumen prints date largely from the 1880s, likely purchased from leftover stock at the various souvenir photography shops spread throughout the city. Many of the picture postcards are reproductions of these older images as well. A number of both of these prints are smaller, cheaper versions of photographs by well-known photographers or photo studios found in more expensive albums, and photography books, and demonstrate the flexibility in distribution for these types of images in the Japanese market in the first decade of the 20th century.

Collections Management for scrapbooks, photographs and prints. Scrapbooks do not fit neatly into established cataloguing guidelines due to their complexity and variety of component elements. It is therefore necessary to establish a number of fields to be used in the database as well as choosing a controlled vocabulary authority that will help in the creation of accurate, sharp, concise and precise descriptions that researchers will find useful in the future.

Director for Collections & Services and Chief of the Prints and Photographs Division of the Library of Congress, Helena Zinkham gives a detailed coverage of photograph description and cataloguing methodologies for cultural institutions in her chapter "Description and Cataloging" in

9

Photographs: Archival Care and Management, edited by National Archives' Document Conservation Laboratory chief, Mary Lynn Ritzenthaler. Zinkham highlights the special benefits of description for photographs, makes recommendations on descriptive elements, outlines the optional levels and depths of cataloging and finally offers an overview of guidelines and standards as well as resource needs and risk prevention. Her pragmatic advice is a concise resource to help me describe and catalog the scrapbook images following consensus-based best practices without having to start this process from zero.

University of Idaho Library Conservator Melissa Tedone's online webinar and handout titled "Preserving Historic Scrapbooks and Making New Ones That Last" outlines a variety of strategies she uses to preserve over 1,400 scrapbooks in the university's collection. Tedone uses and defines the term `inherent vice' as the tendency towards deterioration innate to each component of the scrapbook, and of the scrapbook as a whole. She also covers various suitable approaches to a particular preservation issue but warns that there are no "silver bullet" solutions. She overviews interleaving, isolation/encapsulation, preservation surrogates/ digitization, stabilization/conservation treatments, rehousing, disbanding and disassembly and expanding on each of these solutions to mitigate a scrapbook's inherent vice.

Photographer and bookbinding enthusiast Graeme Dawes's article on Japanese orihon book binding comments that the origins of this book style originates in 8th Century China. She provides some historical context, describing how orihon were used in ancient Japan to both show and preserve paintings and calligraphy. Dawes explains that orihon are intended to stand on their side, displaying their contents vertically, rather than horizontally on a flat surface. Dawe's provides an in-depth description of orihon structure, composition, sizes and handling guidelines. Dawes describes this type of book binding and how it was designed to be used. I

10

have learnt about its structure and binding materials, giving me valuable information for cataloguing and new factors to consider for effective preservation.

Emeritus Professor of Japanese Studies at Cambridge University Peter Kornicki's The Book in Japan: A Cultural History from the Beginnings to the Nineteenth Century is an in-depth study into the history of Japanese books dating to the 7th Century. His chapter on ancient conservation and preservation practices in Japan and China. The author describes how the ancients there used light, air flow and camphor wood interleaving to deter and arrest the growth of mould and insect infestation in Japan's hot and humid climate, and how these practices survived well into the 19th Century.

Conclusion The cultural, historical, social and political contexts in which a particular scrapbook is created in must be well understood to glimpse into the author's mind. Written documents such as letters, diaries and other ephemera can offer additional context to the contents compiled into a scrapbook. Scrapbooks can be difficult to interpret, as they may be compiled over long timeframes, and involve two or more authors. Ways in which to interpret the narrative, identify their compilation process and sources remain to be learned in greater detail.

Globetrotter tourism created a high demand for idyllic images of Japan booming in the 1880s and 1890s. Subsequently, a decrease on foreign visitors' travel restrictions to the interior in 1899, and the increase in snapshot photography since 1888 contributed to the demise of the souvenir album's export market by the early 1900s. When it comes to extant volume of photographs produced in Yokohama at the close of the 19th Century, the attribution of many of these remains elusive due to gaps left by absent business documents and destruction in natural

11

disasters and war, as well as insufficient documentation when other studio stocks were purchased and republished by new owners. A great deal of photograph attribution research remains to be done to identify the origin and trajectory of these photographic images.

Scrapbooks and their contents require concise and precise catalog descriptions at both the collection and item levels to be useful to researchers. The use of descriptive language agreed-upon by consensus, facilitates the usability and accessibility of the records, and allow the cataloger to avoid re-inventing the registration wheel. Conservation and preservation treatments must take into account the multiple deterioration factors that affect the diversity of ephemera that makes up a scrapbook. Suitable solutions to improve accessibility and mitigate their physical deterioration must be balanced against the needs and available resources at the collecting institution. Every conservation and preservation solution is unique to each scrapbook, and there don't seem to be any established cataloguing approaches for these types of objects.

12

Margaret Sarah MacLean

Very little is known about Margaret MacLean's life before 1904, and it has not been easy to grasp an understanding of this period of her life. Thus further research was required into her father's professional trajectory prior to his appointments to Yokohama and Shanghai to shine light on Margaret's early years (fig. 2). Margaret was born to Alexander MacLean and Sara Smith on December 13th of 1871.7 She was their only daughter, and the middle child out of seven kids.8 Her father was a successful businessman, of Scottih descent.9 Soon after Margaret was born the family moved to Ottawa. There Mr. MacLean bought and ran the Ottawa Times for nearly 10 years before establishing The Canadian Granite Company in the 1880s10. He built a large Gothic Revival home on a generous plot of land on Bank Street Road, just south of Ottawa proper in Nepean11. Margaret was around 10 years old at this time, but had had very little formal schooling. By her own account, she received only 5 years of elementary education, learning her ABCs at the age of ten.12 A hand-written comment by MacLean on a Japanese society lady's wedding photograph reproduced on a Canadian magazine suggest that Margaret attended a very good school nonetheless (Fig. 3).13

7 8 9

Year: 1881; Census Place: Nepean, Carleton, Ontario; Roll: C_13231; Page: 138; Family No: 630 Year: 1891; Census Place: Nepean, Carleton, Ontario; Roll: T-6330; Family No: 39

Ken Elder "910 Bank Street Road, The History of a house built in the Suburbs of Ottawa in 1876" Heritage Ottawa Newsletter 41 (4) 2.
10 11 12

Ibid. Ibid.

Gertrude E.S. Pringle "How Margaret MacLean Won a Niche for Herself in a Museum, By Energy, Initiative, And Persistence", MacLean's Magazine, (May 1923) 68
13

Object Number 1.541, side two, leaf 30, Margaret MacLean 1904 Japanese Scrapbook

13

In 1891 at the age of 19, she was living at home with her youngest brothers who were half her age. It is possible that a domestic role may have been expected of her as the only daughter, despite the fact that the family had two live-in maids.14 Accounts remark that Margaret was a voracious reader,15 no doubt influenced by her father and her older brother who were journalists. 16 While she may not have had a formal education, she educated herself.

A memorial plaque in the ROM's Canadiana collection commemorates Margaret MacLean's visit to the Columbian Exposition in Chicago in 1893.17 She may have gone there with members of her family. It was at this World Expo that the electric railway was introduced to NorthAmerican audiences. In the late 1890s Alexander MacLean would play a major role in installing the finest electric railway transportation system in Canada in the city of Ottawa.18

Her mother, Sarah MacLean (neé Smith), died in 1897,19 when Margaret was about 26 years old. It appears that Margaret took on the role of looking after the household and her aging father's ill health. Margaret was given the Bank Street house in 1899.20 She was an active participant in her community, recognized by The Ladies Aid Societies at Stewarton Church and

Year: 1901; Census Place: Ottawa (City/Cité) Wellington (Ward/Quartier), Ottawa (city/cité), Ontario; Page: 35; Family No: 348
14

Margaret MacLean, Beverley Stapells, and Pam Young. The Wise Traveller. (Ottawa Oberon Press 1990) 11
15

Year: 1901; Census Place: Ottawa (City/Cité) Wellington (Ward/Quartier), Ottawa (city/cité), Ontario; Page: 35; Family No: 348
16 17 18 19 20

Royal Ontario Museum, Canadiana collection, Accession Number 929.54 Ken Elder. "910 Bank Street Road, The History of a house built in the Suburbs of Ottawa in 1876" 3. Ibid. Ibid.

14

The Women's Missionary Society in Nepean, Ottawa.21 They honoured her with a valuable token of their appreciation for her work with young missionaries before departing for Japan in 1904. This event is published in an area newspaper, datable to May of 1904, making it one of the oldest 20th Century items in the Japanese Scrapbook (Fig.4).

As for Mr. Alexander MacLean, he had become quite a popular politician, being elected four times to the office of alderman between 1889 and 190222 . As mentioned earlier, he was instrumental in the Electric Railway system of Ottawa, and had for many years been a government contractor before that23. He was a well known figure in the capital as a journalist, entrepreneur and staunch liberal24 .

In 1903 Canadian interest in trade with Japan began to grow. Canada had a very successful participation in the First National Industrial Exhibition in Osaka, where its agricultural, food and technology products were received quite well. Agriculture Minister Mr. Sydney Fisher, reported right away to Ottawa the great success Canadian bread (wheat) had had at the fair25 . Upon his return, he made a case for the great trade potential with Japan to senior government officials in Wilfried Laurier's Cabinet: "The use of bread is becoming more common every year among the Japanese and this demonstration [at Osaka] of the superiority and relative economy of Canadian hard wheat flour has laid the foundation of what will, in a few years,

21 22 23 24

Newspaper clipping, Side 1, Leaf 5, Margaret MacLean Japan Scrapbook. Ken Elder. "910 Bank Street Road, The History of a house built in the Suburbs of Ottawa in 1876" 1-4. Ibid.

Margaret MacLean, Beverley Stapells, and Pam Young. The Wise Traveller. (Ottawa Oberon Press 1990) 11 Robert Joseph Gowen "Canada and the Myth of the Japan Market, 1896-1911" Pacific Historical Review, Vol 39, No 1 (Feb., 1970), pp 67
25

15

become an enormous trade, not only with Japan, but throughout the far east generally." 26

Fisher reported to the newly appointed Governor General of Canada, the Earl Grey on the great demand for Canadian wheat in Japan. This fuelled hopes and dreams for economic growth. Such high demand for Canadian wheat from 45,000,000 Japanese people would prove to be a most bountiful and profitable venture. It would finally justify the expensive and currently unsustainable transcontinental railway two-fold: first, it would be the logistical link to move wheat to the western ports for export to Asia, and two, it would be the transportation system that would bring new European immigrants to settle the vast prairies where they would grow the coveted wheat for Asia. Expectations were highly optimistic and quickly grew like wild fire once the Special Japanese Envoy to Canada, Nosse Tatsugoro reinforced these views with his own. He stated that Japanese people were leaving behind their traditional diet of rice and choosing to eat bread more often. At the time, Japan's impressive rate of westernization and modernization made claims like these entirely plausible. It was decided that same year that the fastest way to get these new trade links established was to forgo government to government treaties27, and send Trade Agents to foster direct trade on behalf of Canadian businesses.

Japan had been forcibly opened up to international trade by U.S. Commodore Perry in 1854. Unequal treaties with the United States were followed by other unequal treaties with European powers, among them the United Kingdom, France, Russia, Germany and others. Japan already had a tightly controlled and regulated trading post with the Dutch at Deshima

26 27

Robert Joseph Gowen "Canada and the Myth of the Japan Market, 1896-1911" 69

Fisher initially reasoned that joining the Anglo-Japanese Alliance Treaty would benefit Canada with minimum tariffs for its products entering Japan. After careful study on his way back to Ottawa, he realized that wasn't the case, and argued for the forgoing of joining that treaty in favour of sending Commercial Agents to lobby for Canadian companies directly. Robert Joseph Gowen "Canada and the Myth of the Japan Market, 1896-1911"

16

Island in Nagasaki Bay since the early 1600s. Japan was well aware of the disastrous consequences unequal treaties and European imperialistic ambitions had wrecked on China and other Asian neighbours. By the early 1890s Japan had modernized dramatically and renegotiated most of the unequal treaties as it sought equal standing on the geopolitical stage. In 1894 and 1895 it fought a war with China, defeating that country's armed forces and making territorial gains on the mainland and Taiwan. In 1894 Japan and the United Kingdom signed the comprehensive Alliance Treaty. Its first article provided for the right of subjects from either nation to travel to, do business in, migrate and establish themselves freely in any of either empire's home islands and territories. Canada flatly refused to be a signatory party, effectively excluding itself from the Alliance treaty 28. It can be said that Japanese migrants were neither welcome nor wanted in Canada at the time.

In spite of these discriminatory conditions, Japanese and Canadians engaged in commercial activities privately and directly. Many Japanese companies established trading networks with Canadian counterparts on their own initiative and vice versa. The Canadian Pacific Railway Company had won a contract to deliver mail from the United Kingdom to Hong Kong in the 1880s. This prompted it to build a new fleet of fast steamships to sail between Vancouver and Hong Kong via Yokohama and Shanghai. This line would eventually grow to include other ports of call in Japan, China and The Philippines. In 1891 the first of the new luxurious mail ships, The Empress of Japan entered service. Her sister ships, The Empress of India and The Empress of China, followed suit in the next three years. These ships crossed the pacific in an impressive ten days, and made it possible for a traveler in London to reach Hong Kong in about 22 days traveling exclusively on the Canadian Pacific Railway Company's rail and ship transportation network (fig.5)
28

Robert Joseph Gowen "Canada and the Myth of the Japan Market, 1896-1911" 65

17

On February 8th, 1904, two days after diplomatic relations between Japan and Russia were broken off, the Russo-Japanese War broke out after a surprise Japanese attack at Port Arthur.29 The Canadian government felt even stronger about pushing for trade with Japan, as it would need to feed its people and its army during this new conflict. Alexander MacLean believed that war time embargoes would not affect Canadian trade with Japan, as the war was not taking place on Japanese soil.30 MacLean and many others in Canada believed that as Japan modernized, appetite for western foods and agricultural products would increase31. With this mindset in place the MacLeans left for Yokohama.

Alexander and Margaret MacLean likely arrived in Yokohama on May 16th, 1904 aboard CPR's luxurious RMS Empress of India.32 Their first place of residence based on inbound correspondence dated August 17th, 1904;33 was The Bluff Hotel at No. 2 Bluff, on the hills overlooking the older foreigner's district known as The Settlement. Alexander MacLean's offices were located at No. 14 Bund street, on the same premises of the Canadian Pacific Railway Company and the Chamber of Commerce (see Appendix D). It was just two doors down from where Felice Beato's studio was located in the 1860s and 1870s. Baron Raimund Von Stillfried

The Russo-Japanese War Research Society, Timeline of the War. http://russojapanesewar.com/timeline.html
29 30 31

"TRADE WITH JAPAN" The Globe, Toronto. April 15, 1904.

O. Mary Hill Canada's Salesman to the World: The Department of Trade and Commerce, 1892-1939. (London and Montreal, McGill-Queen's University Press, 1977) 90 Postal History Society of Canada, Sailing Tables for the Pacific, Canadian-Pacific Line - Westbound http://www.postalhistorycanada.net/php/Library/Research/ShipTables/int_pacific3.php
32 33

Correspondence, side 1, leaf 1, Margaret MacLean Japan scrapbook

18

would take over the studio in the 1870s and 1880s. From the1880s to the 1890s Adolfo Farsari set up his studio at the same address next to the Grand Hotel: No. 16 Bund (fig. 6). 34

Their next place of residence was No. 15 Bluff, further away from The Settlement (fig. 7).35 They lived here for most of their stay in Yokohama, likely commuting to work by the electric railway inaugurated that same year. Shortly before being reassigned to Shanghai, the MacLeans lived at No. 58 Bluff, overlooking Motomachi-Dori, on the west bank of the canal separating The Bluff from the city36. All of their homes were in the affluent neighbourhoods of The Bluff, the home of well-to-do foreign and Japanese residents37 .

Margaret MacLean joined the Japanese Red Cross' Foreign Ladies Volunteer Nurses Association in the late spring (fig.8).38 Following the example of the Imperial Princes Komatsu, volunteer nurses around the country were rolling bandages for Japanese casualties of war. The Yokohama chapter was no exception, and its members dutifully engaged in this activity at the British Hospital, which had provided them with a room for this purpose. 39 It appears that most foreign volunteer nurses staid in their local chapters, and very few of them actually treated

34 35

Terry Bennett Old Japanese Photographs: Collectors' Data Guide, (Quaritch, London, 2006) 242

Correspondence, K. Kido to Margaret MacLean, April 16th, 1907, Margaret MacLean postcard collection, The Royal Ontario Museum. Correspondence, K. Kido to Margaret MacLean, January 1st, 1908, Margaret MacLean postcard collection, The Royal Ontario Museum.
36 37 38

See Figure 6 Map of Yokohama

Red Cross Certificate, Side 1, Leaf 34, Margaret MacLean Japan Scrapbook, The Royal Ontario Museum.
39

News clipping, Side 1, Leaf 35, Margaret MacLean Japan Scrapbook.

19

casualties of war in the field or at Japanese hospitals.40 Margaret MacLean served in the Yokohama chapter from 1904 to 1905.

It is also at this time that the MacLeans begin to receive invitations to high-society functions and parties. In her scrapbook, Margaret sometimes makes notes on important figures she met, Such as The Marquis Ito, Privy Council of The Empire, with comments such as "dressed like this when I met him".41 1905 appears to be one of the busiest years in the MacLeans' social calendar. The scrapbook contains a number of printed invitations to a number of high-profile Imperial Family parties, receptions for visiting dignitaries and much more. It also contains two articles published in The Globe by Margaret MacLean in June and July of 1905 describing some of these social engagements.

In 1905, Margaret MacLean set off on a four-week visit to China, with the express purpose of experiencing the China not known to non-missionary foreigners. 42 This is a clear statement of her sociological interests. MacLean explored the cities of Shanghai and Soochow, and describes in vivid detail her experiences and observations there.43 Upon her return she focused on writing, and her accounts were published in 1906 as Chinese Ladies at Home. 44 She

40 41 42

Nihon Seijujisha, The History of the Red Cross Society of Japan, (Nihon Seijujisha, Tokyo 1919) 288 Object No. 1.81, side 1, leaf , Margaret MacLean Japan Scrapbook

Margaret MacLean, Beverley Stapells, and Pam Young. The Wise Traveller. (Ottawa Oberon Press 1990) 8 Beverly Stapells 1975. "A ROM Pioneer: A Tribute to Margaret MacLean", Rotunda Magazine 8 (3) pages 15.
43

Margaret MacLean, Beverley Stapells, and Pam Young. The Wise Traveller. (Ottawa Oberon Press 1990) 7
44

20

was engaged in some business deals far way in Ottawa,45 continued to assist her father, attend official functions and gather photographs and photo postcards in her travels around Japan.

There is one particular dinner they attended at the behest of industrialist Shibuzawa Eichi (fig. 9) in November 27th of 1907, being held in honour of Canadian Minister of Labour, Rudolph Lemieux, who was visiting Japan to force that government to curtail Japanese migration to Canada and preserve Canada's friendly relations with both Japan and the British Empires.46 Lemieux arrived in Japan in the wake of the September 7th, 1907 Vancouver riots. White settlers of British Columbia reacted violently when a ship carrying Japanese passengers (some migrants, some en-route to other ports) made call at Vancouver. Consul General Nosse Tatsugoro, who was also Alexander MacLean's Japanese counterpart in Canada, demanded reparations be made to the injured Japanese. Nosse was a seasoned diplomat with a dual role in Canada, to promote trade between the two countries as Trade Commissioner, but most importantly, to defend and protect Japanese subjects from the at times violent discrimination they suffered in Canada.

A complex web of political compromises permitted racism to inspire new legislation to ban Chinese, Indian and especially Japanese immigrants to Canada, such as the Chinese Exclusion Act47 and the Continuous Journey Act. 48 The so-called Yellow Peril was gaining strength, and British Columbia passed numerous laws, regulations and measures against non-

45 46 47

Ken Elder "910 Bank Street Road, The History of a house built in the Suburbs of Ottawa in 1876" 1-4. Iino, Masako. "Japan's Reaction to the Vancouver Riot of 1907", BC Studies 60 (Winter 1983) 43

Canadian Museum of Immigration at Pier 21, http://www.pier21.ca/research/immigration-history/thechinese-immigration-act-1885 Canadian Museum of Immigration at Pier 21, http://www.pier21.ca/research/immigration-history/ continuous-journey-regulation-1908
48

21

white and Asian immigrants. Some were aimed at the Japanese in particular, whom were thought to be in direct competition with white economic interests49. The Vancouver riots of 1907 against Japanese nationals damaged relations between Japan and Canada, and eventually prevented the dream of profitable trade with that country from materializing. In the wake of these incidents Alexander MacLean was blamed in part for the decline in trade, and dully reassigned to Shanghai (fig. 10).50

This was the ultimate irony in many ways. Alexander MacLean had gone on the public record repeatedly to promote more equal relations with Japan and the Japanese. He wanted to promote better business relations, which was his mission, and he consistently spoke in favour the Japanese.51 On March 2nd, 1908, a disappointed Ottawa replaced MacLean with a certain W.T.R. Preston, "...a kicker and a pusher of approved quality.",52 in hopes of increasing their commercial profits in Japan. Preston was an aggressive business man whom the Canadian government felt would be better at increasing profits than Alexander MacLean.53 The myth of the Japan market set unrealistic profit expectations that were never met, and by 1911 all pans to continue growing trade and exports to Japan dissipated with Sir Wilfried Laurier's death.

Simon Nantais "When the Geta is on the Other Foot: Xenophobia in the Canadian Immigration Policy Towards Japan, 1907-1908", The Asia-Pacific Journal, Vol. 6, Issue 1, Number 0, (Jan 2008) 6
49

John D. Meehan. Chasing the Dragon in Shanghai: Canada's Early Relations with China 1858­1952. (University of British Columbia Press 2011) 27-28
50

"Japanese Immigrants: Attitude of The Canadian Government" The Press, Auckland, February 22, 1905
51

Anne Shannon Finding Japan: Early Canadian Encounters with Asia, (Vancouver, Heritage House 2012) 109
52 53

John D. Meehan Chasing the Dragon in Shanghai 27

22

Once in Shanghai, it appears that Mr. MacLean's health deteriorated to the point where he could not perform his duties, and, according to author John D. Meehan, it was Margaret MacLean who worked in his stead until his death on December 22nd, 190854. Margaret MacLean does not mention this sad event explicitly, but has included a menu from her voyage home on The Empress of China (1.591). She has hand-dated it to March 12 1909, a day before her ship docked at Vancouver. An announcement on the Ottawa Journal states that Margaret MacLean held a memorial service for her father at Stewarton Church, in their hometown of Nepean, Ottawa, on March 18th, barely five days after returning to Canada55. Supplemental correspondence found with the scrapbook points to Margaret MacLean relocating to Montreal after her return to Canada, and then travelling around the world before establishing herself in Toronto in 1914, and taking the first steps towards an important career as an educator at The Royal Ontario Museum.

54 55

John D. Meehan Chasing the Dragon in Shanghai 27 Ottawa Journal, March 18th, 1909, 8

23

Scrapbooks and Albums at the Turn of the 20th Century
In the last decade of the 19th century and the first decade of the 20th century, the booming popularization of snapshot photography required its own stage for both presentation and preservation. The purpose-made, slip-in cardboard Carte-De-Visite and Cabinet Card albums of the Victorian era were not suitable to contain the multiple sizes of snapshot photographs.56 As early as the 1870s scrapbooks moved in to fill this gap due to the flexibility they afforded, as their smooth, blank pages allowed for materials to be laid out and pasted in with greater freedom, reflected in the term scrap album used by some magazines.57 More than that, the art of putting albums together was informed by the older, more established American art of scrapbooking. 58 These new photo albums were already borrowing the format from that folkloric art form, and so too would other facets of this art form be transferred to album-makers.

In tracing the transition from the CDV and Cabinet Card album to the modern snapshot album, Dr. Elizabeth Siegel states how the scrapbook fit in this transitory period.59 Due to the increasing variety of print formats and sizes, the scrapbook was uniquely positioned to gather them both for safekeeping and for display. Reflecting the more casual and free way in which snapshots were being made, the scrapbook allowed for new kinds of layouts to take shape. They became highly personal, and reflected more on the life of an individual instead of a whole

Elizabeth Siegel. Galleries of Friendship and Fame: A History of Nineteenth-Century American Photograph Albums (Yale University Press, New Haven, 2010) 160
56 57 58 59

Ibid. Ibid. Ibid.

24

family. Quoting author Marilyn F. Motz, Siegel states: "such albums presented women's constructions of their lives as they saw them and as they wished to have them seen by others". Is this a highly personal album of Margaret MacLean? Does it present her life as she wished others to see it? It is very clear that the source material she uses to report on the war is mostly in the English language, or bilingual, Japanese and English, as in the case of the commemorative picture postcards and many of the news clippings. It must also be considered that she may not have had access to Russian materials to include in her book, save one piece of correspondence early on in the scrapbook. It is a letter from a friend now living in St. Petersburg, who makes direct reference to their living in enemy countries. It is possible that this is the only piece "form the other side" that she may have been able to include. It is possible as well that MacLean was sensitive to her father's quasi-diplomatic position, and that she would not include any materials that portrayed Japan or its war efforts in a negative light. This would prove her prudence as a guest of that country.

Professor Patricia P. Buckler contends that scrapbooks occupy an intermediate space between correspondence and memoirs, that scrapbooks are not spontaneous documents created immediately following an event, but rather incorporate reflections on the author's part, and that scrapbooks are cultural products usually authored by women over longer periods of time, with the goal of passing them on to the next generation.60 Margaret MacLean's scrapbook contains a wealth of matter that marks many events in the history of Yokohama and Japan between 1904 and 1915. Some of these events have been largely forgotten, but immortalized in her book, such as the crisis created when Yokohama ran out of drinking water for ten days. Other events are completely absent for the record, such as
Susan Tucker, Katherine Ott, Patricia P. Buckler, The Scrapbook in American Life, (Temple University Press 2007) 64
60

25

the Hibiya Park riots of September of 1905, in which citizens angered by the final terms of Portsmouth Treaty set fire to parts of Tokyo and Yokohama in violence that lasted for several days.61 MacLean also fails to acknowledge in any obvert way the death of her father in Shanghai. Instead, she very subtly includes the ship's menu with hand written notes dating it to the day before she arrived in Vancouver with her father's remains 12 weeks after his death. The final page of the scrapbook is dedicated to Alexander MacLean's work in Yokohama, and makes no mention of his time in Shanghai. In fact, Margaret affirms the good work her father did in Japan with a press clipping stating his merits clearly.

In the exhibition The Family Camera at The Royal Ontario Museum, in the State of the Family section, curators Dr. Deepali Dewan, Dr. Thy Phu, Dr. Jennifer Orpana, Dr. Julie Crooks, Dr. Sara Bassnett, Dr. Sara Parson and Dr. Silvia Forni propose that family photographs are any photographs that occupy a privileged position in the domestic space.62 Is MacLean's scrapbook also a family album? Or is it merely a record of a special time in a far-off land? In the first instance, the scrapbook is an imposing physical object. It is bulky and heavy. It is made of very fine materials, such as silk brocade wrapped covers and heavy card and paper. Its larger dimensions and unusual binding style make it unwieldy to handle without the adequate reverence: the book is meant to be supported properly at all times and its pages turned slowly. The density of the compiled materials demand a careful and detailed study of each leaf. Personal snapshot photographs intersect with mass-produced imagery of different sorts. Affixed fold-outs reveal more photographs and prints. In this way intimate interventions that locate herself in the album create a sense of intimacy. MacLean converts these readily
Andrew Gordon. "Social Protest in Imperial Japan: The Hibiya Riot of 1905", (Massachusetts, MIT 2011) https://ocw.mit.edu/ans7870/21f/21f.027/social_protest_japan/trg_essay01.html
61 62

Label text, The Family Camera Exhibition, The Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto, 2017.

26

available and cheap mass reproductions into her own pictures by adding hand-written captions such as "Our gardener looked like this" (1.386) or by marking an "x" on a postcard with "Our house" written right above it (1.308, 1.309 and 1.317). MacLean does indeed transform impersonal photographs into personal ones with this technique. The combination of these factors point to an object that was indeed precious to her, so much so that she waited until 1928 to gift it to the museum. The evidence points to this scrapbook being a special object that accompanied her for decades after its initial creation. This is indeed a visual record of an important shared family experience and it was treated with reverence. Its final donation to The ROM signals a shift in meaning for the object, changing from something personal to something that had historical and social value as a teaching tool.

It is apparent then that MacLean's scrapbook is an object that exhibits the characteristics of both, albums and scrapbooks, overlapping these classifications. It brings together Asian book binding and Western scrapbooking traditions effortlessly. It falls squarely in the transitional time period in which these two forms began to merge, and clearly serves as an appropriate stage for the display of photographs, based on Elizabeth Siegel's descriptions of albums of this era. Her compilation of official commemorative picture postcards closely follows the battles and events of the Russo-Japanese War with accuracy, but not immediacy, despite being compiled in chronological order. She returns to these pages years later with clippings offering additional information to complete the narrative with better quality facts. MacLean revisits other points along the timeline of her Japan experiences, with images, descriptive hand-written captions, longer notes with colourful anecdotes or even fold-out pages with further content (1.137, 1.139, 1.240, 1.271, 1.307, and 1.352). Evidence of this is in her careful notation of the year in which presumably the added information was released. Many press clippings will have a year written

27

in the top-right corner. Others while not explicitly dated, will reveal clues to their output dates in the image or the text copy itself, such as in item 1.351. MacLean did come form a family of journalists after all. Thus it can be seen that materials are arranged chronologically at first, with additional materials added on thematically at later dates. There are two instances in which additional materials have not been added directly onto the scrapbook's surface, but rather on tissue paper. One of these sheets of tissue paper has been affixed to the inside back cover of side 1, and includes a number of newspaper clippings on the death of Emperor Meiji in 1912, four years after MacLean had left Japan. There is another such tissue paper add-on in which more newspaper clippings about the Japanese Red Cross and a translation of MacLean's award certificate are pasted. There is one newspaper clipping that talks about a new Japanese Red Cross hospital in Paris during World War I. That appears to be the latest addition, datable to about 1915. Compiled materials do not seem to originate beyond 1915. While it is not possible to determine with absolute certainty whether MacLean continued to compile after this date, the fact that this latest material is in fact added to an additional, unattached sheet of paper suggests that the scrapbook may have already been filled, or that, at least, MacLean was satisfied with the layout and did not wish to alter it any further. The reflexive nature of her relationship to this scrapbook highlights her desire to remain engaged with Japan long after her departure. It is therefore possible to assume that MacLean intended for others to read this book and her narrative exactly as she intended. This might also signal her intent to use this book in an educational role, adding another layer of meaning to her work.

28

Scrapbook Description

Is it an album or a scrapbook? The Margaret MacLean Japan Scrapbook is a large accordion-bound book made in the tradition of the Japanese orihon. The orihon is a type of book constructed by binding together leafs of paper which fold in alternate directions. Its earliest origins date from 8th Century China, where various types of this alternating accordion-type binding were used to preserve and store paintings and calligraphy works. These would be pasted onto one side of the orihon. The paintings would later be displayed by opening the orihon like an accordion and resting on its lower side. In the MacLean scrapbook's case, its format and contents overlap into the categories of album and scrapbook. It could be said that it is a photographic album compiled in the manner of a scrapbook, or a scrapbook that is rich in photographic images. While its contents are quite varied in materials and media, the layout composition is sober and modern, a departure from the ornate victorian aesthetic but not quite as stark as the modernist magazines of the 1910s. The orihon book format is an in-between stage meant to preserve scrolls in a codexlike manner.

29

The scrapbook measures 33.5cm long by 38cm wide by 6.5cm deep and it weighs 5.98 kilograms or 12.78 pounds. If it were stretched out, it would measure about 16.5 meters long. It is likely that the orihon itself was purchased in Japan circa 1904, the year Margaret Maclean arrived in Yokohama with her father. On each page are pasted a number of items, mostly photographs, photographic postcards, and other photomechanical reproductions clipped from magazines and newspapers, and it also contains maps, woodblock prints, booklets and other fold outs. These objects were gathered while in Japan, as they relate almost exclusively to specific events during the Russo-Japanese war or to her life in Japan. Many of them are dated by the author or postmarked as correspondence to either Margaret MacLean or Alexander MacLean. This object is made of cardboard and fabric at its essence. Its front and back covers are made of thick cardboard and wrapped in a green and copper-orange silk brocade. Its 36 heavy card leafs fold in alternating directions with fabric hinges. Altogether there are 78 surfaces for the affixing of images and other flat materials. Its covers are joined to the album leafs using a blue fabric that appears to be silk. the blue fabric is affixed to the edge of each leaf. It appears that this originally served to reinforce the paper joint between leafs, but now that these have all but separated over time, these fabric joints act as hinges that fold in alternating directions. There are two sides, a long side that has 38 pages (including the inside front and back

30

covers) and a short side that has 36 pages. Its two sides fully covered with pasted photographs, printed ephemera, and additional tissue pages taped by hand. Many images are accompanied by hand-written captions in ink that provide added information on people, places, events and dates.

How's it compiled? While it is compiled chronologically, some materials pre and post-date MacLean's Japan stay by several years. This suggests that Ms MacLean returned to edit the scrapbook over time, to add relevant clippings and images where she felt necessary. While there may have been some early editing collaboration with her father, there are sufficient items dating from after his death to indicate that Margaret MacLean was the primary compiler. She omits important family events, such as her Father's death and other controversial topics such as the September 1905 Hibiya Park Riots, The treaty of Potsdam and the true purpose of Minister Lemieux's visit to Japan, as well as the motives for her father's transfer to Shanghai. Ms. MacLean crafted a narrative that was deliberately sympathetic to Japan, strayed away from many controversial topics, focused on generally acceptable topics of discussion. Materials for it began to be compiled in the spring of 1904, just before Margaret MacLean resided in Japan while her father was appointed the Canadian Government's Trade Agent to Japan between May 1904 and early 1908. The earliest dated object in the scrapbook is from 1904 and the latest is from 1915. This points to a time period that covers announcements

31

regarding the MacLean's future life in Japan through to Emperor Meiji's death in 1912. What is less certain is the date of compilation. Scrapbooks tend to be compiled in a very conscious manner over a long period of time, often marking important points in the author's life. Ms. MacLean's avid collection of varied pictorial materials suggests she was very resourceful, utilizing items from both mass produced consumer culture and mementos from the exclusive social events of her circle. The extensive use of much older hand-coloured albumen silver prints point to her use of more or less obsolete material that may have been quite inexpensive to purchase. The advanced stages of deterioration of these photographs raise suspicions as to their true date of origin in the early 1900s, and may in fact be left-over stock from the 1880s and 1890s. Much of this material can appear to be more ethnographic in nature, but was already firmly rooted in the Yokohama Shashin tradition first seeded by the work of influential Western photographers based in Yokohama63, such as Felice Beato, Baron Raimund Von Stillfried and Japanese masters such as Kusakabe Kimbei and Kozaburo Tamamura. Evidence of definite compilation time is not readily apparent in the scrapbook itself, however, a wet stamp on the inside front cover marks the date October 30th, 1928 as the day it was accessioned into the Royal Ontario Museum of Archaeology's care. It is thus clear that the compilation could not extend past this date, and a date of 1904 to 1928, while generous, serves as the earliest and latest possible dates of compilation. The fact that the oldest items in the scrapbook date from 1915 suggests that MacLean made a conscious choice not to include any more Japan-related content after the first year of World War I until the time she gave the scrapbook to the museum. It must be noted that the scrapbook does not contain material unrelated to either the Russo-Japanese war or to life in Japan during the Meiji Period, therefore in terms of subject matter, it encompasses the late Meiji Period Japan.

63

Sebastian Dobson Art and Artifice: Japanese Photographs of the Meiji Era (MFA Publications, 2004) 17

32

How did it come into the ROM? The scrapbook was a gift of Miss MacLean to the Royal Ontario Museum of Archaeology made on October 10th, 1928, four years after her retirement. This indicates that the book was considered differently from other scrapbooks MacLean left to the museum, which she used in her education work as teaching aids. It is evident from its dimensions, binding style, weight and remarkable state or preservation, that this book would not have been a practical teaching aid for the scores of lectures Miss Maclean conducted at the museum during her tenure, but that it was much more likely a precious book to her.

What else came with it? A number of lose postcards may have come into the collection along with this book, as many of them are duplicates of the official commemorative Japanese postcards already within the scrapbook. There are additional cards from Europe and South Asia that form part of this loose postcard collection. Some of these were posted by MacLean to her brother Donald in Toronto, with explicit instructions to save them until she returned from her travels. Other postcards were sent to her by friends and acquaintances living or traveling around the world. The earliest postcard dates from 1903 and the latest from 1926. It isn't clear if this group of cards came in at the same time as the scrapbook, as there is no documentation recording this, however, they are housed in a separate box next to the scrapbook. Margaret MacLean also

33

gifted other items to the museum, including Korean ceramics, textiles and her younger brother's military medals.

What condition are the photographs in? The photographs in the album are affected by a number of deterioration issues. First and foremost, they are all susceptible to deterioration related to inherent chemical instability, that is to say, various mechanisms of degradation due to the materials they are affixed on, next to and against. The materials the scrapbook itself is made of, its binding structure and how it does or does not protect against deterioration agents in the environment, and the non-photographic materials also compiled in it all affect the various types of photographs in different ways. There are three main types of photographic images, and three main types of photomechanical reproductions. Within the photograph types there are (in order of quantity):

· Hand-coloured albumen silver prints, dating mostly from the 1880s and 1890s. · Collodion POP prints · Gelatine silver POP prints
Photomechanical reproductions are:

· Hand-coloured, duotone and monochromatic collotypes. · Halftone images from newspapers and other publications. · Offset lithographs.
Here are the deterioration agents acting on each type of photographic and photomechanically reproduced object and examples for illustration purposes:

34

Photographs: Hand-Coloured albumen silver prints suffer from yellowing and fading. objects 1.573 and 1.585 are examples of severe cases of fading, where the image is very hard to see due to density loss, revealing the details of the hand colouring. Several albumen prints also suffer from cockling due to adhesive application, such as 1.83, 1.122, and 1.163. A number of images are also plagued with creasing. This is largely due to how and where they are affixed onto the various leafs when they open and close. All of the albumen prints suffer from one degree or another from striations, which is inherent to that medium. The degree of deterioration also points to a much earlier production time than the scrapbook compilation, and exposure to detrimental environmental conditions for extended periods of time. Japan is notorious for its long, hot and humid summers. Collodion POP prints are few in number, but are in remarkably excellent shape in terms of image density and the absence of surface damage. However, 1.440 and 1.444 suffer from cockling. 1.440 also suffers from creases due to an unglued side of the picture being in close proximity to the edge of the leaf. The rest of the collodion POP images are of smaller dimensions but some suffer from small lacunas on their edges and others also suffer from cockling and creases. Gelatin silver prints are all affected from the two general patterns of silver mirroring: around the edges, which points to environmental conditions as the catalyst, and all-over silver mirroring, which indicates direct contact with an acidic object for prolonged periods of time. objects 1.444, 1.151 and 1.152 are examples of all-over mirroring, showing that they have been in contact with acidic objects. In the opposite it is evident that a column of hand-coloured

35

collotype postcards have been the objects against which these photographs have been in contact with.

Photomechanical Reproductions In general, collotype postcards make up a large percentage of all photographic images compiled in the album, and hand-coloured collotypes make up the majority of postcards. All collotypes have excellent image layer permanence, as this photomechanical process is rendered in ink. The associated deterioration mechanisms with them are physical in nature, as they are in contact with objects on the opposite leaf while the scrapbook is closed. Because of the card stock they are printed on, which is acidic, they pose a threat to objects susceptible to damage from higher acidity. It is important to note that a significant number of collotype postcards have been trimmed from their original dimensions to fit the author's layout. Clippings with halftone images are quite brittle, especially those printed in newsprint. this type of paper is very acidic and has yellowed and turned almost brown in some cases. Many of these clippings are in direct contact with other printed and photographic material, acceleration deterioration such as silver mirroring, staining and embrittlement. Many of them are creased or have had pieces from the edges break away over time. Last, but not least of the photomechanical reproductions are the off-set lithographs or compound lithographs. Being ink-based, their images are quite permanent and the colours of their inks appear to have held up. Like other paper-based objects, the stock they're printed on can be acidic, leading to accelerated deterioration on object in close contact with them.

36

Preservation and Access Strategies
Where does it "live"? Currently, the scrapbook is stored in a lid box in the World Cultures Department's Far Eastern collection vault, where other Bishop White Committee Library of East Asia rare books requiring controlled storage environments are also stored, and is listed in its catalog as a manuscript. Tracking its provenance since accession has been a difficult. As mentioned earlier, the scrapbook was a gift from Margaret MacLean to the Royal Ontario Museum of Archaeology (ROMA) on October 31st, 1928, but it does not appear to have been accessioned as a collection object. Beverly Stapells mentions the scrapbook being in the Library of East Asia in 1975. 64 Thus it seems that it has been kept in the custody of two different collecting bodies within the museum. Both are tasked with the access and preservation of this book. It is considered both a library book and a collection artifact, creating a complex administrative context. The photographs and photographic objects are only now being accessioned into the ROM's Asian photograph collection, while the book itself, the correspondence, news article clippings and other written matter remain under the Bishop White Committee Library of East Asia care.

What are the challenges of preserving this book? There are several serious risks to the preservation of this object, and they relate primarily to handling issues. First of all, because of its size and weight, most pages cannot be fully open without

64

Beverly Stapells 1975. "A ROM Pioneer: A Tribute to Margaret MacLean", Rotunda Magazine 8 (3) 14.

37

placing undue stress on the cloth binding the leafs together. Adequate support must be placed underneath the book, such as angled foam blocks to ensure the pages are not open flat. Because the book has no real spine, support must be adjusted with the turning of each page, as this changed the thickness of each half of the book. Secondly, there are a significant number of fold-outs pasted onto the leafs. Some of these have been further folded due to poor awareness and care while turning the leafs. The new folds are rather harmful to more sensitive material like poor-quality newsprint paper, and a number of these have broken off. Prior to rehousing into a single zip bag, the loose material in L sleeves that was left in place where it was found within the book would slide out, and increase the risk of folding or bending. Thirdly, turning the book around is not easy due to its size and mass. The risk of a dropping it is high if the handler treats it like a regular spine-bound book. Fourth, there are a number of different materials in direct contact with each other. High-acid newsprint pulp has stained some of the other ephemera it faces on the opposite page. Some of the silver gelatine prints have faded quite significantly, while others are in remarkable condition.

How is it accessed? It is currently accessed by request to Dr. Deepali Dewan, Dan Mishra Curator of South Asian Art and Culture and curator of the Asian photography collection and The Family Camera Archive at The ROM, or through Dr. Max Dionisio, Head Librarian of the Bishop White Committee Library of East Asia, or through Dr. Brendan Edwards, Head of the ROM Library and Archives. The scrapbook is not in circulation, but it is listed on the University of Toronto Libraries

38

website search results65. The scrapbook has been viewed in the Far Eastern Collection Vault, the Far Eastern Archives room, the Far Eastern Library reading room, and the Library and Archives reading room, four different locations for as many different audiences. Conservators, photography scholars, biographers and students have requested access to this object.

How is it preserved? The scrapbook is currently wrapped in tissue paper, housed horizontally in an archival box and placed in the Family Camera Archive stacks. In the same box are housed a first edition copy of MacLean's book on her China travels: Chinese Ladies at Home, as well as a rare book on the Russo-Japanese war, gifted to her by the general manager at the Grand Hotel in Yokohama, as well as some copies of articles on her work at the museum, her father's appointment as the Canadian Government's Trade Agent to Japan, two recently acquired handtinted collotype postcards. Loose ephemera and photographs found inside the book have been individually housed in clear polyester L sleeves and stored together in a polyester zip bag.

What will be cataloged? The album, photographs, photomechanical reproductions, woodblock prints and some of the letterpress and hand-painted invitations are being accessioned into the museum's photography collection. A careful selection of cataloguing fields was drawn up that is in keeping with established ROM cataloging fields and adapted for this unique object. A total of 12 fields were chosen for this record. The controlled vocabulary from The Getty Research Institute's Art & Architecture Thesaurus authority were the preferred terms for these records.

65

Royal Ontario Museum Far Eastern Rare DS847 .M32

39

1. Accession number: This is based on the ROM's current cataloging system, structured as 2016X49.1.1, where the first four digits represent the year the object is accessioned, the X represents a special status and the next two digits refer to the donor. The next two digits refer to the group number, and final period separated numbers address the object itself. In the MacLean scrapbook's case, 1.1 refers to the album itself, and 1.2 refers to the first image within the book. For the purpose of this paper, only the last two digit groups will be used, that is to say, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, etc, while the preceding accession numbers are being determined by the Registration department. 2. Object name: The common object name goes here, for example, photograph, relief halftone, postcard, invitation card and so on. The terms used here are those in common usage already in the photography collection. 3. Curatorial Title: This titled is descriptive in nature, whenever possible of both the image and the object if it is necessary. 4. Maker: The attributed creator or contributor, may include the photographer, the person who commissioned the work, the publisher or, in case it cannot be attributed, the term `unknown' 5. Geography: This field identifies the location where the object was made. Where the location cannot be determined precisely, the country name alone is used. 6. Materials and technique: The media the object is created with, for example Hand coloured albumen silver print or collodion DOP print based on The Getty terms. 7. Output date: This field refers to the date of publication or printing of the photographic object itself, and not the date of the events depicted in the image layer. Dates are expressed as either a range of years, circa a particular year, century or part thereof, or a specific date based on direct evidence on the object or its associated event.

40

8. Dimensions: These fields contain the length and width of a photographic object or print, and whenever possible the thickness as well. The measurements are recorded to two decimal places where appropriate. 9. Description, Inscriptions and Curatorial Notes: This combined field tracks a) overall description statements of the image and/or object for quick identification, b) notations that are either printed with the object or handwritten by the compiler where practical to include in the record, that is to say, usually no more than two sentences in length, and c) original research notes that serve to expand or clarify understanding related to events, locations or personages connected the object.

Based on these cataloguing fields, a catalog record will resemble the following example:
Accession Number Object Name Curatorial Title Maker Geography Materials and technique Output date Dimensions: HxWxD Description, Inscription, Curatorial Notes

1.31

Postcard

Stone Buddhas

Unknown

Nikko, Japan.

Hand-cloured collotype on postcard stock

c. 1905

9 cm

14.1 cm

n/a 

This hand-coloured collotype postcard depicts a row of stone statutes resembling The Buddha along a stretch of pathway leading to a larger stone sculpture of the diety. A kneeling figure can be seen before one of the statues in the row. (27) The Stone Buddhist Statue at Gamman, in Nikko.

The digitization process The Royal Ontario Museum's dedicated photography department is headed by Bryan Boyle. It counts with state-of-the-art facilities, equipment and digital asset management systems in place for the acquisition of top-tier digital images from artifacts. These are used for publications, catalogs, media and other high-visibility uses or when high resolution images are required. To offset demand on the studio for everyday needs, departments have their own, smaller studios where they can photograph artifacts for internal needs. Such is the case in the Far Eastern Department where I worked. This smaller facility is used for the quick

41

documentation of its objects, and serves as the first step in the digitization of artifacts. The Far Eastern Department also has scanners available for materials that require it.

The first step in making this album usable, is to digitally photograph it and its contents. While lower resolution images no greater than 300kb are the maximum allowable for the database to work, I created high resolution files from which derivatives were made. Using departmental equipment: a copy stand, a NIKON D5500, a set of lights, a scale ruler and a colour card I captured images following the in-house standard, that is at 300dpi, 24bit color depth, 6000 x 4000 pixels dimension. These high-resolution originals are stored locally on a departmental workstation, as there are tightly regulated storage restrictions on networked resources.

During the digitization process I was able to see all of the photographs and quickly appraise their general condition. A great deal of them have faded substantially, others are plagued by silver mirroring and others experience various other deterioration issues in different degrees. The acidic nature of the support paper and inadequate storage environment conditions account for the bulk of the degradation damage. There are other issues of yellowing and brittleness with newspaper clippings, some correspondence has been folded intentionally or inadvertently. There is a lot of discolouration and spotting in many of the paper-based items. Folded items present a particular challenge to photograph, as their dimensions sometimes extend far beyond the album pages. There are also items which are glued on top of others, and finally a number of folded pamphlets and booklets that need to also be photographed page by page.

42

Coming up with an initial logical way of doing this was clunky, but I decided on the following procedure: First, use the copy stand already in use by the department. Due to the album's dimensions, it was most practical to photograph one page of side at a time. I intellectually divided the album in two sides, recto and verso. I then subdivided each side into odd and even page numbers. As I finished with the odd pages, I would rotate the album so that the even pages could be photographed. As the album is fragile and susceptible to handling damage, I placed it on a sheet of mylar, and I would move the album by handling this layer.

I photographed whatever I saw when I opened the album. Where there were folded ephemera, I would then unfold the item and photograph its recto and verso if they remained flat on their own. Sometimes I used a glass sheet weight that allowed me to flatten and photograph the item. Some correspondence was neatly folded inside its envelop, which was glued to the page. It was carefully removed, unfolded and then photographed, sometimes with the aid of the glass plate weight. Wherever I found a broken-off piece of paper, I would place it inside a mylar sleeve or polyester bag, and re-place it where I found it and photographed it. The process required a few hours and the periodic readjustment of camera settings, book supports and other lighting corrections. Various methods were tried to reduce glare on glossy or silver-mirrored photographs when problems arose. In the end some pages had to be photographed a number of times to compensate for some of these factors, but this number was limited, taking into consideration that post-production time was also limited. The work was completed in a day, and the digital photographs were moved to a local desktop for review. I was able to see the level of detail of each image on the scrapbook and determined that it was sufficient to meet the database image standards.

43

The idea for a surrogate copy created from these digital files that would reduce physical handling on the scrapbook emerged right away. After considering several approaches to creating this digital surrogate, I settled on an approach in part inspired by the orihon format itself. That is to say that I looked at the original purpose of the orihon format, which was to preserve scrolls in a more accessible format. I decided to do the reverse, and to "unfold" this orihon scrapbook into two scrolls, one each for the recto and the verso sides. There were a number of post-processing steps that needed to be undertaken in order to create a continuous file that would approximate the unfolded state of the scrapbook.

The first step was to go through the image files and re-name them, so that the images would be in the correct sequence to match the book, and not match the in-camera capture order. Due to the the scrapbook's dimensions, the copy stand lights configuration provided limited usability. Odd and even pages were shot in separate sequences and in reverse orientation. The files were renamed in the following fashion: MM_SB_S1_L1.*; where MM stands for Margaret Maclean, SB for Scrapbook, S1 for side one and L1 for leaf one. Side and leaf numbers would change as the sequence progressed. Once the files were renamed, the reversed images were rotated to the correct orientation. The files for each side were saved on separate folders labeled Side1 and Side2 respectively. Thus I ended up with an orderly sequence of images for each side.

The next step was to correct for slight perspective distortions. I took measurements using the ruler photographed with the scrapbook and created a guide grid that would allow me to stretch the image in such a way that I could "square" all four corners to each other using Adobe Photoshop. At this time I also corrected the white balance and exposure for each image and made other minor image adjustments like finer rotation corrections.

44

Step three required the stitching of two adjacent album leafs together into one doublespread. I proceeded to create a canvas on photoshop where I could have two leafs side by side. I copied and pasted each leaf side by side in he order they appear in the album. I overlapped them at the visible seam, and made some fine-tuning adjustments to clean up the joining edges. Each double spread file was then named S1_spread1, where the number values would change in sequence order. These files were then saved in subfolders named Spreads. The following step in the process involved stitching together each spread to each other in sequential order. The creation of a large canvas was required, and it was at this point that I had to make an important decision as to what to exclude from the digital surrogate at this early stage. Namely, I did not include multiple views of the fold-outs, nor did I include images of the additional paper tissue pages that were affixed at later dates, nor did I include the loose materials found stacked together inside the album. They were not necessary for the proof-ofconcept initial prototype I had in mind, and they were thus left out. The question stayed in mind though, as to how to present these excluded items in future versions. It was decided then to create a canvas that was 38 times the length of a leaf, plus a little extra cautionary margin for side one of the digital surrogate. In a similar fashion to the creation of the double spreads, I dropped onto this canvas each sequential double spread file and joined them at the seams, repeating blending steps to make the joining edges appear natural. all the layers were then collapsed and the image flattened to reduce the file size. It would only safe as a tiff file because of its unusual dimensions (16.5 meters wide), and has a data size of nearly 500 megabytes, This whole process took about four weeks of after-hours work outside of my internship. I was satisfied with this initial model, and could now see it scroll across my computer screen at will. The 300 dpi resolution was clear enough to make all text and detail readable with ease. I felt that this file could not just serve as a research surrogate, but also as the basis of an interactive display piece that would live in a gallery exhibition or digital blackboard panel for

45

public access. The idea to integrate the images with their catalog record to facilitate meaningful interactions was born during this process.

The challenge that arose from this model for an enriched digital surrogate was it incompatibility with the TMS database system, which is being implemented by the museum to make their collections accessible through the E-museum platform. While the digitally applied scroll format makes the scrapbook's timeline easier to navigate, its component images are not easily integrated into TMS, and print outs or hard copies re-introduce the problems of scroll storage and preservation that orihon were designed to solve. Therefore, the digital surrogate took on a much more conventional form. Each album leaf was separated, trimmed and processed individually, and saved with filenames that reflected their placement in the scrapbook, for example, S2L2.*. When dealing with fold-outs, the file dames were given the following form: S2L6_1.*, S2L6_2.*, S2L6_3.*, where the final number expresses a view of the same page. the same approach is used to to denote different views of the album/scrapbook itself. Each one of these files was compiled sequentially into a large PDF file. This file starts with several object views of the album/scrapbook, and is then followed by the image of each leaf, starting with side one, inside cover and sequentially through to the end of side two, leaf 36. After that, it is followed by the loose ephemera and photos found between the album leafs. It is on this PDF file at each of the selected photographic and pictorial objects are given a catalog number that matches the catalog record. Wherever possible, these numbers are placed on the top-right of the image, and are inscribed on white rectangles with red borders to highlight them. This PDF document was then printed, and a hard copy resides with the album/ scrapbook in its housing, to reduce the amount of direct handling of the object itself. A hard copy of the catalog record is also housed with the album/scrapbook. The housing of these two printed

46

documents with the object is meant to greatly reduce physical damage stemming from repeated handling.

47

Conclusions
A total of 597 printed photographs, photomechanical reproductions and printed images have been individually cataloged and processed for upload to The ROM's TMS database for both, increased accessibility and digital preservation. A digital surrogate in Portable Document Format (PDF) with various object views and individually numbered images also resides on the network storage, and a hard copy of the same lives with the scrapbook in the vault, along with the corresponding hard copy of the catalog record. The author's compilation and editorial process have been analyzed using current frameworks, revealing a chronological order of events, evidence of reflection on these, and the discovery of a suppressed personal narrative. Finally, recommendations for suitable handling procedures and physical preservation have been written and developed for this precious object.

It exists on different planes as a scrapbook, album, historical document and a potential educational resource due to its format, construction, author's intent and the materials compiled within. Furthermore, as a privileged object, first in the MacLean's Yokohama home, and later in Margaret's home, it also functions as a personal family album. Because it was created at a transition period in the nature of photo albums between the 19th and 20th centuries, it occupies a place in photographic history that reflects the evolving design aesthetics of North American scrapbooking as it embraced photographs.

The variety of material culture objects compiled in MacLean's scrapbook reflects the popularity and accessibility to photomechanically reproduced images, true photographs and other pictorial media for mass consumption available to non-Japanese residents of Yokohama in the first decade of the 20th century. In part spurred by the newly permitted creation of

48

photographic postcards, demand for photographic images of the Russo-Japanese war, the album is mostly made up of hand-tinted collotype postcards, followed by older hand-tinted albumen silver prints, letterpress halftone images, gelatin silver and collodion prints and a handful of woodblock prints. Using hand-written captions and notes she transforms commonplace images not only into a testimony of her experiences and descriptive account of Japan and its people. MacLean also described her privileged experiences through written accounts in her personal correspondence, and published articles in Canadian newspapers of the time. The Margaret MacLean scrapbook demonstrates how the appropriation of impersonal, mass-produced images can convey personal narratives effectively.

Measures for the long-term care and preservation of The MacLean scrapbook have been accomplished by combining traditional and digital preservation methods. A custom-made archival storage box, and selective interleaving have been implemented to mitigate inherent vice deterioration. A handling guide has also been included to reduce the risk of handling damage. This physical damage is drastically reduced by using a full-colour hard copy surrogate with numbered images linked to the catalog record. This helps users identify the images to be accessed in the scrapbook. The scrapbook's digital surrogate allows for greater access through The ROM's new TMS database system and its E-Museum web pages.

Finally, it is clear further research remains to be done to answer questions about photographers identities, studios, publishers, and precise material dating. There is also the question of cataloguing the objects outside the scope of this project, namely newspaper clippings and correspondence. In addition, the latest in digital tools can be used to incorporate cataloguing data about this album to illustrate and chart the narrative, further revealing the album's organizational structure and intention. There is a wealth of knowledge still to be

49

unlocked from this singular work, and further insights to be gained about Margaret MacLean, her life and times in Japan.

50

Bibliography
Aleph, Faena. "Collotype: The Delicate Printing Technique That Preserves The Japanese Cultural Legacy", Faena.com, June 22, 2015.
 http://www.faena.com/aleph/articles/collotype-the-delicate-printing-technique-that-preservesthe-japanese-cultural-legacy/
 Baldwin, Gordon. Looking at Photographs: A Guide to Technical Terms,
 The J. Paul Getty Museum,1991
 Bennett, Terry. Early Japanese Images, 
 Tuttle, London, 1996
 ------. Photography in Japan 1853-1912, 
 Tuttle, London, 2006
 ------. Old Japanese Photographs: Collectors' Data Guide, 
 London, 2006
 Brinkley, Francis. Japan: Described and Illustrated by the Japanese: written by eminent Japanese authorities and scholars, JB Millet, Boston. 1897.
 Cortazzi, Hugh, Bennett, Terry. Japan Caught in Time: Great Photographic Archives. 
 Garnet Publishing Ltd, U.K., 1995.
 Currely, Charles Trick. I Brought The Ages Home. 
 The Ryerson Press, Toronto, 1956.
 Dawes, Graeme. "Japanese Book Binding: Accordion Styles"
 http://homepages.nildram.co.uk/~dawe5/bookbinding_pages/BB_accordion2.html
 Dickson, Lovat. The Museum Makers: The Story of The Royal Ontario Museum.
 Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto, 1986.
 Dobson, Sebastian, Nakamura Morse, Anne, Sharf, Frederic A. Art and Artifice: Japanese Photographs of the Meiji Era. MFA Boston, 2004
 Dower, John W. "Yokohama Boomtown." Visualising Cultures, 2008.
 http://visualizingcultures.mit.edu


51

Elder, Ken. "910 Bank Street Road, The History of a house built in the Suburbs of Ottawa in 
 1876" Heritage Ottawa Newsletter 41 (4) Page 1-4.
 Freer GalleryGallery and The Arthur M. Sackler Gallery, of Art ALICE IN ASIA: The 1905 Taft   Mission to Asia,  http://www.asia.si.edu/research/archives/alice/
 Gartlan, Luke. A Career of Japan: Baron Raimund von Stillfried and Early Yokohama Photography, Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2016.
 Gervais, Thierry. 2010. "Witness to War: The Uses of Photography in the Illustrated Press, 
 1855-1904." Journal of Visual Culture 9 (3): 370-384. doi:10.1177/1470412910380343.
 http://resolver.scholarsportal.info/resolve/14704129/v09i0003/370_wtwtuopitip1.
 Geiger, Andrea A.E. Cross-Pacific Dimensions of Race, Caste and Class: Meiji-era Japanese 
 Immigrants in the North American West, 1885-1928, Doctoral Dissertation, 
 University of Washington. 2006.
 Gordon, Andrew. "Social Protest in Imperial Japan: The Hibiya Riot of 1905",
 MIT, Massachusetts, 2011.
 "A WONDERFUL RAILROAD.": A United States Paper's Glowing Tribute to the C.P.R. The  Globe (1844-1936); Dec 9, 1904; ProQuest Historical Newspapers: The Globe and Mail
 pg. 9
 Gowen, Robert Joseph. "Canada and the Myth of the Japan Market, 1896-1911" Pacific Historical Review, Vol 39, No 1 (Feb., 1970), pp 63-83 Hare, James H. A Photographic Record of the Russo-Japanese War. 
 New York: P. F. Collier & son, 1905. The Directory and Chronicle for China, Japan, Corea, Indo-China, Straits Settlements, Malay States, Siam, Netherlands India, Borneo, The Philippines, &c.: With which are incorporated "The China Directory" and "The Hong Kong Directory and Hong List for the Far East" for the year 1905, Hong Kong Daily Press, London, 1905.
 Helfand, Jessica. Scrapbooks: An American History. Yale University Press, New Haven and 
 London, 2008.
 Hight, Eleanor M.. Capturing Japan In Nineteenth-Century New England Photography Collections. Ashgate, London, 2011.


52

Hill, O. Mary. Canada's Salesman to the World: The Department of Trade and Commerce, 1892-1939. McGill-Queen's University Press, Montreal and London, 1977.
 Iino, Masako. "Japan's Reaction to the Vancouver Riot of 1907", 
 BC Studies 60 (Winter 1983) pp. 28-47
 "Japan: A Compilation of Miscellaneous Articles From Various Periodicals". 
 New York, 1881-1906.
 Japan Photographers Association. A Century of Japanese Photography. 
 Pantheon Books, New York, 1980.
 Jones, Donald. "Pied Piper led them happily to the ROM", Toronto Star, Saturday May 23, 
 1987.
 Katriel, Tamar, Farrel, Thomas. 1991. "Scrapbooks as Cultural Texts: An American Art of
 Memory." Text and Performance Quarterly 1 (11) 1-15
 Kinkodo Company. The Russo-Japanese War - fully illustrated No. 7 - Vol 3 - March 1905, 
 Kinkodo, Tokyo, 1905.
 Kornicki, Peter. The Book in Japan: A Cultural History from the Beginnings to the Nineteenth Century, University of Hawai'i Press, 2001.
 Library of Congress, "Thessaurus for Graphic Materials"
 https://www.loc.gov/pictures/collection/tgm/
 Lewis, Gordon. The History of the Japanese Camera, Edited by Gordon Lewis from a translation by William and Amy Fujimura of Nihon Camera no Reikishi, George Eastman House, 1991.
  MacLean, Margaret. "Cherry Blossom Time in the Mikado's Land" Toronto Globe, Saturday
 June 17, 1905.
 ------. "A Letter From Japan By a Canadian Girl" Toronto Globe, Saturday July 1, 1905.
 ------. Chinese Ladies at Home, 
 Methodist Publishing House, Tokyo. 1906


53

------. The Wise Traveller, Edited by Stapells, Beverly and Young, Pam. Montreal, Oberon Press. 1990.
 MIT Visualizing Cultures. "A special edition of The Japanese Graphic called The Tokyo Riot Graphic, No. 66, Sept. 18, 1905,Kinji Gah Company, Tokyo
 https://ocw.mit.edu/ans7870/21f/21f.027/social_protest_japan/trg_gallery.html
 ------. "Felice Beato's Japan: Places." 
 https://ocw.mit.edu/ans7870/21f/21f.027/beato_people/index.html
 ------. "Felice Beato's Japan: People." 
 https://ocw.mit.edu/ans7870/21f/21f.027/beato_places/index.html
 Nantais, Simon. "When the Geta is on the Other Foot: Xenophobia in the Canadian Immigration 
 Policy Towards Japan, 1907-1908", The Asia-Pacific Journal, Vol. 6, Issue 1, Number 0, (Jan 2008)
 Nihon Seijujisha, The History of the Red Cross Society of Japan, 
 Nihon Seijujisha, Tokyo, 1919. Nishimura Morse, Anne, Rimer, J Thomas, Brown, Kendall H. Art of the Japanese Postcard : the Leonard A. Lauder Collection at the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, 
 MFA, Boston, 2004.
 Ogawa Kazumasa. Some Japanese Flowers: Chromo-Collotypes, 
 Kelly & Walsh, Tokyo. [189?]
 Pascoe, Julienne. The Personal Albums of Samuel Bourne at the National Media Museum and The Art Gallery of Ontario,  Ryerson University Library, Toronto, 2009. Pringle, Gertrude E.S. "How Margaret MacLean Won a Niche for Herself in a Museum, By 
 Energy, Initiative, And Persistence", MacLean's Magazine, May 15, 1923.
 Postal History Society of Canada, Sailing Tables for the Pacific, Canadian-Pacific Line Westbound 
  http://www.postalhistorycanada.net/php/Library/Research/ShipTables/int_pacific3.php
   Eastbound 
 http://www.postalhistorycanada.net/php/Library/Research/ShipTables/int_pacific2.php


54

Reilly, James M. Care and Identification of 19th-Century Photographic Prints, 
 Image Preservation Institute, New York. 1986.
 The Russo-Japanese War Research Society, Timeline of the War.
 http://russojapanesewar.com/time-line.html Sato, Kenji. "Postcards in Japan: A Historical Sociology of a Forgotten Culture" International  Journal of Japanese Sociology, Number 11, (November 2002). 35-55
 Shannon, Anne. Finding Japan: Early Canadian Encounters with Asia, Heritage House, Vancouver. 2012.
 

Siegel, Elizabeth. Galleries of Friendship and Fame: A Hiostory of Nineteenth-Century American Photograph Albums, Yale University Press, New Haven, 2010.
 Simon, Anabelle. "Nineteenth Century Japanese Photography:
 Techniques, Conservation and Restoration". Association France Japon-Nord / Japan
 Society Symposium Les Collections d'Art Japonais en Europe, October 1997.
 http://www.old-japan.co.uk/article_techniques.html
 Skyrme, Alison Elizabeth. Victorian Women and the Hand-Embellished Photograph Album: A Case Study of the Bouverie Album, Ryerson University Library, Toronto, 2007. Stapells, Beverly. 1975. "A ROM Pioneer: A Tribute to Margaret MacLean", Rotunda Magazine 
 8 (3) pages 13-19.
 Snyder, Levine. Snapshot Chronicles: Inventing the American Photo Album, 
 Princeton Architectural Press and Douglas F. Cooley Memorial Art Gallery, 2006.
 Tedone, Melissa. 2014. "Preserving Historic Scrapbooks and Making New Ones That Last", 
 ALA-ALCTS Preservation Week Webinar, May 1, 2014.
 Tucker, Susan, Ott, Katherine, Buckler, Patricia P. The Scrapbook in American Life, Temple 
 University Press. 2007.
 The Russo-Japanese War: a Photographic And Descriptive Review of the Great Conflict In the Far East Gathered From the Reports, Records, Cable Despatches, Photographs, Etc., of Collier's War Correspondents Richard Harding Davis ... [et Al.]. 
 New York: P. F. Collier, 1905.


55

Wakita, Mio. 2009. "Selling Japan: Kusakabe Kimber's Image of Japanese Women". History of Photography 33 (2) Page 209 to 223
 ------. 2013. "Sites of "Disconnectedness": The Port City of Yokohama, Souvenir 
 Photography, and its Audience". Transcultural Studies 2 (2013)
 Winkel, Margarita. Souvenirs from Japan: Japanese Photography at the Turn of the Century.
 Antique Collector's Club, Massachusetts, 1991. Worswick, Clark. Japan: Photographs 1854­1905.
 New York: Pennick Publishing, 1979.

56

Appendix A: Margaret MacLean Japanese Scrapbook Catalog Record
Maker Geography Material & Technique Output Date Dimensions HxWxD Description Inscription 1904 1915 33.5 cm 38 cm 6.5 cm Cataloguer Remarks

Acc. No. Margaret S. MacLean (1871-1931) Yokohama, Japan. Mixed media, collage

Object Name

Curatorial Title

1.1

Book

Margaret MacLean Japanese Scrapbook

Green and orange Silk brocade wrapped covers of orihon style Japanese album likely purchased around 1904 in Yokohama, Japan. 38 leafs on one side and 36 leafs on the other. it weighs 6 kilograms. Black and white phtomecahinacally reproduced image of a large group of people standing near train tracks await the departure of a train filled with appear to be military personel.   TROOPS FOR MANCHURIA ABOUT TO DEPART FROM YOKOHAMA  

1.2

Relief halftone Unknown Japan Halftone print on paper c.1904 n/a

People departing by train 10.25 cm 11.05 cm

1.3 c.1904

Picture postcard Unknown n/a

Celebrations on Bentendori Hand-cloured collotype on postcard stock 9.1 cm 14 cm

Bentendori, Yokohama, Japan.

This magazine clipping resembles other clippings with very similar formats. It may originate from one of the same publications other identified clippings come from. TBD Hand-coloured black and white street scene decorated with Japan and Rising Sun flags and paper lanterns. Many pedestrians are walking on the street and a walking figure wearing a dark robe with with cuffs dominates the lower centre of the composition. (238) BENTEN-DORI AT YOKOHAMA A hand-coloured black and white street scene at an unnamed location. The street is decorated with Japanese, Rising Sun and foreign flags (the Union Jack and the U.S. flags). The street is sparsely populated with some pedestrians. A jinrikisha with running puller is clearly visible, left of lower centre.

57
Unknown c. 1904 Japan, possibly Yokohama Hand-cloured collotype on postcard stock 8.6 cm 13.4 cm n/a Unknown Tokyo, Japan Hand-cloured collotype on postcard stock c. 1904 9.1 cm 13.2 cm n/a

1.4

Picture postcard

Celebrations on Japanese Street with jinrikishas

"Banzai" Celebrating the victory of Lonquang This image appears to be a postcard that originaly had white borders around it, but has since been trimmed further. Its measuremnts do not conform to known standard postcard sizes. A hand coloured postcard with a very dark image of three streetcars (plus one in the distance) decorated in celebratory illumination and Rising Sun flags. ILLUMINATED ELECTRIC CAR IN CONGRATULATION OF OUR VICTORY. Inscribed in pencil: TOKYO The streetcars are a little blurry, showing linear movement, betraying the low shutter speed or light sensitivity of the photographic equipment.

1.5

Picture postcard

Illuminated Streetcar

Handcoloured collotype Picture postcard, in portrait orientation depicting carp windsocks suspended from poles in front of houses along a street. Each pole hangs from two to five carp windsoks of various sizes. n/a THE CARP Carp windsocks are a staple celebration of Boy's day during the month of March. Hand-coloured collotype postcard depicting a streetscente with Japanese and Rising Sun flag decorations. There are three paccards one is a graphic with a naval theme. One is legible and the other partially so. A young boy is prominent in the lower left side of the image. n/a CELEBRATION OF VICTORIES IN TOKYO.

1.6 c. 1904

Picture postcard

Fish Windsocks

Possibly Karl Lewis

Japan, possibly Yokohama Hand-cloured collotype on postcard stock 9.1 cm 14 cm

1.7

Picture postcard Unknown c. 1904

Tokyo street celebration Tokyo, Japan. Hand-cloured collotype on postcard stock 9.1 cm 12.6 cm

1.8

Picture postcard Unknown c. 1904 n/a

Decorated streetcars

Japan, perhaps Tokyo Hand-cloured collotype on postcard stock 9.1 cm 14.2 cm

58
Unknown c. 1905 Yokohama, Japan. Hand-coloured albumen silver print 8.6 cm 13.5 cm Leslie's Weekly, Eleanor Franklin Tokyo, Japan Halftone print on paper c. 1904 11.2 cm 21 cm Unknown Tokyo, Japan. Hand-cloured collotype on postcard stock c. 1904 9.1 cm 14.1 cm

The first pacard reads: "Banzai to the Great Japanese Imperial Army and Navy". The secnd placcard is laterally reversed and partially covered, making it difficult to translate. Monochromatic collotype postcard depicting 6 streetcars decorated with electric light bulbs and Japanese and Rising Sun flags. The streetcars are lined up under a roof structure, perhaps a streetcar garage. Five of the streetcards appear to be coupled together. Hand-coloured albumen silver print depicting a street scene decorated with various flags and paper lanterns. Pedestrians walking on the street are dressed in traditional costume, except one figure in the lower centre, who is wearing a western costume. n/a  YOKOHAMA (visible)  It is not certain what specific victory or event is being celebrated in this photograph, as the US and a British empire flag are both clearly visible. A wide black and white magazine clipping depicting 22 men marching in lock step.  n/a  Image taken by Eleanor Franklin for Leslie's Weekly. It is possible other images in this style are also from the same publication. Hand-coloured collotype postcard depicting a large Europeanstyle building. No people can be seen walking on the street immediately before it or anywhere else. n/a  The european style of this building is reminiscent of French architecture.  TOKYO - NAVAL DEPARTMENT SOLDIERS DESTINED FOR THE FRONT DRILLING ON THE GROUNDS OF THE IMPERIAL PALACE AT TOKIO. Photographed for Leslie's Weekly by Eleanor Franklin.

1.9

Photograph

Decorated street scene

1.10

Relief halftone

Soldiers in formation

1.11

Picture postcard

Government Building

1.12 c. 1904

Picture postcard Unknown 9 cm

People assembled on open ground Japan, possibly Yokohama 28.3 cm 0.41 mm Double-width handcoloured collotype on postcard stock.

Hand-coloured double-width collotype postcard depicting a large gathering of people in a park or other form of open ground. The croud is orderly and standing holding a variety of flags. People are dressed in civilian clothes. Is this a special edition postcard? Thickness of paper is that of acommonly used postcards. There are no inscriptions or other indications that this was a postcard, other than being exactly double of the standard width, and the height also corresponds to a standard measurment. This hand-coloured collotype postcard depicts a welcoming arch surrounded by a croud of people at Hibiya park. The Nisshin and the Kasuga are two war ships built in Italy and bought from the Argentine Navy. WELCOME OF NISSHIN AND KASUGA AT HIBIYA-PARK. War ships brought from England. 1904 This postcard has been trimmed height-wise by about half a centimeter. Argentina sold both Italian-made ships to Japan as its own arms race with Chile wound down. It had offered them to both Russia and Japan, but Japan ended up purchasing them. Monochromatic collotype postcard depicting a military review by officials on horseback and charriot. The photographic part of this image is inset into an ornate frame and flower decoration motif. 

1.13

Picture postcard Unknown 1904 n/a

Welcome Arch

Hibiya Park, Tokyo, Japan. Hand-cloured collotype on postcard stock 7.5 cm 14 cm

1.14

Picture postcard Japan 1905 n/a

Triumphal Army Review Collotype on postcard stock 9.1 cm 14 cm

59
Unknown c. 1905 Japan Collotype on postcard stock 6.5 cm 14 cm Unknown Japan Collotype on postcard stock c. 1905 9 cm 12 cm

Japan Communicat ions Department

Triumphal Army Review. Issued from Communications Department as the last of series of Japan-Russia War Post Cards. 

1.15

Picture postcard

Marching men

n/a

This is the last Russo-Japanese War conmmemorative post card issued by the Japanese Communications Department. Trimmed down monochromatic collotype postcard depicting a large group of armed men in light toned uniforms marching in formation on open ground. Postcard is partly coverd on th eright side by another postcard. Monochromatic collotype postcard depicting a sailboat in the moonlight sailing across an ezpanse of water with what appear to be some islands on the horizon. n/a  Cropped postcard. Width is 2 cm shorter than known standard sizes  MOON - LIGHT OF SHINAGAWA.

1.16

Picture postcard

Sailing boat at night

Duotone collotype postcard depicting the Bristish Oriental fleet anchored in the bay, with smaller Japanese row boats and sailboats nearby. The image is tinted with a delicate aqua color gradation.  Unknown 1906  Possibly published in 1906 as part of the larger commemorative postcard craze after hostilities ended in 1905. 38.10.23 translates as October 23rd, 1905. The 1/2 sen stamp on the recto may also provide clues as to date. Delicately tinted albumen silver print depicting a naval scene of a single japanese Junk, with sail extended, sailing across a bay. The water and sky are tinted in a gradated light blue, and the junk and sail in varying tones of brown and yellow. There is a single figure sailing the boat, sitting at the back.  Possibly published in 1906 as part of the larger commemorative postcard craze after hostilities ended in 1905. 38.10.23 translates as October 23rd, 1905. The 1/2 sen stamp on the recto may also provide clues as to date. Hand-coloured collotype postcard depicting people standing at the endge of a pier watching a formation of warships flying colours. Unknown Japan. Hand-cloured collotype on postcard stock 1906 9 cm n/a  The date in the wet stamp corresponds to October 23rd, 1905. This monochromatic photograph depicts three warships at night. They are decorated with electric lights which outline their shapes. The ship on the left has two search lights on, shining their beams into the night sky. 14.5 cm n/a  14 cm  Wet stamp reads: 38.10.23 YOKOHAMA IMPERIAL NAVAL REVIEW - 1905 Japan Duotone collotype on postcard stock 9 cm n/a 14.2 cm ORIENTAL FLEET OF GREAT BRITAIN AT YOKOHAMA. Wet stamp reads: 38.10.23 YOKOHAMA IMPERIAL NAVY REVIEW-1905

1.17

Picture postcard

Warships and sailboats

1.18

Photograph

Japanese Sailboat Unknown Japan 1906 n/a

Hand-colored albumen silver print.

13 cm

8.7 cm

1.19

Picture postcard

Warships in the horizon

60
Unknown c. 1905 Japan. Toned gelatin silver print. 4.1 cm Unknown Yokohama, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1905 7.8 cm 14.2 cm Unknown Japan, possibly Tokyo or Yokohama. Tokyo, Japan. Tokyo, Japan. Hand-coloured collotype postcard. C. 1905 9 cm 14.1 cm Unknown Unknown Duotone collotype on postcard stock Collotype on postcard stock c. 1905 c. 1905 6.7 cm 13.8 cm

1.20

Photograph

Warships at night

1.21

Picture postcard

Ships at the pier

n/a 

This photograph is browning signifficantly. It may also be suffering from poor fixing, which may lead to the disappearance of theimage altogether. Must be protected from light. Two large passenger ships are moored at either side of the Yokohama pier. People can be seen walking on the pier from and towards the ships. Both ships are flying their colours.

1.22

Picture postcard

Sailing ships

n/a 

YOKOHAMA Seven small sailing boats are seen maneuvering in the waters in this duo-tone collotype. The ships are all in silhouette but many small, capped figures can be seen on board most of them. BOAT DRILLING OF NAVAL STUDENTS. n/a n/a H.I.H. Crown Prince's Imperial Palace. H.I.H. Prince's Crown Palace. Imperial

1.23

Picture postcard

Palace Gates

1.24

Picture postcard

Imperial Palace

This photograph portraits a man in western gentlemen's clothes.  n/a T. Nakashima.  This photograph is heavily silver mirrorerd. It may also have been cropped from a larger, more complete photo print, Unknown Japan. Collotype on postcard stock c. 1905 n/a Woman in traditional costume This compound halftone postcard is from an educational edition publised after the war. It features a poem in Japanese calligraphy at the top, framed in a purple band decorated with government crests, Admiral Togo's portrati inset into an oval, and a translation into English of his poem, framed in a floral device. Unknown Japan. Halftone and spot color print on postcard. c. 1905 n/a 13.8 cm 8.95 cm Poem: "The invincible might and the peerless virtues of the Sovereign and Bushido and Yamato-Damashii of the People gave us the victory over an overwhelming foe. Togo." Caption: All rights reserved "The Educational Post-Card" Vol I. (2J 14 cm 8.6 cm With Couple Unknown c. 1905 Japan. Gelatin silver print 11.1 cm 7.2 cm

1.25

Photograph

T.

Nakashima

1.26

Picture postcard

Woman in traditional clothes

1.27

Picture postcard

Admiral Togo

61
 Unknown c. 1905 Japan. Halftone and spot color print on postcard. 13.8 cm 8.95 cm n/a   c. 1905 13.8 cm 8.95 cm n/a  Unknown Japan. Halftone and spot color print on postcard.

Part of a series of related postcards printed perhaps in 1906. these postcards are not collotypes, but rather half-tone prints on crisp white paper. This compound halftone postcard is from an educational edition publised after the war. It features a poem in Japanese calligraphy at the top, framed in a decorated purple frame, ViceAdmiral Kamiura's portrati inset into an oval, and a translation of his poem into English, framed in a rectangular device. Poem: "The Yamato Damashii seed of Japan includes following virtues; Loyalty, Filial Piety, Patriotism, Frugality, Charity." Caption: All rights reserved "The Educational Post-Card" Vol I. (4J Part of a series of related postcards printed perhaps in 1906. these postcards are not collotypes, but rather half-tone prints on crisp white paper. This compound halftone postcard is from an educational edition publised after the war. It features a poem in Japanese calligraphy at the top, framed in a conical fan device, Admiral Ito's portrati inset into an oval in purple ink, and a translation of his poem into English, framed in a parchemnt-like device. Poem: "Yamato-Damashii is the root of the country and Bushido the blossom. Y. Ito" Caption: All rights reserved "The Educational Post-Card" Vol I. (1J Part of a series of related postcards printed perhaps in 1906. these postcards are not collotypes, but rather half-tone prints on crisp white paper.

1.28

Picture postcard

ViceAdmiral Kamimura

1.29

Picture postcard

Admiral Ito

This compound halftone postcard is from an educational edition publised after the war. It features a poem in Japanese calligraphy at the top, framed in a purple band decorated with government crests, Admiral Togo's portrati inset into an oval, and a translation into English of his poem, framed in a floral device. Unknown c. 1905 Japan. Halftone and spot color print on postcard. n/a 13.8 cm 8.95 cm Poem: "Bushido comprises the following virtues; duty of loyalty, faithfulness and rectitude, valour, sense of honour, simplicity of habit, modesty, self-control, and benevolence. The Naval Review Day, October 23, 1905. Vice-Admiral S. Dewa, J.I. Navy" 

1.30

Picture postcard

Vice Admiral Dewa

1.31 

Picture postcard Unknown c. 1905 9 cm n/a

Stone Buddhas

Nikko, Japan.

Hand-cloured collotype on postcard stock

14.1 cm

This image is partially covered by the stone buddhas postcard. This hand-coloured collotype postcard depicts a row of stone statutes resembling The Buddha along a stretch of pathway leading to a larger stone sculpture of the diety. A kneeling figure can be seen before one of the statues in the row.

1.32 

Picture postcard Japan. c. 1905 n/a

Boats and Lotus designs 8.95 cm 13.8 cm

Department of Communicat ion Compound collotype and lithographic postcard

(27) The Stone Buddhist Statue at Gamman, in Nikko. This compound technique postcard depicts two naval scenes inset in art nuveou desing frames, against a deep blue background decorated with green and lilack lotus flower blooms. The image on the top left shows a boat suspended from a ship, and the second shows a distant ship, smaller boats and floating ice.

62
 Unknown c. 1905 Japan. Halftone and spot color print on postcard. 13.8 cm 8.95 cm n/a  Unknown Tokyo, Japan. Collotype on postcard stock C. 1905 9 cm 14 cm n/a  Department of Communicat ion Hsiku, China and Japan. Collotype on postcard stock c. 1905 8.9 cm 14 cm n/a  

OUR SHIPS AT THE RIVER TADONG, DRIFTING ICE This compound halftone postcard is from an educational edition publised after the war. It features a poem in Japanese calligraphy, framed in a purple hanging scroll motif, Vice Admiral Kataoka's portrati inset into an oval at the top left, and a translation into English of his poem, framed in a paisly device.

1.33

Picture postcard

ViceAdmiral Kataoka

Poem: "The most important power to be borne in mind by our people after the war is: - That Yamato-Damashii and Bushido nust be nursed and cultured more than ever, so as to develop the wealth of the country and maintain the prestige of its arms." Caption: All rights reserved "The Educational Post-Card" Vol I. (3.)

1.34

Picture postcard

Streetcar and river

Part of a series of related postcards printed perhaps in 1906. these postcards are not collotypes, but rather half-tone prints on crisp white paper. A monochromatic collotype postcard depicting a streetcar traveling on rails in the foreground, a river or canal view in the middle ground and a large building compound in the background No.119 View of the Military Academy. A monochromatic collotype postcard depicting a group of artillery men with canon alond a line of artillery pieces in a stark, white winter setting. Artillery duel in the snow near Hsiku. Official, government published postcard.

1.35

Picture postcard

Artillery squad

A hybrid postcard composed of a monochrome collotype framed by lithographic military rope motifs in grey, black, red, green and gold metalc inks. Commander and his staff of Third Army Division at the Shaho battle. n/a  Official, government published postcard. The Shaho battle was the second largest land battle of the Russo-Japanese war. Over 500,000 men fought in this battle between October 5 and october 17th, 1904. A hybrid postcard composed of a monochrome collotype image of a military camp in winter, framed by lithographic still-life motif in grey, black, red and yellow inks. Wintering of our army near the Shaho n/a  Official, government published postcard. The Shaho battle was the second largest land battle of the Russo-Japanese war. Over 500,000 men fought in this battle between October 5 and october 17th, 1904. A hybrid postcard composed of two monochrome collotype images framed by geometric motifs. The top image is of soldiers entrenched on the banks of the river Han, and it is framed in a green rectangular motif with corner holders. The second image is of a sharpshooter on a tree top and it is framed by a green circle. n/a  Official, government published postcard. This battle is part of the larger Battle of Mukden, the largest land battle of the Russo-Japanese war. Over 620,000 soldiers fought each other in the Battle of Mukden from Feb 20 to March 10th, 1905. A hybrid postcard composed of a monochrome collotype framed by lithographic gradated silver field motifs in silver metalic ink. Our Artillery at the Shaho Battle  Rectangular crop image: Our infantry fighting on the river Hun. Circular crop image: Our look-out erected on a snow-clad tree 

1.36 c. 1905

Picture postcard 9 cm

Soldiers on a hilltop

Department of Communicat ion Compound collotype and lithographic postcard 14.1 cm

Mukden, China, Tokyo, Japan

1.37

Picture postcard c. 1905

Rooster and eggs Postcard 8.9 cm 13.9 cm

Department of Communicat ion Compound collotype and lithographic postcard

Mukden, China, Tokyo, Japan

1.38

Picture postcard c. 1905

Double image postcard 8.95 cm 13.9 cm

Department of Communicat ion Compound collotype and lithographic postcard

Hun River, China, Tokyo, Japan

63
Department of Communicat ion Compound collotype and lithographic postcard c. 1905 Mukden, China, Tokyo, Japan 9 cm 14 cm n/a Yalu River, China, Tokyo, Japan Compound collotype and lithographic postcard unknown Department of Communication Unknown Tokyo, Japan. River Ai, China, Japan. United States Halftone print on paper Compound collotype and lithographic postcard Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1905 8.8 cm 13.9 cm n/a  c. 1905 c. 1905 c. 1906 18.5 cm 13.9 cm 9 cm 11.9 cm 8.95 cm 14 cm n/a n/a n/a

1.39

Picture postcard

Silver field poscard

1.40

Picture postcard

Artillery at Rver Yalu

Official, government published postcard. The Shaho battle was the second largest land battle of the Russo-Japanese war. Over 500,000 men fought in this battle between October 5 and october 17th, 1904. A hybrid postcard composed of a monochrome collotype image of a valley being bombarded with artillery shells framed by lithographed, stylized forest motif rendered in green, browns orange, acqua and purple. Artillery Duel At The River Yalu Prince Fushimi Jr. son of Reiki Tokugawa - ex-shogun

1.41

Relief halftone

Prince Fushimi

1.42

Picture postcard

Army at River Ai

1.43

Picture postcard

Triumph

Trimmed from original dimensions. n/a YOKOHAMA n/a

1.44 c. 1905

Picture postcard Unknown

Street celebration

Yokohama, Japan.

Hand coloured collotype postcard

8.8 cm

11.6 cm

1.45 c. 1905

Picture postcard 9 cm Unknown c. 1905 Collotype on postcard stock c. 1905 n/a 8.8 cm 11.5 cm Unknown Yokohama, Japan. China or Japan 5 cm n/a 12.6 cm

Attack on Nanshan

Department of Communicat ion Nanshan, China Compound collotype and lithographic postcard 13.9 cm

1.46

Print

Bivouac

1.47

Picture postcard

Honcho Dori

HONCHO DORI

1.47

Picture postcard c. 1905 n/a

War trophies

Kiuliengchen , China

Compound collotype and lithograph postcard

14.95 cm

8.95 cm

1.49

Picture postcard c. 1905 n/a Yokohama, Japan. c. 1905 9 cm n/a Hand-coloured collotype postcard. 14.05 cm

Anchored ships

Department of Communicat ion Department of Communicat ion China or Japan Compound collotype and lithograph postcard 9.1 cm 13.85 cm

1.50

Picture postcard

Decorated street

1.51 c. 1905

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. 9 cm n/a

Hotel where Russian refugees awaited transport Collotype on postcard stock 14.15 cm

Hotel where Russian refugees stayed awaiting transportation on French mail boats

64
Unknown c. 1905 Yokohama, Japan. 9 cm Collotype on postcard stock 14.15 cm Unknown c. 1905 c. 1905 c. 1905 c. 1904 c. 1905 c. 1905 Unknown Unknown Day Allen Willey Japan. Japan. Shimbashi, Japan Unknown Unknown Letterpress halftone Collotype on postcard stock Hand coloured collotype postcard Japan. Letterpress halftone Japan Hand-colored albumen silver print. Tokyo, Japan. Letterpress halftone 11.3 cm 8.3 cm 9.2 cm 17.8 cm 9.05 cm 9.05 cm 10.6 cm 11.1 cm 11.8 cm 11.4 cm 14.15 cm 14.04 Unknown Japan Hand-coloured collotype on doublewidth postcard. c. 1905 9.05 cm 28.5 cm

1.52

Picture postcard

Celebratio n of the fall of PortArthur

n/a

To celebrate the fall of Port-Arthur. X This man inspite of his esat..... Respectable and ... man in the regulation esat. The fa... of rice chains belongs the new year decorations he met Togo and had a talk with him. M. MacLean, No 14 Bund Yokohama || red and white decorations n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a

1.53

Relief halftone

Hanging Bear

1.54

Photograph

Ainu men

1.55

Relief halftone

Crowd

1.56

Relief halftone

Asian Players

1.57

Picture postcard

Streetcars at night

1.58

Picture postcard

Crowds and flags

1.59

Picture postcard

Crowd and bridge double width postcard

n/a

1.60 c. 1905 c. 1905 n/a n/a c. 1905 9.05 cm 14 cm 9.06 cm 14.2 cm Unknown Unknown Japan. Duotone collotype on postcard stock Japan. Hand-cloured collotype on postcard stock

Picture postcard Unknown Japan n/a

Decorated streetcar at railyard Hand-cloured collotype on postcard stock 9.08 cm 14.2 cm

1.61

Picture postcard

Decorated Streetcar

1.62

Picture postcard

1.63

Relief halftone Unknown Letterpress halftone c. 1905 n/a

Cruiser Curlew

9.8 cm

10.6 cm

1.64 c. 1905

Photograph

Crowd with umbrellas on road The Canadian Handy Man Line of people on rocky beach Unknown Unknown Gelatin silver print 3.28 cm n/a 13.2 cm 23.7 cm n/a 19.2 cm 16.1 cm 0.07 mm 8.16 cm Unknown c. 1905 c. 1905 Unknown Mukden, China. Letterpress halftone Canada Letterpress halftone

1.65

Relief halftone

Cruiser

1.66

Relief halftone

1.67

Relief halftone Unknown Seoul, Korea Letterpress halftone c. 1905 n/a

11.2 cm

8.9 cm

65
Unknown Unknown Letterpress halftone c. 1905 8.53 cm 5.6 cm Department of Communicat ion China, Japan c. 1905 Hand-cloured collotype on postcard stock 8.89 cm Unknown c. 1905 c. 1905 Unknown Yokohama, Japan. Tokyo, Japan. Yokohama, Japan. Japan. Collotype on postcard stock Hand-cloured collotype on postcard stock Hand-cloured collotype on postcard stock Hand-cloured collotype on postcard stock Letterpress print on paper Hand coloured collotype postcard Japan. Letterpress halftone 11.3 cm 8.4 cm c. 1905 14.2 cm C. 1905 c. 1905 14 cm 7.5 cm c. 1905 7.74 cm c. 1905 7.6 cm 13.9 cm 11.2 cm 13.7 cm 9.1 c, Department of Communicat ion Unknown Unknown 9.1 cm 13 cm 14.2 cm 18.2 cm Unknown Tokyo, Japan. Japan Kode Yamanaka

1.68

Relief halftone

Horse rider in front of gate Troops marching through gate. Portrait of General Kuropatkin in oval frame n/a n/a

1.69

Picture postcard

Entry of Marshal Oyama

1.70

Relief halftone

Colosal Kuropatkin Head

n/a n/a

1.71

Picture postcard

Bentendori celebration

1.72

Picture postcard

General

n/a

1.73

Picture postcard

Bentendori decorated

n/a n/a

BENTEN-DORI AT YOKOHAMA.

1.74

Picture postcard

1.75

Picture postcard

Crowd with floats at park Crowd at Hibiya Park

n/a

GREAT LANTERN MARCH AT HIBIYA-PARK.

1.76

Relief halftone

Japanese soldiers

N/a

DRAWINGS BY JAPANESE NEWSPAPER ARTIST, ILLUSTRATING A POPULAR SERIAL ROMANCE OF THE WAR

1.77 c. 1905 c. 1905 n/a n/a CELEBRATION OF VICTORIES IN TOKYO Yokohama c. 1905 9 cm 14.2 cm 11.2 cm n/a Mr. McLean THE MARQUIS ITO, THE BISMARK OF JAPAN, FORMERLY PRIME MINISTER AND NOW PRESIDENT OF THE ELDER STATESMEN, OR PRIVY COUNCIL OF THE EMPIRE.   Dressed like this when I met him at the above Embassy reception. Unknown c. 1905 Japan. Letterpress halftone 7 cm 5.1 cm n/a 7.8 cm 11.6 cm Unknown Unknown Tokyo, Japan. Tokyo, Japan. Letter press invitation c. 1905 10.9 cm Hand coloured collotype postcard Yokohama, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard

Picture postcard Unknown 9 cm n/a FIRE-WORKS AT RYOGOKU

Fireworks from distance Tokyo, Japan Hand coloured collotype postcard 14.05 cm

1.78

Picture postcard

Yokohama

1.79

Picture postcard British Embassy

1.80

Invitation card

Street Celebratio n British Embassy Reception

1.81 c. 1905

Relief halftone Unknown Letterpress halftone n/a

The Marquis Ito

Tokyo, Japan.

14.4 cm

10.25 cm

1.82

Relief halftone

Field Marshall Marquis Oyama Leslie's Weekly / T. Ruddiman Johnston Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1905 n/a 16 cm 21.4 cm Unknown Tokyo Ginza Kamikataya c. 1905 9 cm Tokyo Ginza Kamikataya c. 1905 9 cm Tokyo Ginza Kamikataya c. 1905 Tokyo, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard 9 cm Tokyo, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard 14.2 cm 14.2 cm Tokyo, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard 14.2 cm n/a Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1905 n/a 11.2 cm 8.2 cm

1.83

Relief halftone

Marshal at Tokyo Station

MARSHAL OYAMA, COMMANDER OF THE JAPANESE FORCES ON THE FIELD, AT THE TOKYO STATION WITH HIS STAFF, EN ROUTE FOR THE SEAT OF WAR.

1.84

Relief halftone

66
Unknown Yokohama, Japan. Gelatin silver print Japan Halftone lithographic process on postcard stock c. 1905 10.5 cm c. 1905 14 cm 6.4 cm 9 cm Unknown Unknown Japan. Collotype on postcard stock c. 1905 9 cm 14 cm Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1905 18 cm 10.2 cm Unknown Japan Letterpress halftone c. 1905 6.5 cm 11.7 cm

1.85

Picture postcard

1.86

Picture postcard

n/a

1.87

Picture postcard

n/a

ADMIRAL TOGO PLANTING LAUREL IN THE PUBLIC CELEBRATION OF THE FALL OF PORT ARTHUR AT HIBIYA PARK. (1) ADMIRAL TOGO HAVING PLANTED LAUREL IN THE PUBLIC CELEBRATION OF THE FALL OF PORT ARTHUR AT HIBIYA PARK. (3) ADMIRAL TOGO DEDICATING LAUREL IN THE PUBLIC CELEBRATION OF THE FALL OF PORT ARTHUR AT HIBIYA PARK. n/a

1.88

Photograph

The Marquis Yamagata Admiral Togo at Hibiya (1) Admiral Togo at Hibiya (3) Admiral Togo at Hibiya (?) The Empress of Japan at Pier n/a

1.89

Picture postcard

H.R.H. Prince

In Honour of H.R.H. Prince (rest is coverd up)

1.90

Picture postcard

n/a

1 My partner at luncheon. 3 Togo. 4, Emperor's Masters of Ceremonies sat opposite me, 6 Gen. Kurota.

1.91

Relief halftone

n/a

1.92

Relief halftone

Outdoor group portrait of Military men Vice Admiral Togo c. 1895 Soldiers with horse wagon

n/a

1.93 c. 1905 c. 1905 n/a 11.2 cm 10.5 cm PACKING BISCUITS IN A FACTORY AT TOKYO FOR THE TROOPS IN THE FIELD. Unknown Tokyo, Japan. Letterpress halftone

Relief halftone Japan. Letterpress halftone n/a

Admiral Togo and his sons 19.5 cm 14.5 cm ADMIRAL TOGO AND HIS SONS Reproduced from Stereograph. Copyright, 1905, by H.C. White Co., New York

H. C. White Co., New York

1.94

Relief halftone

Packing Biscuits

1.95

Relief halftone Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1905 n/a ADMIRAL TOGO. Courtesy of Collier's

Collier's Magazine

10 cm

6.3 cm

1.96 Unknown Unknown c. 1905 Japan. Halftone lithographic process on postcard stock 9 cm 14.1 cm n/a Collotype on postcard stock c. 1905 9 cm n/a Togo 14.2 cm Japan. Letterpress halftone C. 1905 n/a 11.2 cm 11.2 cm

Relief halftone Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1905 n/a

Admiral Togo on deck of Mikasa with white jacket Rear Admiral Urui 10 cm 6.2 cm

REAR ADMIRAL URUI One of Togo's chief subordinates Christian BAKING BISCUITS AT TOKYO FOR THE JAPANESE ARMY MIKASA (1st Class Battle ship)

1.97

Relief halftone

Baking biscuits

1.98

Picture postcard

The Mikasa

1.99

Picture postcard Unknown Japan

1.100

Picture postcard Unknown China c. 1905 n/a Unknown China Hand coloured collotype postcard 9 cm Letterpress halftone c. 1905 16.8 cm 14.7 cm C. 1905 14.1 cm n/a

Halftone lithographic process on postcard stock 6.6 cm 13.3 cm

A VIEW OF PORT ARTHUR HARBOUR AFTER THE SURRENDER

67
H. C. White Co., New York Japan. Unknown c. 1905 Japan. Letterpress halftone 7.5 cm 2.8 cm Underwood and Underwood, New York Near Port Arthur, China. Letterpress halftone c. 1904 15 cm 20.5 cm Unknown Port Arthur, China. Halftone lithographic process on postcard stock Letterpress halftone c. 1905 7 cm 13.3 cm Unknown China c. 1905 8.15 cm 12.4 cm

1.101

Picture postcard

Admiral Togo and entourage walking. Sunken ships at Port Arthur Aerial view of Port Arthur n/a

1.102

Relief halftone

Admiral Kamimura and Family

Reproduced from stereograph. Copyright, 1905, by H. C. White Co., New York. ADMIRAL KAMIMURA, HIS WIFE AND DAUGHTER WARMING THEIR FINGERS OVER A CHARCOAL STOVE

1.103

Relief halftone

Kimonoclad woman holding tray

n/a

1.104

Relief halftone

Nogi at lunch with staff

n/a

Reproduced from stereography, copyright, 1904, Underwood & Underwood, New York GENERAL NOGI AND HIS STAFF AT LUNCH Headquarters, within four miles of Port Arthur. The General is the gray-bearded man in the dark uniform at the farther side of the table

1.105

Picture postcard

n/a

RUSSIAN BATTLE SHIP RETZVISAN AND CRUISER PALLADA DESTROYED, IN PORT ARTHUR.

1.106

Relief halftone

Rretzvisan and Pallada sunk in the harbour Soldiers packing supplies

n/a

JAPANESE SOLDIERS PACKING SUPPLIES , CHIEFLY OF RICE AND DRIED FISH OR MEAT, FOR THE ARMY TRANSPORT CARTS

1.107 c. 1905

Illustration

Togo visiting Rohdjestv ensky in Hospital Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone 12.8 cm n/a 8.3 cm Admiral Togo visiting Vide-Admiral Rohdjestvensky at the Naval Hospital in Sasebo. Lewis, Yokohama Japan Letterpress halftone c. 1905 n/a Unknown Japan Letterpress halftone c. 1905 n/a THE HEAD OF AN ARCH-TRAITOR. 8.8 cm 8.2 cm 11 cm 8.3 cm CART WITH WHICH THE JAPANESE ARMY HAS CONQUERED THE ROADS OF MANCHURIA - WHEN FOREIGN EXPERTS FIRST SAW THIS VEHICLE THEY RIDICULED IT AS AN " OVERGROWN JINRIKISHA"

1.108

Relief halftone

Japanese Army Cart

1.109

Relief halftone

Head of a traitor

1.110

Picture postcard Japan. c. 1905 8 cm n/a

Imperial Army money certificate for 10 silver yen. Japanese Government Collotype on postcard stock 11.8 cm Unknown c. 1905 9 cm 14.1 cm n/a 14 cm n/a 14 cm n/a 14.1 cm n/a n/a 14 cm 14.1 cm 14 cm 9 cm

1.111

Picture postcard Unknown c. 1905 9 cm

Explosion on hill

THE EXPLOSION OF A CAPONIERE OF THE NORTH FORT OF EAST KIKWAN HILL. A RUSSIAN 12 CENTIMETRE CANET GUN MOUNTED ON THE SUMMIT OF THE 174 METRE HILL. RUSSIAN BATTLE SHIP POBADA DESTROYED, IN PORT ARTHUR. BAYONET CHARGE OF A PART OF THE TWELFTH INFANTRY REGIMENT ON THE SIEGE TRENCHES HALFWAY UP EAST KIKWAN HILL FORTS

1.112

Picture postcard Unknown c. 1905 9 cm

Russian Cannon

1.113

Picture postcard Unknown Unknown c. 1905 Port Arthur, China. 9 cm Fengchi'pao, China. c. 1905 9 cm Shuishiying, China. c. 1905 c. 1905 9 cm

1.114

68
Unknown Unknown The Yoshikawa Koobunkan Tokyo, Japan. Shuishiying, China. Port Arthur, China. Tokyo, Japan. Japan. Unknown Unknown Unknown Collier's Weekly c. 1905 8.9 cm c. 1905 c. 1905 C. 1905 Letterpress halftone c. 1905 9 cm 8.4 cm 9 cm 13.2 cm 13.9 cm 14 cm 5.5 cm 14 cm 10.1 cm Letterpress halftone Collotype on postcard stock

Picture postcard

Sunken Ship in the harbour Bayonet Charge on Kikwan Hill

Near Port Arthur, China. Near Port Arthur, China. Near Port Arthur, China. Near Port Arthur, China.

1.115

Picture postcard

Pallada Destroyed

1.116

Picture postcard

Officers in Millett

n/a

JAPANESE NON-COMMISSIONED OFFICERRS IN A MILLET FIELD NORTH-EAST OF FENGCH'PAO. n/a ARRIVAL OF GENERAL STOSSEL AND HIS STAFF AT SHUISHIYING.

1.117

Picture postcard

General Stossel

1.118

Picture postcard

Relief Map of Dailan Penninsula

n/a

Region Occupied by Japan during The War. (All Rights Reserved) PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY THE YOSHIKAWA KOBUNKAN, TOKYO, JAPAN. n/a n/a n/a n/a RESTING COSSACKS THE GUARD OF THE RUSSIAN DELEGATE. GENERAL STOESSEL The Defender of Port Arthur GENERAL NOGI AND DWELLING HOUSE. GENERAL NOGI, THE JAPANESE COMMANDER BESIEGING PORT ARTHUR.

1.119

Picture postcard

Cossacks resting

Halftone lithographic process on postcard stock Halftone lithographic process on postcard stock Halftone lithographic process on postcard stock Halftone lithographic process on postcard stock Halftone lithographic process on postcard stock Halftone lithographic process on postcard stock Halftone lithographic process on postcard stock Lithographic process and raised relief embossing on postcard stock. Halftone lithographic process on postcard stock

1.120

Relief halftone

General Stoessel

1.121

Picture postcard

General Nogi and Residence

1.122

Relief halftone

General Nogi

Photograph from stereograph, copyright, 1904, by Underwood & Underwood, N.Y. Luchupo, China Letterpress halftone c. 1904 IN CAMP NEAR LUCHUPO Orderly rows of transport wagons in the foreground, picketed horses and tents beyond. Photograph from stereograph, copyright, 1904, by Underwood & Underwood, N.Y. Kinchow, China. Letterpress halftone A RUSSIAN PIT NEAR KINCHOW Taken by a Japanese assault last May with a heavy loss of life. Photograph from stereograph, copyright, 1904, by Underwood & Underwood, N.Y. Port Arthur, China. Letterpress halftone c. 1904 n/a 8.2 cm 7.1 cm DISMANTLED RUSSIAN SUBMARINE MINES Removed from the channel of Port Arthur by the Japanese. Photograph from stereograph, copyright, 1904, by Underwood & Underwood, N.Y. Port Arthur, China. Letterpress halftone c. 1904 n/a 7.1 cm 7.1 cm THE JAPANESE ADVANCE ON PORT ARTHUR Transporting supplies on hand-cars over the Manchurian Railway tracks five miles north of Port Arthur c. 1904 7 cm n/a 8.3 cm 7 cm n/a 7.1 cm

1.123

Relief halftone

Camp near Luchupo

Underwood and Underwood, New York

1.124

Relief halftone

Russian Pit

Underwood and Underwood, New York

1.125

Relief halftone

Russian Mines

Underwood and Underwood, New York

1.126

Relief halftone

Japanese Advance

Underwood and Underwood, New York

69
Japan. c. 1904 Five colour woodblock print on paper 37.2 cm 25.3 cm Japan. Five colour woodblock print on paper c. 1904 37.2 cm 25.3 cm Japan. Five colour woodblock print on paper c. 1904 37.2 cm 25.3 cm

1.127

Woodblock Print

Russian officer surrenderi ng

n/a

1.128

Woodblock Print

Pile driving

n/a

1.129

Woodblock Print

Lady Castle

Kinochika, from the One Hundred Victories, One Hundred Laughs series. Kinochika, from the One Hundred Victories, One Hundred Laughs series. Kinochika, from the One Hundred Victories, One Hundred Laughs series. n/a

1.130 c. 1904

Woodblock Print Japan. n/a

Setsubun

Kinochika, from the One Hundred Victories, One Hundred Laughs series. Five colour woodblock print on paper 37.2 cm 25.3 cm Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1905 7 cm n/a 10.7 cm 14.75 cm n/a n/a  Japan c. 1907 Halftone and spot color lithography on paper 21.8 cm 14.7 cm 0.08 mm 14.8 cm 10.95 cm Déjunner du 26 Novembre 1907 10.95 cm Menu Diner du 3 Décembre 1907 JAPANESE WOMAN, IN QUIET SECLUSION, WRITING A LETTER.

1.131

Relief halftone Unknown Unknown 1907 Japan Japan 1907

Japanese Lady writing

1.132

Menu

Dinner menu

1.133

Menu

Breakfast menu

hand-painted decorations and letterpress on card stock. hand-painted decorations and letterpress on card stock.

1.134

Relief halftone

Ministry of Economy and Trade

1.135

Relief halftone Unknown Japan Letterpress halftone c. 1907 n/a 23.8

Officer's portrait on military song book cover Two images inside a prayer hall 15.7 cm Tokyo Printing Company Japan c. 1904 9.1 cm 14.1 cm Unknown c. 1906 Japan and United Kingdom Letterpress halftone 25.2 cm 17.5 cm Lithographic process and raised relief embossing on postcard stock. n/a n/a

Religiserons vice in memory of the late Mrs. Okumura

70
Unknown c. 1907 Japan. Letterpress halftone 21.3 cm 11 cm c. 1906 c. 1905 c. 1905 9 cm 9 cm 15.3 cm 6.7 cm 14 cm 14 cm Unknown Unknown Unknown Chemlupo, Korea Hand coloured collotype postcard Chemlupo, Korea Hand coloured collotype postcard Japan. Letterpress halftone Unknown Shinbashi, Japan Japan Hand coloured collotype postcard Hand-colored matte gelatin silver print on thick paper c. 1905 9.1 cm c. 1906 11.6 cm 13.6 cm 9.4 cm Unknown

1.136

Picture ostcard

Red Cross embossed postcard

1.137

Relief halftone

Baron Tadashi Hayashi

HIS EXCELLENCY BARON TADASU HAYASHI, ENVOY EXTRAORDINARY AND MINSTER PLENIPOTENTIARY OF HIS MAJESTY THE EMPEROR OF JAPAN TO THE COURT OF ST. JAMES. n/a Miss Florence Nightingale, the celebrated nurse, who has recently been decorated by King Edward with with the Order of Merit. 0.06 mm n/a n/a WOUNDED RUSSIANS LEAVING CHEMLUPO FOR JAPAN. WOUNDED RUSSIANS IN THE RED CROSS HOSPITAL AT CHEMLUPO.

1.138

Relief halftone

Florence Nightingal e Order of Merit

1.139

Relief halftone

Buddhist Monks

1.140

Picture postcard

Crowd on a street

1.141

Picture postcard

1.142

Picture postcard

Wounded soldiers in Hospital Wounded soldiers on stretchers on street

n/a

ARRIVAL OF THE WOUNDED RUSSIAN SOLDIERS AT SHINBASHI. n/a

1.143

Photograph

Street procession

1.144 c. 1906 11.55

Photograph

Monks on jinrikishas Unknown Japan. n/a Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown c. 1905 1905 8.6 cm n/a 9.2 cm n/a 11.6 cm 12.9 cm Shinshukyo Daikyocho Letter press invitation Unknown c. 1905 Japan. Hand-colored matte gelatin silver print on thick paper Tokyo, Japan. Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard 9 cm n/a 14.1 cm The Zoujiyoji-Temple in Shira-Park Japan. Hand-colored matte albumen silver print on thick paper c. 1907 n/a R1014 BUDDHIST 13.95 cm 8.95 cm Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1907 n/a 10.3 cm 12 cm Japan. c. 1906 n/a Reliquiary, Courtyard, Gatewayand Bronze Memorial Lanterns Before the Tombs in the Temple of Zozoji, Shiba, Tokyo, Japan 9.2 cm 11.8 cm

9.3 cm

1.145

Photograph

Three monks on Rikshas

Hand-colored matte gelatin silver print on thick paper Hand-colored matte gelatin silver print on thick paper

1.146

Relief halftone

Temple courtyard

1.147

Photograph

Buddhist Monk

1.148

Picture postcard

Zoujiyoji Temple Gateway

1.149

Invitation card

Shinto Festival

1.150

Photograph

1.151

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored matte gelatin silver print on thick paper c. 1905 11.6 cm 8.8 cm 0.17 mm

1.152

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored matte gelatin silver print on thick paper c. 1905 n/a 9.4 cm 11.7 cm Hand-colored matte gelatin silver print on thick paper c. 1905 11.75 cm 9.4 cm n/a

71
Unknown Unknown c. 1905 Hand-colored matte gelatin silver print on thick paper 11.7 cm 8.9 cm Unknown Hand-colored matte gelatin silver print on thick paper Letterpress halftone c. 1905 11.5 cm c. 1905 9.05 cm c. 1905 9.3 cm .4 cm Unknown 3.75 cm 11.6 cm Unknown Hand-colored matte albumen silver print on thick paper Unknown Hand-colored matte albumen silver print on thick paper c. 1905 11.1 cm 9.3 cm Unknown Noge Hill, Yokohama, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1906 9 cm 13.7 cm

1.153

Photograph

1.154

Photograph

n/a

1.155

Photograph

Shinto street procession 2 Shinto street procession 3 Shinto street procession 4 Shinto street procession 5 Shinto street procession 6 Shinto street procession 7 n/a n/a

1.156

Photograph

1.157

Photograph

n/a

1.158

Photograph

Monk with drum Shinto street procession 8 Shinto street procession 9

n/a

1.159

Picture postcard

Noge Hill

n/a

Our house was on the far bluff, looking towards this one. Red church is a sel-supporting Japanese Presbyterian one. Here on this bluff I attended a memorial service for the soldiers who had fallen in the Russo-Japanese War.

1.160 c. 1905

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. n/a

Hand coloured collotype double-width postcard 28.4 cm 9.05 cm Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1906 9 cm n/a (No 25) Yasukuni Shrine, Tokyo Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1905 9 cm 8.6 cm n/a 13.2 cm n/a MOMIGIZAKA, YOKOHAMA Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1905 14.1 cm 14 cm

1.161

Picture postcard Unknown Unknown Unknown Japan. Yokohama, Japan.

Tokyo, Japan.

1.162

Picture postcard

1.163

Photograph

1.164 c. 1905 

Relief halftone Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone n/a Unknown Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1905 n/a 8.05 cm 7.9 cm n/a n/a 13.6 cm 19.7 12.2 cm 7.3 cm n/a 4.5 cm 7.78 cm 4.8 cm Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1905 n/a 8.9 cm 13.9 cm

Admiral Togo at Military Ceremony Soldiers marching at Yasukini Cherryblossom lined street People praying at graveyard Japanese sailors disembarki ng 24.5 cm 28.6 cm VIEW OF THE "DAIRINJI" QUARTER FOR RUSSIAN PRISIONERS AT MATSUYAMA, JAPAN Smoke rising from the crater of Mount Aso.

1.165

Relief halftone

Russian prisioners

1.166

Relief halftone B. L. Singley Unknown c. 1905 Japan. Letterpress halftone Japan. Letterpress halftone 1904

1.167

Relief halftone

Mount Aso billowing smoke Japanese soldiers in formation

1.168

Relief halftone Magazine c. 1905 Japan. Letterpress halftone

Japanese soldier

FIRM-SET FILES OF THE WELL-TRAINED AND INDOMITABLE FIGHTING MEN OF JAPAN. Copyright 1904, by B. L. Singley. THE MAN WHO IS DRIVING RUSSIA FROM SOUTHERN MANCHURIA -- A TYPICAL JAPANESE INFANTRYMAN IN HEAVY MARCHING ORDER. A YOMI-URI CRYING "EXTRA"

72
Unknown Nagaaki, Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1905 12.15 cm Unknown Nagoya, Japan. Letterpress halftone C. 1905 8.2 cm 14.1 cm Unknown Nagoya, Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1905 7.75 cm 14.1 cm Unknown Nagoya, Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1905 8 cm 13.6 cm Unknown Nagoya, Japan. Sasebo, Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1905 8.2 cm C. 1905 Letterpress halftone 9.8 cm 13.35 cm 7.1 cm Unknown

1.169

Relief halftone

1.170

Relief halftone

n/a

RUSSIAN PAROLED OFFICERS FROM PORT-ARTHUR AT NAGASAKI EN ROUTE FOR RUSSIA.

1.171

Picture postcard

n/a

SPORT OF RUSSIAN PRISIONERS IN THE GARDEN OF THE "NISHI HINGANJI" QUARTER, NAGOYA

1.172

Picture postcard

n/a

SPORT OF RUSSIAN PRISIONERS IN THE GARDEN OF THE "HIGASHI HINGANJI" QUARTER, NAGOYA

1.173

Picture postcard

n/a

ENJOYMENT OF RUSSIAN PRISIONERS IN THE GARDEN OF THE "CHOEIJI" QUARTER OF NAGOYA, JAPAN.

1.174

Picture postcard

n/a

RUSSIAN PAROLED OFFICERS FROM PORT-ARTHUR AT NAGASAKI EN ROUTE FOR RUSSIA. n/a ADMIRAL ROJESTVENSKY Wounded in the great sea fight of Tsushima and a prisioner of the Japanese at Sasebo.

1.175

Relief halftone

Yomi-uri crying exrtra Paroled Russian officers Russian POWs in Nagoya Camp Russian POWs in Nagoya Camp 2 Russian POWs in Nagoya Camp 3 Paroled Russian officers 2 Admiral Rojestvens ky

1.176 c. 1905

Photograph

POW Group Picture Unknown Japan. Gelatin silver print 20.7 cm n/a 26.45 cm

1.177

Photograph

POW Group Picture 2 Mizutani No. 1 Studio Gelatin silver print c. 1905 n/a Nagoya, Japan. 20.9 cm 26.4 cm

1.178

Relief halftone China. Letterpress halftone c. 1905 n/a Unknown c. 1905 Japan. Letterpress halftone 9.7 cm 7 cm n/a 14 cm 9 cm 9 cm 13.9 cm n/a 14 cm 14 cm 14 cm 9 cm 9 cm c. 1905 c. 1905 c. 1905 Collotype on postcard stock c. 1905 8.95 cm 9 cm 9 cm 9 cm 14 cm 14.1 cm c. 1905 14.1 cm 14 cm 14.15 cm 14.1 cm n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a THE NIJU-BASHI n/a n/a 14 cm 9.1 cm 9.1 cm 9 cm 9.05 cm

Captured Mines

Leslie's Weekly / T. Ruddiman Johnston 7.9 cm 9.9 cm

Front row Ad. Wiren. 2nd priest of Nishi Hangwonji, Capt. Yasuda, Gen. Smirnoff, Mrs. Yasuda, French Consul., Gen. Beilie, Lieut Himagawa. Back row. Konedo (Jiujitsu teacher) Capt. Neakalinsky (aide to Ad. Wiren), Lieut. Wasnesinsky (?). Takatabe Interpreter, Prince Cheidze, Lt. Col. in Army, Gen Smirnoff (Rus. Artillery) Aide to French Consul, Lieut Gammel, Lt. Beilie (Son of General B.) 1st row left to right. Japanese Greek priest, General Folke (shot Smirnoff in a duel). Japanese Greek priest, Japanese officer in charge, a capt & his wife, Gen. Nikitin, Captn's daughter and friend. On front a Russian servant. 2nd row Lieut Irmam, Gen. Irmam, chief of staff at Port Arthur, Russ. Capt, General Memanderoff (a mohamedan) RUSSIAN SUBMARINE MINES CAPTURED BY THE JAPANESE DURING THE NAVAL OPERATIONS NEAR PORT ARTHUR Photographed for Leslie's Weekly by T. Ruddiman Johnston. VICE-ADMIRAL BIRILEFF Who was billeted to succeed Rojestvensky when the fleet

1.179

Relief halftone Unknown c. 1905 c. 1905 c. 1905 Unknown Unknown Tokyo, Japan. Tokyo, Japan. c. 1905 Tokyo, Japan. c. 1905 c. 1905 c. 1905 Tokyo, Japan. Tokyo, Japan. Tokyo, Japan. Tokyo, Japan. Tokyo, Japan. Tokyo, Japan. Tokyo, Japan. Collotype on postcard stock Collotype on postcard stock Collotype on postcard stock Collotype on postcard stock Collotype on postcard stock Collotype on postcard stock Collotype on postcard stock Collotype on postcard stock Collotype on postcard stock Tokyo, Japan. Collotype on postcard stock Tokyo, Japan. Collotype on postcard stock

1.180

Picture postcard

Vice Admiral Birileff Captured Russian Balloon

1.181

Picture postcard

Pylons

1.182

Picture postcard Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown

73

1.183

Picture postcard

1.184

Picture postcard

Large captured gun Captured guns and wagons Large Captured gun 2

1.185

Picture postcard

Captured guns

1.186

Picture postcard

Captured guns and wagons 2

1.187

Picture postcard

Captured wagons

1.188

Picture postcard

The NijuBashi

1.189

Picture postcard

Captured guns and rifles

1.190

Picture postcard

The NijuBashi 2

1.191

Picture postcard

Captured lances

1.192 c. 1905

Picture postcard Unknown 9 cm n/a Unknown Unknown Antung, Korea. Letterpress halftone c. 1905 9 cm n/a HOSPITAL SCENE, ANTUNG. Tokyo, Japan. c. 1905 9 cm n/a Antung, Korea. Letterpress halftone c. 1905 n/a HOSPITAL SCENE, ANTUNG. Yokohama, Japan. Collodion POP print 1905 n/a 20.9 cm 26.9 cm 7.2 cm 8.9 cm Collotype on postcard stock 14 cm 7.1 cm Tokyo, Japan. c. 1905 n/a Collotype on postcard stock 9.1 cm 14.1 cm

Tokyo, Japan.

Collotype on postcard stock

14.1 cm

1.193

Picture postcard

Captured gun and wagons Large captured gun 3

1.194

Relief halftone Unknown

Hospital scene

1.195

Picture postcard Unknown

1.196

Relief halftone Unknown

1.197

Photograph

Convalesc ents in Jpanese garden Antung hospital scene Madamme Sufu Reception Underwood and Underwood, New York Shinegawa, Japan. Letterpress halftone 1904 n/a Yokohama, Japan. Gelatin silver print 1906 n/a Tokyo, Japan. c. 1906 9 cm n/a Yokohama, Japan. Sumi ink on card stock 1906 c. 1905 c. 1905 9.1 cm 22.2 cm 8.8 cm 14.1 cm Ink on paper Collotype and spot color lithography on postcard stock Collodion POP print c. 1905 Japan. Japan. 13.05 cm 9.65 cm n/a n/a n/a Collotype and spot color lithography on postcard stock 14 cm 8.9 cm 14 cm 10.3 cm 6.9 cm M. Taniguchi

1.198

Relief halftone

Red cross men

1.199

Picture postcard

Gate

Dear Miss MacLean

1.200

Picture postcard Madamme Sufu Unknown Unknown

Prince and Princess

74
Red Cross Society of Japan Yokohama, Japan. Japan. Red Cross Society of Japan Gov't of Japan Unknown Hikone, Japan. Tokyo, Japan. Tokyo, Japan. 20.9 cm c. 1905 9.1 cm c. 1905 14.1 cm c. 1905 14.1 cm Letterpress halftone Letterpress halftone c. 1905 13.5 cm 27.6 cm 14.15 cm 35.8 cm 9 cm Collotype and spot color lithography on postcard stock Collotype and spot color lithography on postcard stock Unknown 11.8 cm

The Red Cross Society of Japan

1.201

Invitation card

invitation to reception

1.202

Woodblock Print

Rifle tripod

1.203

Picture postcard

1.204

Photograph

Three decorated men Japanese and foreign nurses

n/a

1.205

Picture postcard

Japanese nurses

n/a

1.206

Picture postcard

n/a

1.207

Relief halftone

n/a

1.208

Relief halftone

The Imperial Couple Ii Naousuke Portrait Princeses practicing bandaging

n/a

IMPERIAL PATRIOTISM IN TOKYO Japanese Princesses taking a lesson in bandaging.

1.209 c. 1905 c. 1905 n/a n/a c. 1905 14.1 cm 8.15 cm n/a 10.95 cm 9.05 cm 8.4 cm 5.7 cm THE LATE IMPERIAL PRINCESS KOMATSU, FOUNDER OF THE RED CROSS SOCIETY IN JAPAN. Unknown Unknown Japan. Collotype on postcard stock Letterpress halftone c. 1905 Japan. Letterpress halftone

Print

Red Cross emblem n/a SOCIÉTÉ JAPONAISE DE LA CROIX-ROUGE

Red Cross Society of Japan Tokyo, Japan. Letterpress and lithography 7.9 cm 4.1 cm

1.210

Relief halftone

Princess Komatsu

1.211

Postcard

Japanese Nurse Unknown Tokyo, Japan.

1.212

Halftone Illustration

ENGLISH AND JAPANESE LADIES AT TOKYO PREPARING BANDAGES FOR THE ARMY, UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE RED CROSS.

1.213

Halftone Illustration Unknown Letterpress halftone c. 1905 n/a Unknown Unknown Unknown c. 1905 Japan. Letterpress halftone 12.7 cm n/a 7.5 cm n/a 6.8 cm 7.9 cm Tokyo, Japan. Collotype on paper n/a 36.6 cm 32.8 cm Tokyo, Japan. Collotype on paper n/a 37.4 cm 32.8 cm

Japanese and English nurses Japanese ladies making bandages Tokyo, Japan. 9.2 cm 11.4 cm

JAPANESE LADIES IN TOKYO MAKING BANDAGES FOR THE TROOPS

1.214

Collotype

Empress of Japan

1.215

Collotype

Empreror Meiji

1.216

Relief halftone Unknown c. 1905 Japan. Letterpress halftone

Miss Itoko Nakagawa

Miss Itoko, daughter of Mr. Nakagawa.

1.217

Relief halftone

75
Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1905 15.9 cm 13 cm Unknown Tokyo, Japan. Gelatin silver print 1905 17.4 cm 29 cm Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Japan. Japan. Japan. Japan. Letterpress halftone Letterpress halftone Letterpress halftone Letterpress halftone Japan. Letterpress Halftone Japan. Ink on paper c. 1905 c. 1905 c. 1905 c. 1905 c. 1905 1907 8.1 cm 13.9 cm 4.2 cm 14.3 cm 6.3 cm 15.2 cm 4.3 cm 21.7 cm 17.15 cm 20.5 cm 3.15 cm 22.4 cm

1.218

Relief halftone

n/a

Countess Ogawa and her child.

1.219

Photograph

Japanese lady in front of mirror Countess Ogawa and child Outdoor group picture at Admiral Noel's reception n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a

Mrs Harris 9 Miss Sonada Mr MacLean Miss MacLean 7. Lady Barclay 6 Mrs Sonoda (hostess) 8 " " children 1 Admiral Sir Gerard Noel. 3 Mr. Sonoda (host) Lady MacDonald. 5 Sir Claud Macdonald Shirokane Snkozaka Shiba, Tokuo, Oct. 17th, 1905

1.220

Illustration

Lady with hair bows

1.221

Relief halftone

Baron Megata family

Baron Megata and his family. KIVAL FREIGHTERS -- TRAIN AND SAMPAN on the river Ichikawa, Japan. Chinese female graduates from the Seijo Gakko. They are the first batch of Chinese girl students who graduated from the school.

1.222

Relief halftone

Kival Freighters

1.223

Relief halftone

Chinese Graduates

1.224

Illustration

Lady in kimono

1.225

Relief halftone

Prince Pu Lun

We were at a theatre partuy in honour of rthe Princegiven by Baron Goto. Were commanded to wear low-neck gowns.

1.226 c. 1907

Picture postcard Unknown n/a

Yokohama, Japan.

Collotype on postcard stock

9.05 cm

14 cm

IN CELEBRATION OF THE VISIT OF H.R.M. FLEET TO YOKOHAMA. YOKOHAMA PARK.

1.227

Picture postcard Unknown c. 1907 n/a

Officials at Yokohama Park Celebratio n Lady and child gazing out to the harbour from The Bund Yokohama, Japan. Collotype on postcard stock 6.05 cm 14 cm Unknown Japan. Offset lithograph on paper c. 1907 n/a 17.5 cm 14.6 cm

1.228

Illustration

Doll festival

1.229

Relief halftone Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1905 n/a

Baron Kentaro Kaneko J.E. Purdy & Co. 20.75 cm 13.9 cm

BARON KENTARO KANEKO, LL, D. FORMERLY MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE AND COMMERCE IN MARQUIS ITO'S CABINET, AND NOW SPECIAL REPRESENTATIVE OF THE JAPANESE GOVERNMENT IN THE UNITED STATES. PHOTOGRAPHED IN THE CAP AND GOWN OF HARVARD DOCTOR OF LAWS

1.230 c. 1907

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Gelatin silver print

8.3 cm n/a 8.3 cm n/a 20.7 cm n/a n/a n/a 14 cm 10 cm 8.6 cm 8.3 cm 14 cm 14 cm

14 cm

1.231 c. 1907

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Gelatin silver print

1.232 Unknown Unknown Satsuma, Japann. Letterpress halftone c. 1905 Japan. Gelatin silver print c. 1905

Relief halftone P. A. Juley Russia Letterpress halftone c. 1905

76
Unknown Japan, U.S.A. Letterpress halftone c. 1905 20.2 cm 13.15 cm Unknown Tokyo, Japan. Japan. Letterpress halftone Collotype on postcard stock c. 1905 9 cm 14 cm c. 1905 5.3 cm 7 cm Unknown Unknown Unknown Japan. Japan. Ink on paper Letterpress halftone c. 1905 12.5 20.9 cm c. 1905 4.2 cm 8.1 cm

Two uniformed men Uniformed man in shed Count Sergius De Witte

COUNT SERGIUS DE WITTE THE SENIOR RUSSIAN PEACE COMMISSIONER

1.233

Photograph

Soldier with rifle

1.234

Relief halftone

Prehistoric wood-cut masks

1.235

Relief halftone

Baron Komura and colleagues

n/a

BARON JUTARO KOMURA THE SENIOR PEACE COMMISSIONER. THE OTHER COMMISSIONER IS MR. TAKAHIRA, JAPANESE MINISTER TO THE UNITED STATES. TO THE LEFT OF BARON KOMURA IS COUNT YA (...) AND TO THE RIGHT IS MR. SATO, ONE HIS ASSISTANT, THE OTHER HIS SPOKESMAN TO THE n/a The Department of State for Foreign Affairs

1.236

Picture postcard

Governme nt Building

1.237

Relief halftone

n/a

1.238

Illustration

1.239

Relief halftone

Two women over hearth Gentleman courting lady Ladies playing a rope game

n/a

PLAYING AT KONKON CHIKI

1.240 c. 1905

Illustration

Unknown

Tokyo, Japan. Ink on paper n/a The City of Tokyo as seen by the Great American Visitors.

17.8 cm

22.8 cm

1.241

Illustration

Unknown

Japan.

Ink on paper

c. 1905 ATTITUDES OF THE PLENIPOTENTIARIES

36 cm

22.8 cm

1.242 Unknown c. 1905 c. 1905 9.05 cm n/a 8.9 cm n/a 11.8 cm 11.7 cm Unknown Tokyo, Japan. Japan. c. 1905 Hand-colored matte albumen silver print on thick paper Hand coloured collotype postcard Tokyo, Japan. n/a Collotype on postcard stock 13.3 cm 7.35 cm

Photograph

Tourist looking at Tokyo through binoculars Political Cartoon on peace negociatio ns Farmers on rice paddy Unknown Japan Hand-colored matte albumen silver print on thick paper c. 1890 n/a No. 182 The Imperial University, Tokyo. (T62) Asakusa Kwan-on (Buddhist Temple) Tokyo. 5.65 cm 13.15 cm

1.243

Picture postcard

Imperial University

1.244

Picture postcard Unknown

Asakusa Kwan-On

1.245

Picture postcard

1.246 c. 1905

Picture postcard Unknown 9 cm n/a

Koganei, Japan.

Hand coloured collotype postcard

14.1 cm

CHERRY BLOSSOM AT KOGANEI.

77
Unknown Tokyo, Japan. Gelatin silver print c. 1906 13.9 cm 8.3 cm Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1906 11.5 cm 6.1 cm Unknown Tokyo, Japan. Gelatin silver print c. 1906 11.1 cm 6.5 cm Unknown Japan. Collodion POP print c. 1906 20.9 cm c. 1906 11 cm 28.1 cm 6.5 cm Unknown Japan. Watercolour on paper Count and Countess Hayashi Tokyo, Japan. Japan. M. N Letter press invitation 1907 6.9 cm Letterpress print on paper c. 1906 11.8 cm 10.2 cm 17.15 cm

1.247

Photograph

n/a

1.248

Relief halftone

n/a

1.249

Photograph

Children with babies on back Lady in jinrikisha under cherry blosoms Margaret MacLean, Alexander MacLean and friend at Anamori Street Miss Hisako Kinoshita Margaret MacLean and friends under Anamori Torii gate n/a n/a

1.250

Photograph

Actors on stage

1.251

Painting

Farmhouses and sampans

n/a

Miss Hisako, sister of Viscount Kinoshita

1.252

Invitation card

Breakfast invitation

1.253

Illustration

Princesses admiring war trophies

n/a

1.254 c. 1906

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Collodion POP print

17.5 cm n/a

28.5 cm

1.255

Relief halftone Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1906 n/a

14.5 cm

21.3 cm

1.256 Unknown c. 1906 14.2 Yokohama, Japan. 9 cm n/a CUSTOM HOUSE YOKOHAMA Hand coloured collotype postcard

Picture postcard c. 1906 n/a

People walking in front of stage Group picture of lady muscicians Order of the Garter postcard Hoshinosei, Yokohama Yokohama, Japan. Lithographic process on postcard stock. 13.8 cm 8.4 cm Prince Arthur of Cannought presented to the Japanese Emperor, March 1906.

1.257

Picture postcard

Customs House

1.258 c. 1906

Photograph

Unknown

Tokyo, Japan. Gelatin silver print n/a

8.3 cm

13.95 cm

1.259 c. 1906

Relief halftone Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone n/a

14.4 cm

21.4 cm

Students of the Toyo Jogei Gakko practising tea-ceremony

1.260 Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1890s c. 1906 Japan Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1890s 7.7 cm 22.6 cm 5.9 cm Japan Letterpress print on paper c. 1906 4 cm 6.5 cm 3.3 cm 3.7 cm 15 cm Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. 5 cm c. 1890s 5.1 cm n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a

Relief halftone Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1906 n/a

Margaret MacLean, Alexander MacLean and friend at Anamori Shrine entrance. Students practicing tea ceremony Women binding books 14.4 cm 21.8 cm

Japanese women as bread-winners. Women engaged in bookbinding

78
Unknown Japan Collodion POP print c. 1906 10.2 cm 12.6 cm Unknown Unknown Unknown Japan. Nikko, Japan. Kyoto, Japan. Letterpress halftone Letterpress halftone Letterpress halftone c. 1906 c. 1906 c. 1906 12.7 cm 17.1 cm 9.5 cm 15.1 cm 15.1 cm 18.3 cm

1.261

Photograph

Young girl and boy

1.262

Illustration

Kimono shop truck

1.263

Photograph

Girl with basket

1.264

Photograph

Girl holding hat

1.265

Relief halftone

Funeral of Lady Ichijo. The funeral of the late Lady Ichijo, mother of the Empress, was held at the Seishoji Temple on Feb. 1st according to buddhist rites. n/a

1.266

Photograph

Lady Ichijo's funeral Boy standing on the street

1.267

Relief halftone

Chion-in Buddha

0.05 mm n/a 0.06 mm

Ancient wood-cuts of Buddha & 16 disciples, Chion-in temple, Kyoto. Interior of Toshogu Shrine, Nikko. Processions of the feudal lords at the Ote-mon on the New Year's Day.

1.268

Relief halftone

Toshogu Shrine

1.269

Relief halftone

Procession at Otemon

1.270 c. 1906

Relief halftone Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone n/a Yokohama City Unknown Unknown c. 1906 Japan. Letterpress print on paper n/a Letterpress print on paper c. 1906 Hand-colored albumen silver print. n/a c. 1890s 9.6 cm 9.6 cm 11.7 cm 35.1 cm 0.14 mm 21 cm 12.3 cm Isezakicho, Yokohama, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1906 n/a 9.1 cm 14.1 cm Yokohama, Japan. Letterpress print on paper C. 1906 24.3 cm 33.45 cm 0.08 mm YOKOHAMA CITY'S GARDEN PARTY IN HONOUR OF H.B.M.'s CHINA SQUADRON.

7.3 cm

5.5 cm

1.271

Map

Tables, trays and curios Yokohama Garden Party

1.272

Picture postcard

Isezakicho

1.273

Illustration

1.274

Map

Unknown

Tokyo, Japan. Japan.

1.275

Photograph

Unknown

1.276

Photograph

Lady boarding a streetcar Railway map and schedule Itinerant merchants at park Group picture at formal party with Margaret MacLean and other foreign ladies. Unknown Tokyo, Japan. Gelatin silver print c. 1906 9 cm n/a 10 cm Unknown c. 1906 Nagoya, Japan. n/a Tokyo, Japan. 1906 Letterpress print on paper 21.95 cm 23.5 cm Collotype on postcard stock 9.1 cm 12.9 cm CASTLE OF NAGOYA Plan of Emperor's Birthday Ball, Nov. 3rd 0.10 mm

79
Imperial Household Agency Unknown c. 1906 Kyoto, Japan. Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1906 Collotype on postcard stock 10.5 9.2 cm 21 cm c. 1906 10.85 cm 15 cm 14.35 cm Unknown Unknown Kyoto, Japan. Collotype on postcard stock Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1906 21.85 cm c. 1906 8.8 cm Letterpress halftone c. 1906 13.5 cm 15.1 cm 14.1 cm 21.4 cm Unknown Yokohama, Japan. Tokyo, Japan. Collotype on postcard stock Unknown

1.277

Picture postcard

Nagoya Castle

1.278

Floorplan

Plan of Emperor's Birthday Ball

1.279

Photomechanical reproduction

The Golden Pavilion

n/a

KINKAKUJI TEMPLE, TA KYOTO.

1.280

Relief halftone

Women working

n/a

Japanese women as bread-winners. Women engaged in decomposing types. n/a

1.281

Photomechanical reproduction

1.282

Relief halftone

n/a

apanese women as bread-winners. Women engaged in sewing

1.283

Picture postcard

n/a

Yokohama

1.284

Relief halftone

Boatshaped bush and tree Japanee women as breadwinners Street decoration s Mr. Nishida and family

n/a

Mr. Nishida, Director of the Tokyo Jogukkan and his fa

1.285

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1890s n/a arrying children

13.5 cm

8.6 cm

1.286

Photograph

Children carrying infants Lady feeding pigeons in the park Unknown Japan. Cyanotype c. 1906 n/a 8.1 cm 5.4 cm Japan. Tokyo, Japan. 1906 2 mm Tokyo, Japan. 1905 2 mm 15.3 cm 19.7 cm 15.5 cm 19.3 cm Letterpress halftone c. 1905 n/a 18.8 cm 11.8 cm

1.287

Illustration

Punishing Russia

1.288

Invitation card

April 17th, 1906

1.289

Invitation card

November 11th, 1905

Matsuya for The Vogue magazine Imperial Household Agency Imperial Household Agency Letterpress and spot color on embossed card stock Letterpress and spot color on embossed card stock

1.290

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. c. 1906 n/a

Contour trimmed postcard of lady with parasol Hand coloured collotype postcard 12.4 cm 7.4 cm Unknown unknown Unknown unknown c. 1906 c. 1906 c. 1906 6.9 cm 8.9 cm 14.2 cm 13.95 cm unknown Unknown Japan. Watercolor painting Japan. Photogravure on poscard stock Tokyo, Japan. Photogravure on poscard stock 7.3 cm 14 cm n/a n/a n/a Tokyo, Japan. c. 1906 n/a Collotype on postcard stock 9.2 cm 14.3 cm Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1906 n/a 5.65 Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1906 n/a 14.4 cm 5.8 cm

1.291

Picture postcard

Pond and bridge

1.292

Picture postcard

Carp windsocks

1.293

Picture postcard

Tokyo Castle

80
City of Yokohama Yokohama, Japan. Letterpress and spot color on card stock 1905 15.1 cm 11.8 cm Unknown Japan. Letterpress print on paper Letterpress and spot color on card stock Letterpress halftone Letterpress halftone c. 1905 8.2 cm 1905 9 cm 12.2 cm 11.5 cm c. 1905 c. 1905 7.5 cm 12.95 cm 12.2 cm 8.2 cm Governor Sufu's office Japan. Unknown Unknown Japan Japan.

1.294

Picture postcard

Sakurada, Tokyo

1.295

Picture postcard

Castle moat

1.296

Picture postcard

1.297

Programme

Mount Fuji in the distance Admiral Togo's Yokohama reception program

n/a

1.298

Illustration

Editorial cartoon

n/a

THE JAPANESE EDITOR IN WAR-TIME

1.299

Invitation card

Invitation to meet Admiral Noel

n/a

To Meet H.E. Admiral Sir Gerard and Lady Noel

1.300

Relief halftone

Bonsai trees

n/a n/a

JAPANESE DWARF TREES

1.301

Relief halftone

Nagoya Castle

1.302 c. 1905

Menu

Dinner menu Unknown Japan. n/a Unknown Unknown Unknown Yokohama, Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1905 n/a 9.15 cm 10 cm Tokyo, Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1905 n/a 6.95 cm 10.1 cm Japan. c. 1905 n/a Ledal (?) Higashi 4.4 cm 7.5 cm

13.9 cm

11.1 cm

1.303

Name Card

Name card

Letterpress and handpainted watercolour on card stock Hand-painted watercolour and ink calligrahy on card stock

1.304

Relief halftone

Themple Gate

1.305

Relief halftone

1.306 1907

Invitation card Letter press invitation 11 cm n/a

Jinrikisha buy the bay Dinner invitation to meet Mr. Lemieux Eichi Shibusawa Tokyo, Japan. 14.3 cm Kitazawa Rakuten, Tokyo Pack Japan. 1905 Letterpress print on paper Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1905 9 cm 14 cm n/a 9 cm 13.2 cm n/a 13.3 cm 13.4 cm 9cm 6.2 cm c. 1905 c. 1905 c. 1890s c. 1890s 1907 14 cm 9 cm 9.4 cm 9.05 cm 4.1 cm 8.95 cm 13.3 cm 13.7 cm 10.95 cm n/a 9.1 cm n/a Our house c. 1905 Hand coloured collotype postcard Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1905 Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1905 Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1890s 9 cm c. 1890s 13.5 cm Hand-colored albumen silver print. Letterpress halftone Hand coloured collotype postcard Hand-colored albumen silver print. Hand-colored albumen silver print. Collotype on postcard stock 9.05 cm 13.6 cm 35.55 cm 23.1 cm 0.09 mm Unknown Unknown Yokohama, Japan. Yokohama, Japan. Yokohama, Japan. Yokohama, Japan. Japan. Yokohama, Japan. Yokohama, Japan. Yokohama, Japan. Yokohama, Japan. Yokohama, Japan. Yokohama, Japan.

1.307

Illustration

Editorial cartoon

1.308

Picture postcard

Snow on Nishinobashi

Snow Scene, near Nishino-bashi, Yokohama

1.309

Picture postcard Unknown

Namental Car

Our house Namental Car of Temple Osan at Yokohama

1.310

Picture postcard Tomboya

CHERRY BLOSSOMS AT YOKOHAMA PARK.

81
Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown

1.311

Picture postcard

View of Snow Ishikawa, Yokohama.

1.312

Photograph

n/a

YOKOHAMA TOWN.

1.313

Photograph

Yokohama park cherry blossoms Snow on the Ishikawa Aerial veiw of Yokohama Japanese women at well n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a

1.314

Relief halftone

Steps to the temple

STEEP STEPS TO THE TEMPLE NOGE HILL, YOKOHAMA

1.315

Postcard

Noge Hill

1.316

Photograph

Large uilding

1.317

Photograph

Street crowd

x Our house

1.318

Picture postcard

Women lining up with buckets

n/a

1.319 1907

Picture postcard Unknown n/a

yokohama, Japan.

Collotype on postcard stock

9.1 cm

14 cm

1.320

Picture postcard Unknown 1907 n/a

yokohama, Japan.

Collotype on postcard stock

7.9 cm

11.7 cm

1.321

Picture postcard Unknown 1907 n/a

yokohama, Japan.

Collotype on postcard stock

6.1 cm

14.2 cm

1.322 1907

Picture postcard Unknown n/a

yokohama, Japan.

Collotype on postcard stock

9.1 cm

11.9 cm

Water Famine of Yokohama 25TH August 1907.

1.323 1907

Picture postcard Unknown n/a

yokohama, Japan.

Collotype on postcard stock

9.1 cm

14 cm

82
Unknown yokohama, Japan. 1907 Collotype on postcard stock 7.5 cm 12.9 cm Unknown Japan. Hand-colored matte albumen silver print on thick paper c. 1900 7.95 cm 3.9 cm Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1907 6.3 cm 8.6 cm Unknown Yokohama, Japan. Collotype on postcard stock 1907 9.1 cm 14 cm Unknown Yokohama, Japan. Collotype on postcard stock 1907 13.5 cm 8.3 cm Unknown Yokohama, Japan. Collotype on postcard stock 1907 9.1 cm 14.05 cm Unknown Anamori, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1907 8.4 cm 14 cm

1.324

Picture postcard

n/a

1.325

Picture postcard

n/a

1.326

Relief halftone

n/a

1.327

Picture postcard

n/a

1.328

Picture postcard

n/a

1.329

Picture postcard

Japanese water pumpers sitting under shed People standing around wooden water tank Young children carrying water buckets Men and women lining up to gather water from street faucet Long lines of people waiting to collect water Long line of people unde the rain Woman and toddler Man in traditional costume playing stringed instrument Crowded queue at water tank Crowd with buckerts before shops Crowded queue of people with umbrellas n/a n/a THE SHRINE OF THE ANAMORI-INARI

1.330

Picture postcard

Anamori Inari

1.331 c. 1907 c. 1907 n/a n/a n/a VIEW OF INARIBASHI VIEW OF ANAMORI STREET c. 1907 c. 1907 8.25 cm 9.2 cm 6.75 cm 13.4 cm 8.8 cm 14 cm Unknown Unknown Unknown Anamori, Japan. Collotype on postcard stock Anamori, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard Anomori, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard

Picture postcard Unknown n/a THE COMPOUND OF THE ANAMORI-INARI

Anamori Inari compound Anamori, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard 8.9 cm 14 cm

1.332

Picture postcard

Anamori Street

1.333

Picture postcard

Inaribashi

1.334

Picture postcard

1.335

Picture postcard Unknown c. 1907 11 cm n/a Unknown c. 1907 Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard n/a 7.15 cm 13.21 cm

Anamori, Japan.

Hand coloured collotype postcard

6.8 cm

SACRED ARCHES DEVOTED TO TO THE ANAMORI-INARI

1.336

Picture postcard

1.337 c. 1907

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. 8 cm n/a Unknown Unknown Unknown c. 1907 c. 1907 c. 1907 1909 c. 1907 8.1 cm 12.12 cm 8.3 cm c. 1907 11.25 cm 7.81 cm 9.7 cm 9.55 cm 22.1 cm 12.6 cm 6.6 cm Unknown Unknown Canadian Pacific Railway Co. Letterpress print on paper Hand coloured collotype postcard Letterpress halftone Unknown Japan. RMS Empress of China Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard Yokohama, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard 8.9 cm 11.9 cm n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Anamori, Japan. c. 1907 n/a Hand coloured collotype postcard 7.35 cm 12.3 cm Japan. Painting c. 1907 n/a 2.5 cm 8.1 cm

Torii passagew ay Sacred arches devoted to shrine Lady in resting palanquin Woman and children on street Hand coloured collotype postcard 13.9 cm

1.338

Picture postcard

Painted landscape

1.339

Picture postcard

View of Anamori Inari

VIEW OF THE ANAMORI-INARI GEISHA GIRL OF YOKOHAMA

83
Unknown Japan. Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1907 8.7 cm 6.7 cm Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1907 8.4 cm 12 cm

1.340

Picture postcard

Yokohama Geisha

1.341

Picture postcard

Boys balancing baskets

1.342

Picture postcard

Gardner at work

1.343

Menu

Lunch menu

Between Mar. 11th and Marc. 12th, 1909. From a junk like this I saw the Imperial Naval Review 170 Warships n/a

1.344

Picture postcard

Sampan

1.345

Relief halftone

1.346

Relief halftone

n/a

HOUSEMAID OPENING THE "SHOJI" IN THE MORNING.

1.347

Relief halftone

Standing gentleman and sitting lady Woman showing head through sliding door Cemetery and pagoda at Nagasaki

n/a

Burying Ground and Pagoda, Nagasaki.

1.348 c. 1907

Relief halftone Japan. Letterpress halftone n/a A Long and Strong Pull in Japan. Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1907 n/a 9.45 cm 9.7 cm Togo presented one of captured battleship Aral's 12 inch guns to this shrine

Itinerant houseware s salesman Original image by T. Enami 8.4 cm 10.4 cm

1.349

Relief halftone

Ise Shrine entrance

1.350

Relief halftone Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1907 n/a 252 IRIS GARDEN IN HORIKIRI, TOKYO.

Lady on jinrikisha admiring flower garden 10.8 cm 16.6 cm Unknown Unknown Unknown c. 1907 c. 1907 8 cm 10.35 cm n/a 10.4 cm n/a Unknown Nikko, Japan. Nikko, Japan. c. 1907 Collotype on postcard stock 8.1 cm Collotype on postcard stock Nikko, Japan. 8 cm n/a Collotype on postcard stock 10.4 cm Japan. Letterpress print on paper c. 1905 32.5 cm 48 cm 0.13 mm Interior of the Temple of Ieyasu Entrance Gate to the Temple of Ieyasu Japan. Letterpress halftone 1911 n/a 20.55 cm 5.6 cm

1.351

Relief halftone

Michi Kawai

A JAPANESE LECTURER MISS MICHI KAWAI

1.352

Illustration

Editorial cartoon

1.353

Picture postcard

Ieyasu Temple

1.354

Picture postcard Unknown

1.355

Picture postcard

Entrance Gate to the Temple of Iemitsu

1.356

Picture postcard Unknown c. 1907 n/a

Nikko, Japan.

Collotype on postcard stock

7.3 cm

10.45 cm

Naka-Iwa

84
Unknown Nikko, Japan. c. 1907 8 cm Collotype on postcard stock 10.4 cm Unknown c. 1907 Nikko, Japan. Collotype on postcard stock 7.4 cm 10.4 cm Unknown Nikko, Japan. Nikko, Japan. Nikko, Japan. Nikko, Japan. Nikko, Japan. Japan. Collotype on postcard stock Collotype on postcard stock Collotype on postcard stock Hand coloured collotype postcard Collotype on postcard stock Collotype on postcard stock c. 1907 8.2 cm c. 1907 7.45 cm c. 1907 c. 1907 c. 1907 c. 1907 8.05 cm 10.9 cm 10.9 cm 7.2 cm 10.6 cm 10.35 cm 9.4 cm 7.4 cm 7.45 cm 6.5 Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown

1.357

Picture postcard

n/a

Gammanga-fuchi

1.358

Picture postcard

n/a

1.359

Picture postcard

n/a

Chuzenji Lake

1.360

Picture postcard

n/a

Sacred Bridge

1.361

Picture postcard

Ieyasu Temple approach Iemitsu Temple approach Naka-Iwa river and bridge scene Roadside statues and landscape Compound structure across a lake Small boat on lake shore Sacred bridge at Nikko View of a temple complex n/a n/a n/a n/a Kirifuri Fall Kegon Fall

View from the Daikoku Hill

1.362

Picture postcard

Kirifuri waterfall

1.363

Picture postcard

Kegon waterfall

1.364

Picture postcard

Farmers

1.365 c. 1907

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. n/a Unknown c. 1907 Japan. Collotype on postcard stock 8 cm n/a 12.1 cm

Tree-lined road

Collotype on postcard stock

10.4 cm

7.45 cm

1.366

Picture postcard

1.367

Photograph

Unknown

Nagano/ Gunma, Japan Gelatin silver print c. 1907 n/a 9.6 cm 13.95 cm

1.368

Photograph

Unknown

Nagano/ Gunma, Japan Gelatin silver print c. 1907 n/a 9.5 cm 14.2 cm Nagano/ Gunma, Japan Gelatin silver print c. 1907 9.55 cm 9 cm n/a Lava bed near Karuizawa Collotype on postcard stock c. 1907 9 cm n/a Collotype on postcard stock c. 1907 n/a Hand-colored albumen silver print. n/a n/a Collodion POP print c. 1907 8.7 cm 14.1 cm 9 cm 12.95 cm c. 1890s 4.8 cm 10.5 cm 8.8 cm 10.4 cm 6.8 cm

1.369

Photograph

Buddha statue carved on living rock Lava Bed near Karuizawa 1/3 Lava Bed near Karuizawa 2/3 Lava Bed near Karuizawa 3/3 Unknown Unknown 8,200 ft. climbed at night. Asama-yama

1.370

Picture postcard Unknown

Mt. Asama erupting

1.371

Picture postcard Unknown Unknown

Mt. Asama crater

I looked into here at 4:20 a.m.

1.372

Photograph

Pilgrims on the road

Pilgrims MT. ASAMA ACTIVE VOLCANO KARUIZAWA JAPAN MAMPEI HOTEL

85
Unknown c. 1907 Japan. Collotype on postcard stock Unknown Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1907 8.4 cm 11.4 cm Unknown Japan. Gelatin silver print c. 1907 14.2 cm 8.7 cm Unknown Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1890s 8.8 cm 5.2 cm Unknown Japan. Collotype on postcard stock Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1907 1907 14.2 cm 6.4 cm 9 cm 11.55 cm

1.373

Photograph

Nagano/ Gunma, Japan Nagano/ Gunma, Japan Nagano/ Gunma, Japan Nagano/ Gunma, Japan n/a Tunnel

1.374

Picture postcard

1.375

Picture postcard

n/a

a comfortable way

1.376

Photograph

n/a

1.377

Picture postcard

n/a

1.378

Picture postcard

Mt. Asama billowing smoke Railroad track and tunnel Japanese lady on sedan chair carried by four men. Temple structure with high cliffs in the backgroun d Man carrying bedding on his back Railroad tunel and tracks

n/a n/a

1.379

Picture postcard

Sinking Dakora, front quarter view

1.380 1907 c. 1907 n/a 9.3 cm 14.4 cm Unknown Gelatin silver print

Picture postcard n/a

Dakota forward masts Hand coloured collotype postcard 12.1 cm 7.6 cm

1.381

Photograph

Sunrise

1.382

Photograph

Man standing with saddled horse with Mt. Fuji in the distance Unknown Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 n/a 6.4 cm 13.2 cm Unknown Hand coloured collotype postcard 1907 9 cm 7.9 cm n/a 8.7 cm n/a 12.9 cm n/a 9.1 cm 11.4 cm 8.95 cm n/a n/a n/a Kintai BAMBOO FOREST AT KYOMIZU KYOTO n/a 1907 6.5 cm 10.7 Gelatin silver print 5.4 cm Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1907 5 cm n/a 6.4 cm

1.383

Picture postcard

Child at a water well

1.384

Picture postcard

1.385

Photograph

1.386 c. 1900

Picture postcard Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1900 Japan. Yamaguchi, Japan. c. 1907 c. 1907 14.2 cm Kyoto, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard Hand coloured collotype postcard 5.3 cm Gold and silver dust painting on postcard stock c. 1900 13.95 cm 7.55 cm

Hand coloured collotype postcard

Our gardner looked like this

1.387

Picture postcard

Old Hakone

86
Unknown Unknown Kusakabe Kimbei Tokyo, Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1890 6.6 cm 13.3 cm Unknown Unknown Unknown Tokyo, Japan. Japan. Tokyo, Japan. Japan. Lithographic process and embossing on postcard stock. Hand coloured collotype postcard Hand coloured collotype postcard Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1907 c. 1907 c. 1907 7.15 cm 12.6 cm 9 cm 13.9 cm 8.8 cm 14.1 cm c. 1907 9.05 cm 14 cm Tomboya

1.388

Picture postcard

Sinking Dakota, rear right quarter view Sinking Dakota, rear Two men Unknown with grass vests Japanese Unknown village street Sun and Unknown crashing sea waves

1.389

Picture postcard

Kintai Bridge

1.390

Picture postcard

1.391

Photograph

Man in bamboo forest Scene on the Sumida River, Mukojima, Tokyo.

n/a

1.392

Picture postcard

Flying Crane

n/a n/a n/a SHRINE KAMEIDO-JINJA, TOKYO ASAKUSA-PARK, TOKYO. Always enjoyed here, twirled prayer wheels, feed pigeons n/a View of Senjokaku Hall Itsukushima Shrine

1.393

Picture postcard

Kameido Shrine

1.394

Picture postcard

Asakusa Park

1.395

Picture postcard

Senjokaku Hall at Itsukushim a Shrine

1.396 c. 1907 c. 1907 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Nikko god of Thunder TEMPLE NISHIHON GANJI AT KYOTO MIYAJIMA OF AKI One of the three great views of Japan Nikko no one has ever been able to ount the correct number of gods Priest and Acolyte Prayers said for babies. Gifts from babies. TEPLE FUDOO YOKOHAMA c. 1900 c. 1907 c. 1907 9 cm 9 cm 6 cm 8.5 cm 12.75 cm 7.5 cm n/a 12.6 cm 7.7 cm 9.05 cm 8 cm 3.05 13.9 cm 14.1 cm 5.3 cm n/a n/a n/a MIIDERA AT OMI 8.6 cm 7.6 cm 11.9 cm 11.8 cm 12.2 cm c. 1907 c. 1907 c. 1907 c. 1907 12.5 cm 8.15 cm 10.9 cm 11.9 cm 8.6 cm 12 cm 8.1 cm Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Japan. Hand-colored matte albumen silver print on thick paper Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1907 c. 1900 c. 1907 Hand-colored albumen silver print. Hand-colored matte albumen silver print on thick paper Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1907 Nikko, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard Nikko, Japan. Hand-colored matte albumen silver print on thick paper Hiroshima, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard Kyoto, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard Japan. Letterpress halftone Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. Yokohama, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard

Picture postcard Unknown n/a ROAD OF TAKINOWO TEMPLE, NIKKO.

Takinowo Temple road Nikko, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard 14.1 cm 7.6 cm

1.397

Picture postcard

Fudoo Temple

1.398

Photograph

Prayers for babies.

1.399

Relief halftone

Priest and Acolyte

1.400

Picture postcard

Nishion Ganji Temple

1.401

Picture postcard

Miyajima

1.402

Picture postcard

Gods road

1.403

Picture postcard

Forest steps

1.404

Photograph

God of Thunder Unknown Japan.

1.405

Photograph

A Buddhist priest praying that certain li may be as pure as the paper he holds.

87
Unknown Unknown Unknown Shiga, Japan. Japan. Japan. Kyoto, Japan. Unknown Unknown Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard Hand coloured collotype postcard Hand coloured collotype postcard Hand-colored matte albumen silver print on thick paper c. 1907 8.7 cm c. 1907 c. 1907 7 cm 10.9 cm c. 1900 11 cm 13.2 cm 14.2 cm 7.5 cm 7.4 cm Unknown Unknown Japan. Japan. Unknown Japan.

1.406

Picture postcard

Buddhist priest praying Gion festival float

1.407

Photograph

Monk with large hat

1.408

Picture postcard

Temple Gate

1.409

Picture postcard

n/a

1.410

Picture postcard

View of Miidera Temple Row of six stone statues of Buddha

n/a

1.411

Picture postcard

Temple view

n/a n/a god of Wind

1.412

Picture postcard

1.413

Photograph

God of Wind Zen monks with flutes and wicker masks

n/a

Komoso

1.414 c. 1907

Relief halftone Unknown Japan. n/a SHINKO-JI AND DAIBUTSU

Hand-colored albumen silver print.

4.1 cm

5.8 cm

1.415

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1907 n/a BUDDHIST

6.5 cm

7.9 cm

1.416

Picture postcard Unknown c. 1907 n/a Hachiman Temple, Kamakura.

Kamakura, Japan.

Hand coloured collotype postcard

14 cm

8.1 cm

1.417 c. 1900 c. 1900 c. 1907 c. 1907 n/a 9.1 cm 9.1 cm n/a 13.75 cm 13.6 cm 8.7 cm n/a 13.7 cm 8.1 cm n/a (R7) Kasuga Temple at Nara 8.1 cm Unknown Unknown Unknown Nara, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1907 Hand coloured collotype postcard Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print.

Photograph

Large Buddha at Shinko Temple Group of Buddhist monks Temple entrance with fluttering doves Great Buddha at Kamakura Unknown Kamakura, Japan. n/a Hand-colored albumen silver print. 10.6 cm 8.6 cm

1.418

Photograph

Girl walking up

1.419

Picture postcard

Kasuga Temple Entrance

1.420

Picture postcard Unknown Shiga, Japan.

Karasaki pine trees

THE PINE TREES AT KARASAKI, OMI

1.421

Picture postcard

(T27) Temple Toshogu of Ueno, Tokyo.

88
Unknown Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1907 5.7 cm 13.1 cm Unknown c. 1907 Japan. Offset lithograph on card stock 12.1 cm 9 cm Unknown c. 1907 Japan. Offset lithograph on card stock 11.6 cm 9 cm Unknown Nunobukiya ma, Japan Collotype on postcard stock c. 1907 8.8 cm 14 cm Unknown Nagasaki, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1907 9 cm 14.05 cm Unknown Nagasaki, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1907 8.35 cm 14 cm

1.422

Picture postcard

n/a

1.423

Picture postcard

n/a

1.424

Picture postcard

n/a

1.425

Picture postcard

n/a

KWAN-ON-DO, NUNOBIKIYAMA.

1.426

Picture postcard

n/a

takaboko (pappenberg, nagasaki

1.427

Picture postcard

Entrance to Toshogu Temple in Ueno Eight people on a susension bridge Castle ramparts and moat Steps leading up to temple gateway Kwan-OnDo in Nunobikiya ma Rocky outcrop with two pine trees at a nagasaki beach. Two men standing in front of a horse statue in a courtyard n/a

suwa, nagasaki

1.428 c. 1907

Picture postcard Unknown n/a

Nagasaki, Japan.

Hand coloured collotype postcard

5.4 cm

6.7 cm

1.429

Picture postcard Unknown c. 1907 n/a TENMA, OSAKA Unknown Unknown c. 1907 Takinogawa, Japan. n/a Japan. c. 1907 Hand coloured collotype postcard n/a 9.05 cm 11.8 cm Hand coloured collotype postcard 14.2 cm 9.1 cm AUTUMNAL MAPLES TAKI-NO-GAWA Tokyo, Japan. c. 1907 9 cm n/a BENKEI-BRIDGE AT AKASAKA, TOKYO. Hand coloured collotype postcard 14.2 cm

Osaka, Japan.

Hand coloured collotype postcard

14 cm

8.6 cm

1.430

Picture postcard

1.431

Picture postcard Unknown

1.432

Picture postcard

TOKYO, - DRUM BRIDGE AT KAMEIDO

1.433

Picture postcard Unknown c. 1907 9 cm n/a

Hand coloured collotype postcard

12.9 cm

1.434

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. c. 1907 9 cm n/a Unknown c. 1907 Omori, Japan. 9 cm n/a Kyoto, Japan. c. 1907 Yamaguchi, Japan. c. 1907 Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1907 Hand-colored albumen silver print. Albumen silver print c. 1907 9 cm 9.1 cm Hand coloured collotype postcard 14.6 cm 10.1 cm 10.1 cm 11.9 cm 24.3 cm c. 1907 c. 1907 8.35 cm 20 cm 13.5 cm Hand coloured collotype postcard 9.1 cm 13.2 cm n/a Hand coloured collotype postcard 14.15 cm

Hand coloured collotype postcard

14 cm

NICHILEN SHONIN KESAKAKE MATSU KAZUSA

1.435

Picture postcard Unknown

PLUM GARDEN AT OMORI

89
Unknown Unknown Unknown Japan. Unknown Yokohama, Japan. Yokohama, Japan. Collotype on postcard stock Unknown Unknown Japan. Collotype on postcard stock c. 1907 9.2 cm 7.4 cm

1.436

Picture postcard

FUSHIMI INARI, KIOTO. SHINTO.

1.437

Picture postcard

n/a

KINTAI BRIDGE, SUO.

1.438

Picture postcard

n/a

1.439

Photograph

Stone lantern next to path Bell tower at Tenma in Osaka Benkei bridge in Tokyo. Japanese maples in the fall Drum Bridge in Tokyo Cherry blossoms by the riverside Tree branch gateway at Kazusa Plum garden in spring. Fushimi Inari, Kyoto. Kintai Arched Bridge Ladies sitting at gazeebo View of a street at a costal town n/a n/a

1.440

Photograph

New Years Shrine

1.441

Picture postcard

n/a

Commemoration To open Yoshida-bridge

1.442

Picture postcard

Commeroa tion dedication crowd Kneeling man and standing woman in traditional costume.

n/a

TO ADMIRAL H. TOGO

1.443 1905

Lithographi c Print Japan. Offset lithograph n/a

Public announce ment 29.95 cm 15.8 cm Unknown Yokohama, Japan. Albumen silver print c. 1907 n/a Tokyo, Japan. Letter press invitation 1907 n/a 10.7 cm 16.9 cm 17.8 cm 25.2 cm

The Japan Branch of The British Navy League

1.444

Photograph

Ceremony

1.445

Invitation card

Imperial Household Agency Unknown Japan. Collotype on postcard stock c. 1907 n/a Collotype on postcard stock c. 1907 n/a 8.2 cm 12 cm 8.5 cm 12.9 cm

A l'occasion d l'Anniversaire de la Naissance de La Majesté l' Empereur,

1.446

Picture postcard Unknown Yokohama, Japan.

1.447

Picture postcard

Commemoration to open Yoshida-Bridge

2

1.448 c. 1907

Picture postcard Unknown n/a

Tokyo, Japan.

Hand coloured collotype postcard

8.2 cm

13.4 cm

(T198) The Front Gate of the Imperial Lodging Palace in Tokyo.

1.449

Picture postcard Unknown c. 1907 n/a

Yokohama, Japan.

Collotype on postcard stock

4.65 cm

12.8 cm

Celebration of Opening of the new Yoshida Bridge in Yokohama. 3

1.450

Invitation card Collotype on paper c. 1907 n/a Unknown c. 1900 Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. 8.6 cm 8.9 cm n/a

90
Unknown c. 1900 Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. 8.4 cm 9 cm Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1907 6.8 cm c. 1900 9.1 cm 3.8 cm 13.6 cm Unknown Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. Unknown Nikko, Japan. Otsu, Japan. Collotype on paper c. 1907 9.95 cm c. 1907 5.8 cm 14.35 cm 14 cm Unknown Collotype on postcard stock

Mr. & Mrs. E. J. MOS

Yokohama, Japan.

8.3 cm

10.1 cm

OUR GATEWAY. With Compliments of the Season From Mr & Mrs. E, J. MOS A6

1.451

Photograph

1.452

Photograph

Invitation to Emperor Meiji's birthday Three generation s Crowd celebrating bridge opening Imperial Palace in Tokyo Dignitaries walking on newly opened bridge. Seasons greetings card Ladies greeting at a home gate Carp windsocks hanging along the road for Boy's festival n/a n/a

1.453

Relief halftone

Vases and trays

1.454

Photograph

n/a

1.455

Picture postcard

Lady looking out into the lake Yomeimon Temple gate at Nikko

n/a

YOMEIMON GATE AT NIKKO

1.456

Picture postcard

Karasaki Pine trees

n/a

KARASAKI NO MATSU AT OTSU

1.457 c. 1900

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. 9 cm n/a

13.45 cm

1.458

Photograph

Unknown

Yokohama, Japan. Collodion POP print c. 1907 n/a

8.9 cm

13.4 cm

1.459

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 n/a

8.3 cm

12.3 cm

1.460 c. 1900

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. n/a

7.2 cm

13.3 cm

1.461 c. 1907

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. n/a

Hand coloured collotype postcard

6.8 cm

10.2 cm

1.462

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. c. 1907 11 cm n/a

Hand coloured collotype postcard

7.5 cm

91
Unknown Japan. c. 1900 Unknown c. 1907 Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard 9.5 cm 5.7 cm Unknown Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 10.3 cm 7.65 cm Unknown Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 5.8 cm 4 cm Unknown Yokohama, Japan. Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. Collotype on postcard stock c. 1900 8.65 cm c. 1907 11.7 cm 13.4 cm 9 cm Unknown

1.463

Photograph

Hand-colored albumen silver print.

8.3 cm

11.3 cm

n/a

1.464

Picture postcard

n/a

1.465

Photograph

n/a

1.466

Photograph

n/a

1.467

Photograph

People walking over drum bridge Margaret MacLean on Motomachi Dori Family getting ready for household chores Two ladies kneeling at home Five young ladies playing a game with a blindfold. Lady in a palanquin, carriers lighting a pipe. Children street performers Lady carrying infant under large parasol Lady helping to put on a kimono Two ladies with back to the camera admiring flowers Carpertent ers at work cutting lumber n/a n/a A Field Near Yokohama

1.468

Picture postcard

Field near Yokohama

1.469 c. 1907

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. n/a Making Ocha-no-yuri, ceremonial tea.

Hand coloured collotype postcard

6.35 cm

13.4 cm

1.470

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. c. 1907 n/a

Hand-colored matte albumen silver print on thick paper 5.8 cm 12.75 cm

1.471

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. c. 1907 9 cm n/a

Hand coloured collotype postcard

9.3 cm

A CEREMONY OF HOUSE BUILDING

1.472 c. 1907

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. n/a

Hand coloured collotype postcard

5.7 cm

7.15 cm

GIRLS' NAGINATA TRAINING

1.473 c. 1907 c. 1907 9 cm n/a 13 cm Unknown Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. Collotype on paper n/a

Three ladies at home practicing tea ceremony Four ladies at home enjoying luncheaon Carpenters at work on house structure Girls training on long swordspear ....dokwan Hakukaku do 7.8 cm 11.5 cm ....dokwan Hakukakudo THE FARMER TAKING OFF THE STALK OF WHEAT

1.474

Picture postcard

Farmers at work

1.475

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. c. 1907 n/a

Hand coloured collotype postcard

9.03 cm

12.2 cm

92
Unknown Unknown c. 1907 c. 1907 6 cm Unknown Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard 7.2 cm Japan. Collotype on postcard stock c. 1907 13.4 cm 8.75 cm 14.05 cm 9.5 cm Unknown Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1907 7.2 cm 11.1 cm Unknown Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1907 8.3 cm 10.9 cm Unknown Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 4.1 cm 11.8 cm Unknown Japan. Collodion POP print c. 1907 6.3 cm 4.5 cm

1.476

Picture postcard

n/a n/a n/a

1.477

Picture postcard

Two ladies having tea and refreshme nts Actor in Samurai Armour Maid cutting vegetables

1.478

Picture postcard

Two ladies palying Go

1.479

Picture postcard

n/a

1.480

Picture postcard

n/a

1.481

Photograph

n/a

1.482

Photograph

Two ladies enjoying matcha tea and refreshme nts A lady practising ikebana A lady resting on the tatami in the summer heat Portrait of a young lady

n/a

1.483 c. 1907

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. n/a

Hand coloured collotype postcard

12.9 cm

8.8 cm

1.484

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 n/a

8.6 cm

11.9 cm

1.485 Unknown c. 1900 Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. n/a 4.65 cm 11.3 cm

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. c. 1907 11 cm n/a

Hand coloured collotype postcard

7.2 cm

1.486

Photograph

1.487 c. 1900

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. n/a

9.1 cm

13.5 cm

1.488

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 n/a

8.5 cm

13.5 cm

1.489

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. c. 1907 n/a

Hand coloured collotype postcard

8.1 cm

14 cm

93
Unknown c. 1907 Japan. Hand-colored matte albumen silver print on thick paper 7 cm 13.8 cm Unknown c. 1907 Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard 7.9 cm 14.1 cm Unknown Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1907 7.3 cm 9.05 cm Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1907 7 cm 4.4 cm c. 1907 6.3 cm 9.85 cm Unknown Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard Unknown Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1907 7.8 cm 14.1 cm

1.490

Picture postcard

n/a

1.491

Picture postcard

n/a

1.492

Picture postcard

n/a

1.493

Relief halftone

n/a

1.494

Picture postcard

n/a

1.495

Picture postcard

Lady enjoying flowers on display Women washing and drying kimono Two ladies enjoying tea Children playing with kites Three ladies enjoying a game of Go Five ladies playing karuta Six ladies mourning the loss of a loved one Women preparing vegetables and rice in the kitchen Five ladies viewing cherry blossoms Lady contemplat ing a bonsai tree Vases, trays and lamps Lady painting sumie on silk Children in front of Boys Day celebration doll arrangeme nt n/a

1.496 c. 1907

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. n/a

Collotype on postcard stock

11 cm

8.5 cm

1.497

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. c. 1907 n/a

Hand coloured collotype postcard

8.8 cm

13.9 cm

1.498

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. c. 1907 n/a C 56 J Japanese nursemaid

Hand coloured collotype postcard

12.8 cm

8.1 cm

1.499 c. 1907

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. n/a

Hand coloured collotype postcard

6.6 cm

13.7 cm

1.500 c. 1907

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. n/a

Hand coloured collotype postcard

7.9 cm

14 cm

1.501

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. c. 1907 n/a

Hand coloured collotype postcard

7.1 cm

14.1 cm

1.502

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 n/a

11.1 cm

7.9 cm

94
Unknown c. 1900 Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. 10.6 cm 5.8 cm Unknown c. 1900 Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard 7.5 cm 12.8 cm Unknown Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1907 11.2 cm 8.2 cm Unknown Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1907 9.5 cm 6.2 cm Unknown Japan. Collodion POP print c. 1907 5.5 cm 5.95 cm Unknown Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 7 cm 9.5 cm

1.503

Photograph

n/a

1.504

Picture postcard

n/a

1.505

Picture postcard

n/a

1.506

Picture postcard

n/a

1.507

Photograph

n/a

1.508

Photograph

Lady doing her hair in front of a tall mirror Interior view of showing a tokonoma Lady carrying an infant on her back Students and teacher practicing calligraphy Three ladies burining incense at home Lady playing the Koto Three children dressed festively Young girl carrying a baby on her back beneath a paper parasol. Villagers walking on the street Women collecting millusks at a beach Carpenter sawing a wooden beam Carpenters sawing wooden beams Farmers sieving grain n/a

1.509 c. 1900

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. n/a

Hand coloured collotype postcard

8.7 cm

11.65 cm

1.510

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 n/a Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 n/a n/a Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 9.6 cm 8.2 cm 8.4 cm 10.1 cm

7.65 cm

13.41 cm

1.511 Unknown Japan.

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

1.512

Photograph

1.513 c. 1900

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. n/a

6.5 cm

11.3 cm

1.514

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 11 cm n/a

7.95 cm

95
Unknown Japan. c. 1900 Unknown c. 1900 Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. 8.4 cm 12.3 cm Unknown c. 1907 Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. 7.4 cm 13.9 cm Unknown Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 8.35 cm 13 cm Unknown Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 8.9 cm 13.4 cm Unknown Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 8.5 cm 13.4 cm Unknown Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1900 6.6 cm c. 1907 8.55 cm 11.4 cm 13.85 cm Unknown Japan.

1.515

Photograph

Hand-colored albumen silver print.

8.65 cm

12.5 cm

n/a

1.516

Photograph

n/a

1.517

Picture postcard

n/a

1.518

Photograph

n/a

1.519

Photograph

n/a

1.520

Photograph

n/a

1.521

Photograph

n/a

1.522

Picture postcard

Children street performers posing Farmers processing rice stalks Farmers processing grain Farmers milling grain Group of farmer women and children streetside making small bundles by hand Farmers beating grain husks Weaver spooling thread Villager making wooden buckets Villagers processing grain stalks Farmers harvesting rice Farmers preparing rice plants for planting Farmers preparing rice plant bundles for planting 2 Woman spindling thread Farmers planting rice n/a

1.523 c. 1900

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. 9 cm n/a

13.5 cm

1.524

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 n/a

7.35 cm

13.4 cm

1.525

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 n/a

7.85 cm

13.3 cm

1.526 c. 1900

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. n/a

6.5 cm

9.6 cm

1.527 c. 1900

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. n/a

8.9 cm

9.9 cm

1.528

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 n/a

9.1 cm

8.5 cm

96
Unknown Unknown c. 1907 Kyoto, Japan. Letterpress halftone Japan. c. 1907 Hand coloured collotype postcard 14 cm 9.6 cm 11.5 cm 9 cm Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 8 cm 11.4 cm Unknown Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1907 7.6 cm 13.85 cm Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1907 9.1 cm 9.8 cm

1.529

Photograph

n/a n/a A BEAUTIFUL JAPANESE DWELLING OUTSIDE OF THE CITY OF KIOTO n/a

1.530

Relief halftone

1.531

Picture postcard

1.532

Relief halftone

n/a

Guests of The Collver Tours Company Dining "A la Japonaise" with Geisha and Moiko in Attendance From a Flashlight Photograph

1.533

Relief halftone

Women prepararin g drying boards for laundry Farmer using traditional mortar and mallet Man making wooden clogs known as geta Elderly lady spinning thread Men loading bundles of rice Woman using weaking loom Farmers separating rice House outside Kyoto Lady practicing ikebana Group of tourists dining in the Japanese style, photograp hed with flash. Three young ladies enjoying tea and refreshme nts at outdoor table n/a

1.534 c. 1907

Illustration

Unknown

Japan.

Letterpress print on paper n/a

12.7 cm

19.5 cm

1.535

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1907 8 cm n/a

5.8 cm

1.536

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1907 n/a

8.15 cm

12 cm

1.537 c. 1907

Relief halftone Unknown Japan. 9 cm n/a

Hand coloured collotype postcard

12.9 cm

1.538 c. 1900

Relief halftone Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone n/a

11.1 cm

15 cm

PARLOR OF HOUSE, SHOWING "TOKONOMA", POEM "KAKEMONO," AND FLOWER ORNAMENT

97
Unknown Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1907 12 cm 6.4 cm Unknown Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 9 cm 9.3 cm Unknown 1908 Japan. Letterpress halftone 17.55 cm 10.5 cm Unknown Unknown Unknown Japan. Collodion POP print Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard Japan. Collotype on postcard stock c. 1908 c. 1908 1908 14.2 cm 9 cm 6.25 cm c. 1908 14.2 cm 9.05 cm 14.2 cm 4.9 cm 9.1 cm Unknown Japan. Collotype on postcard stock

1.539

Picture postcard

n/a

1.540

Photograph

n/a

1.541

Relief halftone

Illustration of a Japanese samurai family relaxing at home Three young ladies admiring blossomin g trees Two ladies riding on a boat An important message for the lady of the house Interior view of a Japanese room with Tokonoma Lady wearing winter head scarf Lady reading at her desk. Koma Nosse newlywed to Baron Iwasaki. n/a Mr. & Mrs Iwasaki. Of Koiwai, Japan. n/a n/a n/a Hida Kido and Toki Kido, The janitor's children. Fufu dolls

1.542

Picture postcard

Bride

1.543

Picture postcard

Festive adornment s

1.544

Photograph

Hida and Toki Kido

1.545

Picture postcard

Bride wearing white kimono

n/a

120 ways to tie a present A bride

1.546 c. 1900

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. n/a

11.45 cm

4.9 cm

1.547

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. c. 1908 n/a Unknown Unknown Unknown Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1908 n/a 8.3 cm 12.9 cm JAPANESE SHOE SHOP Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1908 n/a 16.1 cm 23.45 cm Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1908 n/a 7.9 cm 11.5 cm

Elderly farmer carrying produce in a backcarried basket Man wearing geta by a streetlamp. Hand coloured collotype postcard 10.9 cm 5.6 cm TEACHING MASSAGE AND ACCUPUNCTURE kamishjineo" "I shampoo head & body" A JAPANESE FRUIT SHOP Exactly like it. "Ama

1.548

Relief halftone

Teaching massage

1.549

Relief halftone

Japanese fruit shop

1.550

Picture postcard

1.551 c. 1908

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. 9 cm n/a

Hand coloured collotype postcard

14.2 cm

PLUM GARDEN BY YOSHIDA BRIDGE YOKOHAMA

1.552 c. 1908

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Collodion POP print

8.7 cm n/a

4.9 cm

98
Unknown Japan. Gelatin silver print c. 1908 8.7 cm 4.8 cm Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1908 8.8 cm 9.5 cm 5.1 cm 5.95 cm K. Tamamura Japan. c. 1908 Gelatin silver print Unknown Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 9.05 cm c. 1900 8.97 cm 13.2 cm 13.1 cm Unknown Japan. Unknown Japan. Gelatin silver print c. 1908 5.4 cm 10.2 cm Unknown Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1908 8.2 cm 12.5 cm

1.553

Photograph

n/a

1.554

Relief halftone

n/a

1.555

Photograph

n/a

1.556

Photograph

Japanese shoe shop Plum garden near Yoshida bridge Young man in military uniform Young man n three piece suit Newspape r portrait of Alexander MacLean Portrait of Japanese lady Staged photograp h of shop merchants n/a 987 Dry goods store n/a

1.557

Photograph

Housewar es shop

1.558

Photograph

n/a

1.559

Picture postcard

Margaret MacLean strolling through a park Merchant with his stall

n/a

1.560 c. 1908

Picture postcard Unknown Japan. n/a YOKOHAMA, BUDDHIST TEMPLE AT YATO Unknown Unknown Unknown Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 5 cm n/a Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1908 9 cm n/a Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 c. 1900 c. 1900 c. 1908 12 cm n/a 7.1 cm 7.9 cm n/a 6.3 cm 5 cm 13.48 cm n/a 8.6 cm n/a 13.55 cm 9 cm n/a Hand-colored albumen silver print. Hand-colored albumen silver print. Hand coloured collotype postcard Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 13.4 cm 14.1 cm 13.65 cm Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1908 9 cm n/a Motomachi-Dori, Yokohama 14 cm Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1908 n/a YOKOHAMA 8.9 cm 13.9 cm

Man in front of Shrine sanctuary Hand coloured collotype postcard 9.1 cm 14.15 cm

1.561

Picture postcard

Zozoin Temple

1.562

Picture postcard

Margaret MacLean's postcard

1.563

Photograph

Japanese sampan Unknown Japan.

1.564

Picture postcard Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Japan. Japan. Japan. Japan.

Passenger ships at Yokohama pier

PIER of YOKOHAMA When I go to China I shall leave from this pier, probably in one of these boats. These are Japanese boats.

1.565

Photograph

Housewar es shop

1.566

Photograph

Fruit shop

1.567

Photograph

Parasol makers

1.568

Picture postcard Unknown Japan.

Gardner

99
Unknown Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1908 Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1908 14 cm 13 cm 9.1 cm 9 cm Unknown Yokohama, Japan. Unknown Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 12.5 cm 9.2 cm Unknown Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 5.75 cm 13.7 cm Unknown Yokohama, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1908 9 cm 14.2 cm Unknown Yokohama, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1908 8.2 cm 14.25 cm

1.569

Photograph

1.570

Picture postcard

n/a

1.571

Picture postcard

n/a

(40) HAGOROMO THEATRE IN (YOKOHAMA)

1.572

Photograph

n/a

1.573

Photograph

n/a

1.574

Picture postcard

n/a

YOSHIDABASHI YOKOHAMA

1.575

Picture postcard

Two boys reaching into large basket Large festive floats Hagoromo theatre decorated Lady musician playing a stringed instrument Landscape view over river Yoshidaba shi bridge from the water Aerial view of Yokohama from The Bluff n/a

VIEW OF YOKOHAMA

1.576 c. 1900

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. n/a

8.7 cm

13 cm

1.577

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 n/a

6.3 cm

13.9 cm

1.578

Picture postcard Unknown c. 1908 n/a GRAND HOTEL AT YOKOHAMA

Yokohama, Japan.

Hand coloured collotype postcard

9.05 cm

13.2 cm

1.579 c. 1908

Picture postcard Unknown n/a

Yokohama, Japan.

Hand coloured collotype postcard

9.05 cm

13.3 cm

MAIN STREET, YOKOHAMA.

1.580 c. 1908

Picture postcard Unknown n/a

Yokohama, Japan.

Hand coloured collotype postcard

9.05 cm

14.2 cm

ISEZAKICHO, YOKOHAMA.

1.581

Photograph

Unknown

Japan.

Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 n/a

6.9 cm

9.25 cm

100
Unknown Yokohama, Japan. Gelatin silver print c. 1900 17.8 cm 21 cm Unknown Yokohama, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1900 9 cm 14.1 cm Unknown Yokohama, Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 9 cm 13.3 cm Unknown Yokohama, Japan. Hand-colored albumen silver print. c. 1900 9.1 cm 12.5 cm Unknown Yokohama, Japan. Hand coloured collotype postcard c. 1900 8.95 cm 14 cm

1.582

Photograph

n/a

1.583

Picture postcard

n/a

Whole View of Pier, Yokohama.

1.584

Photograph

n/a

1.585

Photograph

n/a

1.586

Picture postcard

100 steps of Motomachi Three farmers carrying grain loads The Grand Hotel on the Bund decorated festively Pedestrian s strolling on Yokohama' s Main Street Pedestrian s strolling down Isezakicho Young man preparing food from wooden food carriers Mr. Alexander MacLean at his office, 14 Bund Street, Yokohama A view of the Yokohama pier A view of the Yokohama Bund A view of the Yokohama harbour A view of the Bund looking northeast from the Customs House n/a

1.587 c. 1900

Name Card

Unknown

Yokohama, Japan. 5 cm n/a Yokohama, Japan. c. 1900 n/a Hand coloured collotype postcard 3.5 cm 4.6 cm

Letterpress print on paper

8.2 cm

1.588

Picture postcard Unknown

1.589

Picture postcard Unknown c. 1900 n/a Yokohama Boat Club.

Yokohama, Japan.

Hand coloured collotype postcard

9.05 cm

14.1 cm

1.590 1905

Invitation card Letter press invitation

Alexander MacLean's name card A horsedrawn buggy A view of the Yokohama Boat Club. Garden party at American Legation American Legation Tokyo, Japan. 10.7 cm 13.7 cm Found in side two, leaf 18. Verso has a hand-coloured albumen silver print affixed. 3.2cm high by 7cm wide. Image is of a home, most likely the MacLean home. wreck mail of the S.S. "Dakota" Found in side two, between leafs 7 and 8. Tomboya? Yokohama, Japan. c. 1907 Hand coloured collotype postcard 14.02 cm 9.1 cm 0.25 mm Namental Carof Temple Osan at Yokohama. Vero is a 1/3 divided back, indicating it was printed after march 1907.

1.591 1907

Paper trimming Unknown

SS Dakota

Yokohama, Japan.

Letterpress print on paper

12.7 cm

3.4 cm

0.11 mm

1.592

Picture postcard

Namental Car

1.593

Picture postcard c. 1905 Unknown c. 1905 Japan. Gelatin silver print 28.01 cm 11.11 cm 13 mm 13.5 cm 0.26 mm 0.09 mm

Tokyo Prinitng Co.? Tokyo, Japan. 9.1 cm 29.4 cm 0.37 cm

Hand coloured collotype double-width postcard

101
Unknown c. 1907 Japan. Letterpress halftone Unknown Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1907 10.11 cm 14.3 cm Unknown Tokyo, Japan. Letterpress halftone c. 1912 24.05 cm 11.2 cm

1.594

Photograph

Delaminating on left edge. Found in side two, between leafs 7 and 8. PLAYING ON KOTO AND SAMISEN. Found in side two, between leafs 7 and 8. 0.08 mm TEACHING ARTICULATION TO THE DEAF-MUTE CHILDREN SCENE AT GENERAL NOGI'S GRAVE  n/a GRAVE OF NOGI AND WIFE The two wooden posts bear their names, with offerings beneath.

1.595

Relief halftone

1.596

Relief halftone

Admiral Togo at Military Ceremony Countrysid e path into village Playing Koto and Samisen Teaching to Deafmute children

1.597

Relief halftone

Admiral Nogi's Grave

102

103

104

105

106

107

108

109

110

111

112

113

114

115

116

117

118

119

120

121

122

123

124

125

126

127

128

129

130

131

132

133

134

135

136

137

138

139

140

141

142

143

144

145

146

147

148

149

150

151

152

153

154

155

156

157

158

159

160

161

162

163

164

165

166

167

168

169

170

171

172

173

174

175

176

177

178

179

180

181

182

183

184

185

186

187

188

189

190

191

192

193

194

195

196

197

198

199

200

201

202

203

204

205

Appendix C: Integrated Timeline 1903 to 1909
History of Photography
1903 - Meiji 36
The Cherry Portable, the first portable Japanese camera, is made by Konishi Honten (forerunner of Konica). The box-shaped camera used a magazine which held twelve 2 1/4 x 3 1/4 in. dry plates. Konishi Honten went on to make various other cameras. Paper-backed roll films were still not made in Japan. Only sheet film and glass plates were being made in Japan. Imported roll films were still very expensive and usually arrived in poor condition because there were no refrigerated cargo holds. Japan's first photographic paper, the Sakura Hakkin type paper, is marketed by Konishi Honten.

Margaret MacLean

Geo-political Events

Jan

Margaret MacLean appears to have led a typical middle-class Canadian woman's life up to this point, participating in home, community and religious life.

206

The Kodak Folding Pocket Model 3A camera is introduced this year. It yielded postcard-size negatives (3.25 x 5.5 inches / 83 x 139 mm). Kodak distributed its photo print papers, both the "Velox" and (after 1904) the cheaper "Aso" brand, precut to the same size, with the standard postcard grid format printed on the backs.

Feb Canadian Agriculture Minister Sydney Fisher sent to Japan to oversee Canada's exhibit at the National Industrial Exhibition in Osaka, and to hold informal talks on trade and immigration with Japanese officials.  Canada experiences great success at National Industrial Exhibition. Fisher and Grey discuss exporting wheat to Japan Fisher reconsiders joining the Anglo-Japan Alliance

Mar

Apr

May

Jun.

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov Dec. 17, 1903 The Lumiere brothers are awarded French patent 339,223, for the Autochrope process.

Nov. 19, Alexander MacLean named Canada's Commercial Agent to Japan.

Dec

1904 - Meiji 37
In Shashin Geppo, budding art photographers assert that photography could be used for self expression, not just for recording reality. Shashin Reidaishu, established by Kuwada Shokai (a photo supply shop), held monthly photo contests promoting art photography.

Jan

207 Shashin Reidaishu, established by Kuwada Shokai (a photo supply shop), held monthly photo contests promoting art photography. Photographer Jack London is arrested for taking unauthorized photographs of Japanese army training. Jack London is first photographer to capture pictures of battle at Pyongyang.

New camera clubs emerged to establish photography as an art form. One group was called Yutsuzu-sha, with core members KUNO (AKIYAMA) Tetsusuke, KATO, Seiichi, and SAITO Taro. They advocated pictorialism in photography, with the same possibility of self expression as in painting.

Collier's Weekly dispatches James Hare to Tokyo, to cover the expected war between Japan and Russia.

Feb

February 6th, Japan breaks relations with Russia. February 8th, Japan attacks Port Arthur, Port Arthur, Manchuria (Lüshunkou today). February 9th, Battle of Chemulpo Bay, Chemulpo Bay, Korea (Incheon today).

Mar

Official appointment of Alexander MacLean as Canada's Commercial Agent to Japan at Yokohama signed and ratified in Ottawa. April 30th to December 2nd, Mizuno Henbeh exhibits his works at the Luisiana Purchase Exposition in St. Louis, Missouri. April 30th, Battle of the Yalu River, Wiju, Korea (Uiju today). May 1, Battle of the Yalu River, Wiju, Korea (Uiju today). May 25-26, Battle of Nanshan, Liaotung peninsula, Manchuria (Liaodong peninsula today). June 14-15, Battle of Te-li-Ssu, Outside Wafangdiang, Manchuria. June 27, Battle of Motien Pass, Liaotung peninsula, Manchuria (Liaodong peninsula today). July 24-25, Battle of Tashihchiao, Tashihchiao, Manchuria (Dashiqiao today). July 30, Siege of Port Arthur begins, Port Arthur, Manchuria (Lüshunkou today). August 10, Battle of the Yellow Sea, Off Shantung, Manchuria (Shandong today). August 14, Battle of Ulsan, Off Ulsan, Korea. August 24, Battle of Liaoyang begins, Liaoyang, Manchuria. September 4, Battle of Liaoyang ends, Liaoyang, Manchuria. October 5-7, Battle of Shaho, Sha River, Manchuria.

Apr

May

Margaret MacLean presented with gifts at farewell event at her church.

Alexander MacLean meets with Ontario businessman in Toronto and Hamilton.

Jun.

June 7th, The MacLeans arrive in Yokohama on board the RMS Empress of India.

Jul

Margaret begins volunteering for Japanese Red Cross Foreign Ladies Nurse Association in Yokohama at the British Hospital.

208

Aug

Alexander sends first reports on trade back to Canada, published in Canadian newspapers

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

1905 - Meiji 38

Jan

Alexander MacLEan listed in the Department of Trade and Commerce's list of commercial agents, with an annual salary of $3,000.00 and contingent expenses of $1,310.30.

Collier's Weekly publishes A Photographic Record of the Russo-Japanese War, edited by James Hare and featuring his work and that of other correspondents.

January 25-29, Battle of Sandepu, south of Mukden (Shenyang today).

January 28th, Margaret publishes article "Japs Abandon Native Customs" in The Toronto Globe. February 20, Battle of Mukden begins, Mukden, Manchuria (Shenyang today). March 10, Battle of Mukden ends Canada signs the Anglo-Japanese Alliance treaty

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

May 15 Margaret publishes her article "Cherry Blossoms in The Mikado's Land'" in the Toronto Globe.

May 27-28, Battle of Tsushima, Straits of Tsushima

Jun

209

Final edition of Eliza R. Scidmore's Westward to the Far East guide for Canadian Pacific Railway Co. printed in this year. Scidmore was a co-founder of The National Geographic Society, and was responsible for the planting of thousands of Cherry Blossom trees in Washington DC. Ernst Goldreich Stillman travels to Japan on SS Manchuria with US War Secretary William Howard Taft, Alice Roosevelt and a large US delegation. This trip influences him to become an orientalist and collects Japanese art, books and photographs, bequething them to the Harvard University Library. Anglo-Japanese Alliance Treaty enters renewal process: terms are re-negotiated and expanded. Ambassadors are exchanged for the first time between the UK and Japan. July 8th, SS Manchuria departs for Asian ports. July 25th, Secretary Tafts and Alice Roosevelt arrive at Yokohama.

Jul

July 1st. Margaret publishes "A Letter from Japan By a Canadian Girl" on The Globe Toronto.

MacLeans attend Garden Party at American Legation with War Secretary Tafts and Alice Roosevelt

Aug

Margaret travels to China for four weeks

Sep

MacLeans attend Garden Party at American Legation with Tafts and Alice Roosevelt

September 5, Portsmouth Peace treaty signed. In it is established that Russia will not make reparations to Japan, and Japan will not have any territorial gains. It is also announced that since Japan's war effort has indebted her to the U.K., taxes on Japanese citizens will be raised to repay loans. September 5 Hibiya Park Riots, Police boxes and buildings torched in Tokyo and Yokohama for three days. October 5th to 13th, Alice Roosevelt returns to Japan and visits various famous places and landmarks. She is surprised by the anti-American sentiment now evident in the general populace. Admiral Noel's Fleet arrives in Yokohama

Oct

MacLeans meet Admiral Noel

Nov Postcard demand in Japan is high. Over 400,000,000 postcards are produced and circulated in Japan alone this year.

Dec

210

1906 - Meiji 39
Kakuzo Okakura publishes The Book of Tea through Putnam's, New York.

Jan

Margaret writes letter to friend, Mrs Alexander in Ottawa on her visit to a Leper Mission in Japan. This letter is later published in an Ottawa newspaper.

Margaret sells her Ottawa home this year, but the date is unknown.

Margaret publishes her China travel book: Chinese Ladies at Home, but the date is unknown.

Feb March 15-18, riots break out at Hibiya Park protesting streetcar fare increases and "unconstitutional" behaviour of bureaucracy and the Seiyuukai.. Streetcar company offices are attacked and several dozen streetcars are smashed. Prince Arthur presents Emperor Meiji with The Order of The Garter

Mar

Apr

May Canada signs Anglo-Japanese Alliance Treaty

Laurier addresses Parliament

Jun

Jul

Aug September 5-8, riots break out at Hibiya Park protesting public transportation fare increases and "unconstitutional" actions. Several dozen streetcars are smashed, police boxes destroyed, 113 arrests made.

Sep

Oct November 28th. Report on growing anti-Japanese sentiment in California and Vancouver sent to Japanese Minister of Foreign Affairs Tadasu Hayashi by Consul Kishiro Morikawa in Vancouver, B.C.

Nov

Dec

211

1907 - Meiji 40

Jan

The Tokyo Shashin Kenkyukai was founded with the support of Konishi Honten. It held its first Tokyo Shashin Kenkyukai Exhibition (abbreviated as "Kenten") in Ueno, Tokyo. Other prominent groups such as the Naniwa Shashin Club of Osaka and Aiyu Shashin Club of Nagoya participated. The exhibit had a strong impact among amateur photographers with soft focus and other artistic techniques. Kuribayashi Seisakusho, the forerunner of Petri Camera, is founded. Konishi Honten markets Japan's first single-lens reflex camera, the Sakura-flex Plano with a Tessar f/6.3 lens. Priced 225 yen. The Autochrome plate is introduced in France. It becomes the first commercially successful color photography product. Emperor Meiji awards photographer James Hare with a medal for his services during the Russo-Japanese War.

212

Feb New international postal regulations provide 1/3 of the rear of the postcard for messages. Writing on the image side is no longer necessary. S.S. Dakota hits a reef and sinks off Yokohama. Spring, San Francisco Race Riots

Mar

Apr

May U.S. - Japan Gentleman's Agreement on Immigration Alfred Stieglitz captures "steerage" on board the SS Kaiser Wilhelm II on his way to Germany from New York.

Jun

Jul

Aug

Yokohama runs out of drinking water

Sep September 7th and 8th, Vancouver Race Riots September 9th, A mob of white supremacists gathers in Vancouver and inflicts severe damage to Japanese and Chinese immigrant quarters. Powell Street receives extensive damage. The riot is immediately followed by a general strike of Vancouver's Asian workers. October 29th. Canadian Minister of Labour and Postmaster-General Rodolphe Lemieux sets sail for Japan from Vancouver on board the Empress of China. He was sent by Wilfrid Laurier to negotiate a Gentlemen's agreement to curtail Japanese migration to Canada. November 14th, Lemieux arrives at Yokohama aboard the Empress of China. November 25th, First scheduled meeting between Mr. Lemieux and Japanese Government Officials.

September 4th and 5th, Bellingham Riots,

Oct

Nov

The MacLean's are invited to the Emperor's Birthday Ball at the Imperial Palace on November 7th.

213

The MacLeans are invited to a dinner to meet Mr. Lemieux at party organized by Eiichi Shibuzawa, and hosted at Count Toda's Club on November 27th.

Dec

December 4th. Rodolphe Lemieux, Claude MacDonald, Joseph Pope and Ishii Kikujiro draft a document which will become the basis for the Lemieux agreement. It is drafted with a strong sense of racial exclusion. December 27th. Lemieux departs for Canada on the Empress of India.

1908 - Meiji 41

Jan  W. C. Preston re-assigned to Yokohama. The Hayashi-Lemieux "Gentlemen's Agreement" restricts further Japanese immigration to 400 male immigrants and domestic servants per year, plus returning immigrants and their immediate family members. The shasshin kekkon, "picture bride" system of marriage becomes widespread.

FUJII Ryuzo establishes the Fujii Lens Seizosho factory. Ryuzo was a Mechanical Engineering major at the Tokyo Institute of Technology and became a naval engineer. He was sent to Europe for three years to study optical design and lens manufacturing in Europe (mainly Germany). He returned to Japan in 1901 and quit the navy in 1908 to start his company. His younger brother Kozo joined the company after quitting his job at the Aichi Cement Company. Kinemacolor, a two-color process known as the first commercial "natural color" system for movies, is introduced.

Alexander MacLean reassigned to Shanghai.

Feb

February 11, Riot breaks out at Hibiya Park to protest tax increases. Lemieux's mission to halt Japanese migration to Canada is initially seen as unsuccessful by Canadian Government and unravels into scandal. Consul General Nosse recalled to Japan from Canada. Margaret MacLean runs the Trade Office due to father's ill health.

Mar

214

Apr

The MacLeans arrive in Shanghai

May The official figures from the U.S. Post Office for their fiscal year ending June 30, 1908, cite 677,777,798 postcards mailed.

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep USS Connecticut Sailor purchases set of hand-coloured collotype postcards of Japan, (including one of Margaret MacLean), and mails one on October 25th to Miss Mannie Webb in Duncansville, Pennsylvania. October 18th, The U.S. Great White Fleet visits Yokohama for a week. Crew are welcomed and entertained with great fanfare to the delight of both Americans and Japanese.

Oct

Nov

Dec

Dec. 22, Alexander MacLean dies of ill health in Shanghai

1909 - Meiji 42
Rokuoh-sha markets Japan's first pocket-size camera called the "Minimum Idea." Its relatively affordable price of 9 yen and 50 sen creates a Minimum Idea boom among amateurs. It became so popular that the Minimum Photo Club was established in 1913. Kodak announces a 35 mm "safety" motion picture film on an acetate base as an alternative to the highly flammable nitrate base. The motion picture industry discontinues its use after 1911 due to technical imperfections.

Jan

Feb

Feb 28* Margaret MacLean departs Shanghai for Vancouver onboard the RMS Empress of China

Mar

Mar 13, Margaret arrives at Vancouver with her father's remains.

Mar. 18th, Margaret buries her father in Ottawa. In 1917, the company was consolidated into Nippon Kogaku Kogyo K.K., forerunner of Nikon.

March 1909 Ryuzo and Kozo FUJII moved to a new factory in Shiba, Tokyo and equipped it with the latest lens manufacturing equipment from Germany. It became Japan's first modern lens factory.

215

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Appendix D: Maps

The Directory and Chronicle for China, Japan, Corea, Indo-China, Straits Settlements, Malay States, Siam, Netherlands India, Borneo, The Philippines, &c.: With which are incorporated "The China Directory" and "The Hong Kong Directory and Hong List for the Far East" for the year 1905, Hong Kong Daily Press, London, 1905.

216



"Deer and Stag" Pure Silk Map of Yokohama, The Kawamata Silk Refining Company, c. 1905 indicating the MacLeans' home and work places in relation to photo studios [added by Celio H. Barreto]] Japan directory for Tokyo, Yokohama, Kobe, Osaka, Kyoto, Nagasaki, Nagoya ... and Formosa; Yokohama 1905, Japan Gazette, 1905.

217



Map of the Canadian Pacific Railway Routes And its Connections Eliza Ruhamah Scidmore, Westward to the Far East, Canadian Pacific Railways, First Edition, 1893, page 73

218

Map of the Canadian Pacific Railway Co.'s Steamship Route, Central and Southern Japan, Eliza Ruhamah Scidmore, Westward to the Far East, Canadian Pacific Railways, First Edition, 1893, page 81

219

Appendix E: Recommendations

The number one action to take is to immediately reduce the amount of handling of this object, and to ensure that those who handle the book do so properly. The age, condition, dimensions, proportions and weight of this object make it challenging to handle and therefore special care must be taken when handling it. A combination of physical and digital preservation strategies will reduce deterioration and damage due to improper or excessive handling.

Recommendation 1: Create an access tracking log sheet to create a record of activity around the scrapbook. This can help ascertain when damage occurs, but also increases accountability. This access log would record date, time, user name and pages or leafs accessed. It will be accompanied by a printed handling guide inside the scrapbook's housing, outlining the correct way to handle it. This guide lets users know what precautions to take, issues to be aware of with delicate, fragile or brittle contents and what tools to use in the safe handling and consultation of the scrapbook. Such a guide is included in Appendix G.

Recommendation 2: In close consultation with the museum's paper and guest photographic conservators, it has been determined that the best way to help mitigate the effects of chemical deterioration of the most vulnerable photographs is through the use of selective interleaving strategies. Using either tissue paper or polyester film sheets can protect prints and photographs in close proximity to acidic materials from further chemical deterioration. However, this strategy must be limited, as 

220

interleaving adds bulk that deforms the scrapbooks natural shape, places undue stress on the fabric hinges, and reduces this scrapbook's overall stability when handling.

Recommendation 3: The most significant way in which handling can be reduced is by creating a high-resolution surrogate than can be consulted prior to accessing the scrapbook itself. This surrogate should be digital for remote and on-demand access, and also printed as a hard copy to be used in the collection storage area: - Digitize the scrapbook with high-resolution digital photographs to record its condition and where loose objects are found within the scrapbook. - Create a derivative digital surrogate PDF format file of the scrapbook with these images, with relevant object catalog numbers included for reference. - Compile a master catalog record in spreadsheet format from which to upload to database and create other derivative files and print-outs. - Hard copies of the PDF surrogate and the catalog record are to always be in close proximity to the scrapbook, and must be consulted before accessing the object to minimize handling and potential damage to its fragile components..

Recommendation 4: Physical handling should only take place when absolutely necessary, and only in such cases where other surrogate materials, both digital and hard copies do not suffice in aiding research. For example, when the album needs to be physically experienced as an orihon.

221

Appendix F: Access Log and Handling Guide THE ROYAL ONTARIO MUSEUM
Margaret MacLean Japan Scrapbook Access Log


Date Name Object #

Time Department or Institution Staff responsible

Date Name Object #

Time Department or Institution Staff responsible

Date Name Object #

Time Department or Institution Staff responsible

Date Name Object #

Time Department or Institution Staff responsible

Date Name Object #

Time Department or Institution Staff responsible

222

Margaret MacLean Japan Scrapbook HANDLING GUIDE
REFERENCE DIGITAL IMAGES OR FACSIMILE BEFORE HANDLING OBJECT

WEAR NITRILE GLOVES - Nitrile gloves must be worn to handle this book in its housing.
 - Gloves prevent skin oils and other contaminants from being transferred to materials in the scrapbook.
 - Pay attention to gloves getting caught on edges of objects
 - Remove jewlery and pull up sleves


USE BOOK SUPPORTS - Never open the book without setting up proper support first.
 - It is imperative to keep the book supported at all times to relieve stress from hinges.
 - Rest front cover on angled support first, adjusting supports as you advance.


HANDLE WITH CARE - It is imperative that you move slowly with this object.
 - This book is large, heavy and bound in an accordion format. 
 - Contents are fragile, brittle and easy to damage.
 - Remove and replace object with care, move slowly.
 - Lift it with hands on either side holding the scrapbook firmly.
 - Turn scrapbook leaves slowly and carefully, mindful that some items will unfold as you move to the next page. 
 - Once the centre of the scrapbook is reached, see illustrated guide in the next page to proceed safely.
 DON'T TOUCH FRAGILE OBJECTS - Objects in scrapbook are extremely fragile and brittle, minimize touch with your fingers even if gloved, as they make become detached, break or be otherwise damaged.
 - Do not pull anything with your fingers.
 - Leave materials as you find them. Notify staff of any breaks or tears.


USE MICROSPATULA Use a micro spatula to:

Lift up fragile objects.
 Unfold attached materials.
 Turn pamphlet pages.
 AVOID using your fingers.

PHOTOGRAPHY - Photography is allowed with a handheld camera for reference purpsoses only
 - For images and permission for publication purposes, please contact ROM Images at romimages@rom.on.ca

223

- REST COVER ON BOOK SUPPORTS
 - ADJUST CARDBOARD SUPPORTS AS YOU ADVANCE THROUGH BOOK TO KEEP CORRECT ANGLE AND WEIGHT DISTRIBUTION.


- WHEN YOU REACH THE CENTRE OF THE SCRAPBOOK:
 - USE PAPER BOOKMARK TO MARK YOUR PLACE.
 - CLOSE THE SCRAPBOOK.


- PLACE ONE HAND PALM-UP UNDER THE BOOK AND THE OTHER HAND PALM DOWN ON CENTRE OF TOP COVER.


- HOLD BOOK FIRMLY AND LIFT IT UP.


- ROTATE SLOWLY AND SET DOWN ON VIEWING SURFACE GENTLY.


- REPLACE FOAM SUPPORT TO RIGHT SIDE OF THE SCRAPBOOK
 - OPEN TO BOOKMARK AND REST BACK COVER ON SUPPORTS.


- ADJUST CARDBOARD SUPPORTS, ADDING THEM ONE BY ONE 
 AS YOU ADVANCE...


...TO MAINTAIN PROPER WEIGHT DISTRIBUTION.


- HOLDING SCRAPBOOK FIRM WITH BOTH HANDS AS SHOWN, REPLACE IT IN ITS HOUSING.


224


