CINEMA ACROSS BORDERS : NATIONAL DIFFERENCES IN SÁMI FILMMAKING IN THE NORDIC COUNTRIES

by Rachael Crawley Bachelor of Arts, Cinema Studies/Russian Language and Literature University of Toronto Toronto, Ontario 2013

A thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the degree of Master of Arts in Film + Photography Preservation and Collections Management Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2017 © Rachael Crawley, 2017

Author's Declaration

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. This is a true copy of the thesis, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my thesis may be made electronically available to the public.

ii

Abstract Cinema Across Borders: National Differences in Sámi Filmmaking in the Nordic Countries Master of Arts, 2017 Rachael Crawley Film + Photography Preservation and Collections Management Ryerson University The cinema of the Sámi people, of northern Fennoscandia and Russia (Sápmi), has flourished since the turn of the millennium. This thesis summarizes the history of Sámi film, its current infrastructure, and the differences in filmmaking trends between the three Nordic countries of Sápmi. It also includes a list of all known Sámi productions and organizations funding Sámi film. By exploring the differences in funding in the Nordic countries, it examines the relative lack of Sámi film production and infrastructure in Sweden, as compared to Norway and Finland. The paper compares the development of the film industry, in each country of Sápmi, with the political history and current legal status of the Sámi, finding that the success of Sámi film is correlated with greater autonomy in government and language rights.

iii

Acknowledgements

I am grateful to Jan Olsson, my first reader, for his insight and guidance, and to Alicia Fletcher, my second reader, for her meticulous attention to this thesis, and her initial encouragement of studying Sámi film. I would like to thank Jon Wengström, my supervisor at the Swedish Film Institute, and my colleagues in Stockholm for their patience and support. Thanks as well to the faculty and staff of the Film and Photography Preservation and Collections Management program for all that they have taught me, and to my fellow students for their friendship, support, and ideas. I would also like to thank my Swedish teacher, Lilian Junkin, for her help in learning the language. Thank you to Oskar Östergren from the Dellie Maa film festival and the International Sámi Film Institute, for speaking with me about Sámi film funding and the creation of Dellie Maa; and to Kaija Anttonen from the Skábmagovat Film Festival and the Sámi Film Database, for her insight into the composition of the database and the history of Skábmagovat. For their unwavering belief in me, and for all they have done to support me, I thank Helen and LeRoy Worley, and David Crawley and Joan Bubbs.

iv

Table of Contents Author's Declaration ............................................................................................... ii Abstract .................................................................................................................. iii Acknowledgements ................................................................................................ iv Table of Contents .................................................................................................... v Introduction ............................................................................................................. 1 Chapter 1: The Sámi People .................................................................................... 2 Chapter 2: Literature Review ................................................................................... 4 2.1 Films and Their Content ........................................................................ 5 2.2 Sámi History and Political Status .......................................................... 8 Chapter 3: Sámi Film .............................................................................................. 11 Chapter 4: Analysis of Sámi Films And Institutions .............................................. 14 Chapter 5: Sámi Rights by Country ........................................................................ 20 Appendix A: Sámi History and Facts ..................................................................... 27 Appendix B: Sámi Film History, Exhibition and Institutions ................................ 30 Appendix C: List of Sámi Films ............................................................................ 45 Appendix D: Sámi Films By the Numbers ............................................................ 126 Bibliography ................................................................................. 132

v

Introduction In the case of the Sámi people, the policies of four different countries  Norway, Sweden, Finland and Russia  create widely differing legal and cultural contexts across the region. This disparity is reflected in local film production, which varies both in number of films produced, and in development of filmmaking infrastructure, from country to country. In countries with a strong legal basis for political autonomy and recognition, such as Norway and Finland, there is greater development of institutional and financial support for filmmaking, as evidenced in the creation of the International Sámi Film Institute. Conversely, in Russia, which has little recognition of the Sámi, very few films have been made. Sweden has taken steps towards Sámi recognition, but still lags behind Norway and Finland in implementation linguistic and political support. It has produced many films from Sámi filmmakers, but does not possess the Sámifocused funding and educational organizations offered to filmmakers in Norway and Finland. Current scholarship on Sámi film, especially in the English language, is strongly focused on analysis of individual films or the careers of particular filmmakers, with little attention paid to the industry itself (though some articles exist on Sámi radio and television broadcasting). Films can also be studied comparatively with Indigenous productions from other countries, notably Canada, the United States and Australia, though these analyses usually focus on film content. Though I have created a list of the known Sámi films from its inception in 1963, it is not from a textual perspective, but instead as an indicator of the industry's growth. By documenting the funding of films across Sápmi, and describing the presence and impact of local filmmaking institutions, this thesis explores the differences between the infrastructure of the Sámi film industry in the three Nordic countries of Sápmi -- Sweden, Norway and Finland -- and seeks to understand the political contexts in which each developed.
1

Chapter 1: The Sámi People The Sámi (or Saami) are the Indigenous people of the Sápmi region, consisting of northern Norway, Sweden, Finland, and the Kola Peninsula of Russia. The previous term for the area, "Lappland", is now considered to be outdated by the Sámi (though it is still used in some deesignations by national governments), as are the terms "Lapp" for the people and "Lappish" for the language.1 Historically, the Sámi have lived by fishing, gathering, trapping, and especially reindeer herding. Outside of Sápmi, there are about 30,000 people of Sámi descent in the United States, and significant populations in Ukraine and other ex-Soviet states. There are ten generally accepted extant Sámi languages, all from the Finno-Ugric language family -- making them close relatives of Finnish and Estonian -- which range in number from 25,000 speakers to two (as well as several extinct variants)2. There are about 70-80,000 Sámi people in the world, including 40,000 in Norway, 20,000 in Sweden, and 8,000 in Finland3. Sámi history in the countries of Sápmi has been marked by marginalization, including collectivization and forced deportation to Lovozero, Murmansk Oblast in Soviet Russia4, denial of language rights, forced conversion to Lutheran or Orthodox Christianity, "Norwegianization" campaigns5, and mandatory (and often inadequate) education in "Sámi boarding schools" in the Nordic countries6. This process has recently been depicted in the Swedish film Sameblod (Amanda Kernell, 2017). Current issues include conflict over land rights, which threaten the

1

Frawley, William J., International Dictionary of Linguistics: AAVE-Esperanto, Vol. 1, 2nd Edition, s.v. "Sàmi, Inari", New York: Oxford University Press, 2003, 332. 2 "Uralic", Ethnologue.com, accessed 9 May 2017, https://www.ethnologue.com/subgroups/uralic. 3 "The Sámi - an Indigenous People in Sweden", Samediggi, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.samer.se/2137. 4 Jorn Madslien, "Russia's Sàmi Fight for Their Lives", BBC.co.uk, December 21, 2006, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/business/6171701.stm. 5 Kirsti Strom Bull, "Sàmi Reindeer Herders' Herding Rights in Norway from the Nineteenth Century to the Present Day", Indigenous Rights in Scandinavia: Autonomous Sàmi Law, ed. Christina Allard and Susann Funderud Skogvang, New York: Routledge, 2016, 84. 6 "The Sámi - an Indigenous People in Sweden", Samediggi, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.samer.se/2137.

2

traditional livelihood of reindeer hunting; the impact of tourism, forestry, mining and hunting on Sámi homelands; the right to education and government services in Sámi languages; and autonomous or semi-autonomous government within the countries of Sápmi, which has achieved varying degrees of success. Questions of a unified, cohesive identity across four separate states are also paramount, especially with regards to the free movement of reindeer7. The definition of being Sámi, for an individual person, can be complicated. Generally, the status is determined by two steps  self-identification, and speaking a Sámi language, or having a parent or grandparent who speaks a Sámi language8. However, some people of Sámi ancestry may not self-identify as Sámi, regardless of their language history, and are thus not counted. Conversely, those of Sámi ancestry from several generations back, or who have both Sámi and non-Sámi heritage, are ineligible to claim Sámi status and may not even be aware of their lineage, or may have lost access to their language in previous generations, thus making the definition highly problematic. This can also complicate the definition of a Sámi film, as the identity of the filmmakers or producers may be in question.

7

Christina Allard and Susann Funderud Skogvang, "Introduction" , Indigenous Rights in Scandinavia: Autonomous Sàmi Law, ed. Christina Allard and Susann Funderud Skogvang, New York: Routledge, 2016, 4. 8 Tanja Joona, "The Definition of a Sàmi Person in Finland and its Application", Indigenous Rights in Scandinavia: Autonomous Sàmi Law, ed. Christina Allard and Susann Funderud Skogvang, New York: Routledge, 2016, 156.

3

Chapter 2: Literature Review The field of Indigenous film study (as opposed to study of the portrayals of Indigenous people on film) is predominantly composed of recent writing; while some academic books and articles on the subject were published as early as the 1970s, especially in Australia9, the majority of works appear to have been published from the mid-2000s10. Writing on Sámi film, academic and otherwise, has been minimal, particularly in English; the examples in this review are mostly limited to textual readings of specific films, usually Nils Gaup's The Kautokeino Rebellion (2008) and especially Pathfinder (1987), due to its status as the first Norwegian film to be distributed in the United States and its Academy Award nomination11. Where political and economic status is concerned, as well as demographic information, I have used resources from the national governments of Sápmi's countries, and Sámi organizations within these countries. Websites of non- and intergovernmental organizations, particularly those which handle Indigenous and human rights issues, also provided an overview of the Sámi community within the four countries and in Sápmi as a whole. In finding films, the Sámi Film Database provided the largest number by far, though it lacks entries from the more recent years and for certain films that had not come to the attention of the Skábmagovat Festival (which is explained in more detail later in this thesis). Other sources for films were programs from the Dellie Maa Festival and later years of Skábmagovat (which are

9

"Research - Journal Articles", Monash University, accessed August 4 2017, http://artsonline.monash.edu.au/indigenous-film-bibliography/research-journal-articles/. 10 "Results for 'indigenous film'", Ryerson University Library, accessed August 4 2017, https://ryerson.summon.serialssolutions.com/search?s.q=indigenous+film&spellcheck=true#!/search?ho=t&l=en&q =indigenous%20film. 11 "Academy Awards Database", Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, accessed May 9 2017, http://awardsdatabase.oscars.org/search/results .

4

not yet listed on the festival's website), the personal webpages of filmmakers, IMDB, the International Sámi Film Institute, and the Swedish Film Institute Database. 2.1: Films and Their Content Indigenous empowerment is a central theme of the film analyses, focusing on how stories are told from within Sámi communities, rather than commentary on Sámi people from outsiders. In practice, this is mostly explored in Nils Gaup films, which have achieved great commercial success. In "Reclaiming the Past: On the History-Making Significance of the Sámi Film The Kautokeino Rebellion", Cato Christensen discusses how Gaup's 2008 film transforms the discussion surrounding a significant event in Sámi history, portraying the rebellion from a Sámi perspective rather than the mainstream Norwegian discourse. It addresses previous portrayals of Sámi characters in Nordic film, generally inaccurate, and the current efforts to reclaim Indigenous history and folklore, shifting "cultural memory" in the mainstream perception. Gunnar Iversen ("Learning From Genre: Genre Cycles in Modern Norwegian Cinema") describes the "indigenous [native to Norway, not Indigenous people] genre film", which he states came to prominence in the 1980s, focusing on Nils Gaup's films, particularly Pathfinder (Ofelas in Sámi), perhaps the most famous Sámi film. The article includes a discussion of funding in the Norwegian state, a combination of private and national support, but in the context of genre film, not specifically Indigenous or Sámi work. Iversen categorizes the film as similar to an American Western, and writes of the film's reception, box office, and Gaup's subsequent career. Wendy Gay Pearson ("Once Upon a Time in a Land Far, Far Away") analyzes Ofelas, in the context of a "decolonialized" form of storytelling, as the film is made by a Sámi filmmaker and depicts the time before Scandinavian colonization. The film is compared to Ten Canoes (Australia) and Atanarjuat: The Fast Runner (Canada) as further examples of decolonialized film, telling a story
5

from an Indigenous perspective. Tina K. Ramnarine, in "Sonic Images of the Sacred in Sámi Cinema" explores the portrayal of Sámi traditional religion (pre-Christian) in the film Ofelas through the film's soundtrack, most notably in the use of drumming and joik (Sámi singing style). The article includes a history of joik, emphasizing its diverse use in the modern era. Ramnarine juxtaposes the use of these symbols as tourist items in real life alongside their portrayal as sacred in the film. The article also addresses the modern Sámi view of a pan-Sámi identity, transcending national borders, and the ways that the Sámi people fit, and do not fit, into this concept. Anne Yr Skardhamar traces the portrayal of Sámi people and culture in Nordic films, from 1929 to 2007, in "Changes in Film Representations of Sámi Culture and Identity." She discusses early stereotypes of Sámi people, including their portrayal as "childlike", as well as the later romanticization of Sámi culture and concern for its disappearance, both from mainstream Norwegian culture. She then contrasts these portrayals with two Sámi films, Ofelas and The Kautokeino Rebellion (1987 and 2008 respectively, both Nils Gaup), stating that they have left colonial discourse behind. The films no longer romanticize, or denigrate, the Sámi people, viewing historical events and folklore from a Sámi perspective and raising questions of Sámi rights in the past and today. The academic work available on the subject of the Sámi film industry, or media in general, is also fairly sparse. In Representing 'Race': Racisms, Ethnicities and Media (London: Sage Publications Ltd., 2005), John Downing and Charles Husband discuss different aspects of Indigenous media, including political concerns, the problem with "good" versus "bad" representation, and infrastructure; Sámi media is discussed in a chapter on Indigenous empowerment through media portrayal, alongside the media of the Aboriginal people of Australia, and the Inuit of Nunavut. The authors discuss the development of the Sámi image in

6

media, and how well-defined political autonomy tends to allow for greater freedom of Indigenous media. This work mostly refers to broadcast media, and is more concerned with the situation in Australia, but it is a helpful resource in finding works more deeply focused on Sámi media specifically. Sari Pietikainen's "To Breathe Two Airs: Empowering Indigenous Sámi Media" discusses the transnational nature of the Sámi media, and provides some historical and current political context for its existence, including some of the difficulties of broadcasting over a small population and wide geographic area. She also mentions the need for representation of Sámi issues from a Sámi perspective, free of stereotypes and in Sámi languages where possible. She writes about a drive for "Sáminess" across the four countries, treating the Sámi as one people regardless of borders. Her work covers Finland in-depth, briefly touching on Norway, and does not mention media in Sweden. It also questions which direction Sámi media will take in the future, as technology changes. "Contemporary Dynamics of Sámi Media in the Nordic States" (Lia Markelin and Charles Husband) addresses similar issues, as it draws a parallel between the separate developments of Sámi political autonomy, and the growth of Sámi media industries, in each Nordic country. It is primarily concerned with broadcast media, and does not explore film to a significant degree. This work is continued in Markelin and Husband's "The Sámi Media, State Broadcasting and Transnational Indigeneity," which tracks the development of Sámi broadcast media alongside growing Sámi political rights in each Nordic country. Valerie Alia's The New Media Nation: Indigenous Peoples and Global Communication suggests that Sámi media is forced to be transnational due to varying levels of support from national governments, pointing specifically to Sweden's comparative lack of assistance. She explores the shared Sámi identity, which transcends Finnish, Norwegian, Russian or Swedish identity. Her work is also about broadcast media, primarily radio. Alia includes in-depth analysis of the Sámi history in

7

Russia, in the context of other Russian indigenous populations, including a brief history of their media (which is a difficult topic to research). Veli-Pekka Lehtola's book The Sámi People: Traditions in Transition looks at all aspects of Sámi life in the modern age, and briefly mentions film in the section on arts and media. Lehtola mostly speaks of Nils Gaup's career, including Beaivvas Theatre in Kautokeino, and Pathfinder (The Kautokeino Rebellion was not yet in production, but was mentioned as being in development). The book includes a brief summary of the works of Paul-Anders Simma, and a short paragraph mentioning the existence of the Skábmagovat Film Festival.

2.2: Sámi History and Political Status Indigenous Rights in Scandinavia: Autonomous Sámi Law (ed. Christina Allard and Susann Funderud Skogvang) consists of an extraordinarily detailed and up-to-date view of Sámi law within the Nordic countries, as well as a comparison to Indigenous autonomy in other countries (such as Canada and New Zealand). Though it does not discuss media in particular, it does provide an excellent overview of the current legal and political situation, as well as ongoing debates about Sámi identity, international cooperation between Sámi groups in the Nordic countries, and land rights. I also examined James Anaya's report, in his capacity as United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Rights on Indigenous Peoples, in 2011 on the subject of "The Situation of the Sámi People in the Sápmi Region of Norway, Sweden and Finland", as well as the 2016 report written by Victoria Tauli-Corpuz on the same topic when she served as Special Rapporteur. Overall, Anaya approves of the support given to the Sámi by Norway, Sweden and Finland. He advocates for stronger cross-border initiatives, including the adoption of a Sámi Nordic

8

Convention. Anaya also expresses concern for land rights, linguistic survival, and continued education of tradition and culture for Sámi youth. Throughout the piece, he emphasizes the need for cohesion between the Sámi people, and the governments of the Nordic Sámi states, on existing and developing policies. Five years later, Tauli-Corpuz reports on issues of mining, identity, cross-border initiatives, and the development of the Nordic Saami Convention. While she acknowledges the developments in legislation and implementation of Sámi rights, she also feels that many of these initiatives could be improved, and makes recommendations for each country in several different fields. Prior to Tauli-Corpuz's visit, India Reed-Bowers prepared a report from the Swedish Sámi parliament, examining the same issues from a Sámi perspective. She includes a list of recommendations for land rights, recognition, and reconciliation, including a proposal for a Truth Commission in the style of other countries with Indigenous populations. Also writing for the United Nations, Eva Josefson gives a description of how the Sámi parliament functions in each Nordic country, the parliament's application in Sámi advocacy, and its cooperation with national government. It clearly outlines the difference in each Nordic country, emphasizes partnership with Russia, and defines the areas deemed lacking in autonomy for Sámi people in each country and across Sápmi as a whole. Timo Koivurova provides commentary on preliminary efforts towards a Nordic Sámi Convention, an initiative intended to provide a consistent legal framework across the Nordic states, between the Sámi people and national governments. Koivurova addresses the notion that the Sámi people are indivisible across the four states (Russia is acknowledged if not included), and advocates for strong support of crossborder activity and unity, especially in regards to land rights and Sámi legal customs. Of particular note is Koivurova's concern for the protection of reindeer herding and fishing livelihoods in Sámi communities. Koivurova praises the joint effort between the Sámi

9

parliaments and the three national governments, and declares the effort to be ambitious and precedent-setting, though he is concerned that it will not go ahead in its current form. (The convention was approved in December 2016, but has not been ratified by national governments.) From the perspective of the Swedish government, a report submitted by the Swedish Equality Ombudsman details the issues facing Sámi people in Sweden, both in terms of legal discrimination, and discrimination outside of the law, such as in the workplace. The Ombudsman concludes that legislation and official practices could be more comprehensive, including the ratification of ILO 169, an international convention on Indigenous rights by the International Labour Organization; access to education in Sámi languages; the involvement of Sámi people in decisions affecting them. The report also states that an attitude of racism and prejudice still exists in some aspects of Swedish society, particularly health care and the workplace, to which they suggest "mutual knowledge development". The document includes historical background information to add context for the modern situation. For coverage of the Sámi in Russia, Vadislava Vladimirova's "Contested Political Representation of the Sámi in the Kola Peninsula, Northwest Russia" provides an account of the changes in legislation and in practices towards the Sámi and other "small-numbered peoples of the North" in the Russian Federation since the country's 1991 establishment. Due to shifting laws and varied implementation, even those protections promised by the state or region are not necessarily applied in reality, leaving the Sámi people divided and without the needed support of local administrations.

10

Chapter 3: Sámi Film What qualifies as a Sámi film? According to the Sámi Film Database, managed by the Friends of Sámi Art in conjunction with the Skábmagovat Film Festival, a film is considered a Sámi production if the central creators (for example, the director, producer or screenwriter) of the film include Sámi people12. In an interview, Kaija Anttonen, a translator who has worked with the Skábmagovat festival and the Sámi Film Database, clarified that a Sámi film was defined by the creative influence on the film; a film with a Sámi producer (individual or company), director or screenwriter would qualify. A film starring a Sámi actor, or concerning Sámi issues, however, would not automatically be included13. It should be noted that films with non-Sámi filmmakers could be included, if they were made by a Sámi production company or institution. The oldest film included in the Sámi film database is Poazzovazzi (Antero Ruuhonen, Finland, 1963). Prior to this, film productions appear to have been made about the Sámi community by external filmmakers, rather than originating from filmmakers within the community. From then on, production was sporadic throughout the rest of the twentieth century. A full three hundred of the three hundred and twenty-three films in the Sámi Film Database, and all but four of the films I found outside of the Database, were made subsequent to the year 2000. The growth of digital media and resulting ease and reduced cost of filmmaking, as well as the formation of institutions like the International Sámi Film Institute, are likely catalysts for this sudden increase.

12

"The Sàmi Film Database", Skábmagovat.fi, accessed 9 May 2017, http://Skábmagovat.fi/Skábmagovat_2014/?page_id=6220. 13 Kaija Anttonen in Skype interview with the author, April 18, 2017.

11

In addition to exhibition within Sápmi, Sámi film has played at film festivals around the world, including several Indigenous events, such as Toronto's ImagineNative. One film, Pathfinder (Nils Gaup, 1987), became Norway's Best Foreign Language Film submission to the Academy Awards, the only film in a Sámi language to have achieved this distinction; it was nominated in that category, but did not win. Sámi film is frequently exhibited online, both on Sámi-focused websites (notably Nuoraj.tv) and general video-sharing sites like YouTube. Sweden has the second-largest population of Sámi people globally (around 20,000 people)14 and the largest general population of the Nordic countries15, possesses a welldeveloped film industry with a long history, and has the largest output of films in Northern Europe16. Why, then, does Sweden historically lag in both the total number of Sámi films produced, and in the number of institutions available to Sámi filmmakers? The historical attitude towards the Sámi people, particularly with regards to land, is markedly different between the three Nordic countries. Where the recognition of Sámi autonomy and Indigenous status is strongest, as in Norway and Finland, there tend to be more institutions and services available to Sámi artists, and thus more opportunity to create films exists. Sweden, which lags in recognition of Sámi issues and provides far less of an institutional framework for potential filmmakers, not only produces fewer films from Sámi artists or communities, but has a far greater proportion of filmmakers who must finance their films independently or through private funds (while state or public resources finance many productions in Finland and Norway). Though the trend of the disparity in films appears to be evening out in recent years, especially

14 15

"The Sámi - an Indigenous People in Sweden", Samediggi, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.samer.se/2137. "Country Comparison: Population", CIA World Factbook, last updated July 2016, https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2119rank.html. 16 Movie Production Countries, The Numbers, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.thenumbers.com/movies/production-countries/.

12

with the prospect of expansion for the International Sámi Film Institute and ratification of a panNordic Sámi convention, Sweden still maintains a lack of institutional support that affects the production of films in its Sámi communities, a problem tied up in the historical issues, and political status, of the Sámi people.

13

Chapter 4: Analysis of Sámi Films and Institutions Sámi film is a small enough corpus that it is possible to catalogue, if not every film ever made, then at least the vast majority of the films that have been produced. The bulk of the films I found were listed on the Sámi Film Database (SFD). However, the database is incomplete, and many Sámi films are missing from the website. This issue was most significant when looking for films from 2014-2017, as the site had not yet catalogued them. I discovered extra films by searching the databases of the Swedish and Norwegian Film Institutes, the personal websites of Sámi filmmakers (or those of their companies), and programs from Skábmagovat and Dellie Maa. According to Skábmagovat's Kaija Anttonen, the database mostly draws information from the festival's programs, though some external research is conducted, and filmmakers are also free to submit their own information. Though works by Sámi filmmakers are included, the database may also extend to non-Sámi filmmakers, if the films are made by Sámi production companies or institutions. Information is verified from databases like IMDB, from distributors, and from filmmakers or production teams. Some films may also be passed over because it is not known that the creators are Sámi, or because the film is simply assumed to be from the country of production with no further specification. Due to staffing issues, the database has also not been updated since 2014 or 2015, though some more recent films may be found in the Skábmagovat programs17. Despite these challenges, broad patterns in Sámi filmmaking can be drawn from the database, and from these external sources. Length and genre of film are easily discerned -- 100 of the database's films were documentaries (predominantly short form), 194 were short films, and twelve were features, while seven were listed as children's films. Nine were listed as TV
17

Kaija Anttonen in Skype interview with the author, April 18, 2017.

14

productions, which are also sometimes exhibited at Sámi film festivals, including Skábmagovat, Riddu Riddu and Dellie Maa18. Outside of the database, there were fifty documentaries, eight features, seventy-one shorts, seven TV productions, one "remix," twenty music videos, and three films labelled as "experimental." Fifteen films did not have a specified genre, all of them outside the database. Genre was determined by the descriptions from the database, program, or filmmaker's description, even when the categorization appeared ambiguous. It is also possible to discern differences in film production between the four countries of Sápmi. The Database contained 113 films from Norway, thirty-eight from Sweden, 144 from Finland and one from Russia. Films not listed in the Database included forty-nine from Norway, forty-one from Sweden, fifty-three from Finland and two from Russia. Thirteen films in the Database and two outside the Database were co-productions between countries within Sápmi, of which nine and one included Sweden, respectively; six in the Database were co-productions between Sápmi and non-Sápmi countries, all of them in Europe, of which three films included Sweden. Outside the database, there are two collaborations between Sápmi and non-Sápmi countries, which can be attributed to the director Nils Gaup, who has worked with studios in Hollywood and Europe (though usually in collaboration with at least one country in Sápmi). One film was described as from Sápmi without further specification. Several films were marked as exclusively from non-Sápmi countries (two in the Database and ten outside of the Database). All but two are the work of Elle-Maija Tailfeathers, a filmmaker of Blackfoot and Sámi descent who works in both Canada and Sápmi19. Any collaborations with Canadian companies and organizations also refers to Tailfeathers' work. The remaining films are from NATIVE Slam, a
18

In Scandinavia, the gap between television and theatrical film is not as strongly defined as in North America many theatrical films, including Bergman's Scenes from a Marriage and the Swedish adaptation of Stieg Larsson's Millennium Trilogy, were initially aired on television before their theatrical run. 19 "Elle-Maije Tailfeathers", ellemaijetailfeathers.com, accessed May 9 2017, http://elle-maija-tailfeathers.com/

15

project based in New Zealand (and credited to that country) involving collaborations between Indigenous filmmakers from around the world. In some cases, information on national origin was not available; this applied to six films in the Database and fifteen outside of the database. Clearly, Finland and Norway far outrank Sweden in raw number of films produced, though the slightly more even figures outside of the Database (remembering that many of the missing films from the Database are from recent years) suggest that the number of films in each country are coming closer together over time. The number of films produced does not necessarily account for the size of a film industry. To obtain a clearer idea of Sámi filmmaking, it is necessary to take a look at the institutional infrastructures available within the four countries. First, I catalogued every organization or individual which was listed as funding a Sámi film, and counted the number of films attributed to each entity (including joint funding). I gathered information on each funding body, where available, from websites belonging to institutions or artists. I then sorted the organizations into rough categories of Private Company, State Broadcaster, Individual, Non-Profit, Music Label, Mixed (multiple sponsors), Educational, and Unknown, which included both cases where the film's funding was not specified, and funding that was named but had no information available. Thereafter, I compiled the number of films produced in each category, further sorted by country or by combination of countries. This information is available in Appendix D and Appendix E. It was my hope to determine the general pattern of film funding in the Sámi communities of each country. The numbers in these categories proved very revealing. In the database, Finland's films were mostly from educational institutions (ninety-six films), private companies (fourteen films), and non-profits (thirteen films). Norway's were a mixture of private companies (twenty-seven
16

films), state media (twenty-six films), films of mixed funding (seventeen films), and educational institutions (thirteen films). In Sweden, the largest category was private companies at fourteen films, followed by individuals at nine films, with state media and mixed funding tied at five each. (Many of these private companies were also small-scale, and driven by the filmmakers themselves.) Educational institutions produced only two films, while one film came from a nonprofit. This points to a stronger support for filmmaking infrastructure for the Sámi communities in Finland and Norway, both directly through the state media, and through support for film education and organizations, which suggests that Sámi filmmakers in Sweden are more likely to turn to private companies or personal resources. This trend of weaker institutional support in Sweden appears to continue in films outside of the Database, though the numbers have less of a discrepancy. Out of 175 total films listed, there are forty-one films from Sweden, forty-nine from Norway, and fifty-three from Finland, as well as two from Russia, four joint productions (two between Sápmi countries, and two between Sápmi and non-Sápmi countries), and one labeled as "Sápmi" without specifying countries. There ten non-Sápmi films (eight from Blackfoot/Sámi filmmaker Elle-Maija Tailfeathers, and two from the New Zealand-based NATIVE Slam project). Fifteen have no country specified. One reason for this could be the lack of updates in the Database from 2014-2017, suggesting more films from Sweden in recent years, and indeed twenty-five of the forty-one Swedish films that I have found outside of the database are from 2013 or later. However, the data here is slightly faultier, often due to lack of documentation in the source websites and programs. Where the producer can be identified, the films still have the general pattern of funding that they have in the database -- Sweden is mostly from private companies (ten films), Norway from state media (thirteen films) and private companies (ten films), and Finland from private companies (seven

17

films) and educational institutions (fifteen films). Though filmmakers in all three countries work with private companies, Norway and Finland both offer a greater number of films, and produce works in an institutional context that appears to be lacking in Sweden. However, the vast majority of films from all countries are of unknown funding, thus it cannot be said that the patterns take all films into account. (This information is summarized in Appendix E.) Though a similar number of educational institutions producing Sámi film exist in Norway (three institutions, one specifically Sámi-focused, all located in Sápmi), Sweden (two institutions, neither specifically Sámi-focused, both located in Sápmi), and Finland (three institutions, one Sámi-focused, two in Sápmi), the Finnish and Norwegian institutions are generally older and produce a far greater number of films. The Sámi film festivals, including Riddu Riddu (Norway, est. 199120), the Sámi Film Festival/Sámi Easter Festival (Norway, est. 197121), Skábmagovat (Finland, est. 199922), and Dellie Maa (Sweden, est. 201323), also point to a much more longstanding establishment in Norway and Finland. Overarching film institutions devoted to Sámi film, the International Sámi Film Institute and Skábma - the Indigenous People's Film Centre (a film resource centre operating within the Sámi Parliament of Finland, which helps locate funding, educate filmmakers, and provide distribution and screening opportunities)24, are located in Norway and Finland respectively. Aside from the number of films produced by each country, there is clearly a much stronger framework of filmmaking aimed at, or enabling, Sámi filmmakers to produce films.
20

"The History of Riddu Riddu", Riddu Riddu, accessed May 9 2017, http://riddu.no/en/about-riddu-riddufestivala/history-riddu-riddu. 21 "Doing it the Sàmi Way: Beassasmarkanat in Norway", The Nordic Page, last updated January 5, 2017, http://www.tnp.no/norway/exclusive/4466-doing-it-the-Sàmi-way-beassasmarkanat-in-norway. 22 "Skábmagovat Film Festival History", Skábmagovat.fi, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2010/historia_en.htm . 23 Oskar Östergren in Skype discussion with the author, February 20, 2017. 24 "Skábma - the Indigenous Peoples' Film Centre", Samediggi, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.samediggi.fi/index.php?option=com_content&task=blogcategory&id=167&Itemid=311&lang=english.

18

The International Sámi Film Institute was founded in 2007 to promote filmmaking in the Sámi languages. Though the Institute seeks to work across the countries of Sápmi, and serves professional filmmakers in all four countries, the funding is primarily Norwegian, including grants from the Norwegian Ministry of Culture and the Norwegian Sámi Parliament25. According to Oskar Östergren, founder of the Dellie Maa festival and board member at the ISFI, future initiatives include a more international distribution of funding between the countries of Sápmi26, supported by the organization's restructuring from the International Sámi Film Centre to the International Sámi Film Institute in 201427 -- which is compliant with their support from Norway while still allowing them to exist as a "national and international" institution28. Östergren suggested that non-Sámi funding bodies should include Sámi cultural perspectives in their decisions, as cultural context is often essential for understanding a potential film's content, and may contribute towards approval or denial of funding for a proposed project.29 Aside from the ISFI, there is no state-funded agency specifically aimed towards funding Sámi filmmakers' work, or promoting Sámi content in the Nordic countries.

25

"International Sámi Film Institute", International Sámi Film Institute, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.isfi.no/eng/about/isfi/. 26 Oskar Östergren in Skype discussion with the author, February 20, 2017. 27 "International Sámi Film Institute", International Sámi Film Institute, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.isfi.no/eng/about/isfi/. 28 Ibid. 29 Oskar Östergren in Skype discussion with the author, February 20, 2017.

19

Chapter 5: Sámi Rights by Country The current coverage of Sámi rights varies in each country of Sápmi. Norway is only one of five countries, and the only one in Sápmi, to have ratified treaty ILO 169. Christina Allard (a professor at Luleå Technical University), in discussing Nordic law in general, suggests that this contributes to a greater drive for Norway to "come to terms with its colonial past," paving the way for legislation that permits the Sámi people "substantial influence in the drafting of legislation affecting them." Allard has praised the Finnmark Act of 2005, which enables some implementation of ILO 169 in the traditionally Sámi area of Finnmark in Northern Norway (as opposed to the entire country),30 by giving the rights to the land to the people of Finnmark. Finland also has taken steps towards a "Sámi homeland region...with cultural and linguistic autonomy,"31 but has reached difficulty with defining Sámi identity. Allard attributes Norway's progress to a tradition of more independent courts, as opposed to Sweden and Finland.32 The organization of Sweden during the seventeenth century, around a far more centralized property system ultimately based around a king33, was echoed by Finland as part of the Swedish Empire at the time. Norway, by contrast, was far more removed as a province of Denmark, and was thus left to determine many of its property laws alone, especially in remote areas, leading to a great deal of common land.34 Land rights, crucial to Sámi reindeerherding and fishing practices, are addressed to some extent in all three countries, but Norway alone is party to ILO 169, which asks signatory countries to interpret laws according to the

30

Christina Allard, "Some Characteristic Features of Scandinavian Laws and their Influence on Sámi Matters," Indigenous Rights in Scandinavia: Autonomous Sàmi Law, ed. Christina Allard and Susann Funderud Skogvang, New York: Routledge, 2016, 51. 31 Ibid. 32 Allard, 54-55. 33 Ibid, 56. 34 Ibid, 56.

20

"custom" of Indigenous peoples (though Finland had a draft proposal to ratify the convention as of 2015).35 These characteristics illustrate Norway's very different interpretation of Sámi law, both due to historical and to modern conventions, which ultimately allows greater freedom for Sámi people. In terms of recognition as a distinct people, the Sámi are recognized as Indigenous by the Russian Constitution, though this has proved to have little practical effect. They have been recognized in Sweden as Indigenous since 197736 and as "ethnic minorities" since 1999.37 It is also important to distinguish that the recognition as "Indigenous" is not in the Swedish Constitution, where they are simply defined as a "people", while Norway and Finland recognize them as Indigenous38. This is a problem for the Sámi people, as recognition as an "ethnic minority" or "people" does not necessarily obligate Sweden to follow treaties and agreements pertaining to the treatment of Indigenous peoples. Another issue in Sweden is that laws related to hunting and fishing tend to distinguish between Sámi people of traditional villages and those outside of the villages, leaving many Sámi with few or no hunting or fishing rights and disconnecting them from their traditional livelihood.39 In Finland, since its independence from the Russian Empire in 1917, the country has had the ability to develop its own policy on Sámi rights. Finland is currently in the process of

35 36

Ibid, 60. "Discrimination of the Sámi - the Rights of the Sámi from a Discrimination Perspective", Ombudsmannen mot etnisk diskriminering [Ombudsman against ethnic discrimination], Stockholm: Lenanders Grafiska AB, 2008, 5. 37 Ibid, 14. 38 IndiaReed-Bowers, "Preparatory Report from the Sámi Parliament in Sweden/Sámediggi/Sámedigge/Saemiedigkie/Sametinget for the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, Ms. Victoria Tauli-Corpuz, prior to her 2015 August visit to Sápmi and Sweden", Samediggi, August 2015, https://www.sametinget.se/92639. 39 Eivind Torp, "Sámi Hunting and Freshwater Fishing Rights in Swedish Law", Indigenous Rights in Scandinavia: Autonomous Sàmi Law, ed. Christina Allard and Susann Funderud Skogvang, New York: Routledge, 2016, 111-112.

21

ratifying ILO 169.40 In terms of land rights, though most of the Sámi homeland is officially owned by the Finnish state, and the government and Sámi officials are currently in negotiation for its common use. However, a recent Mining Act (2011) contained special considerations pertaining to the impact on the Sámi as a result of gold panning or mining,41 and is regarded as a positive step forward by UN Special Rapporteur for the Rights of Indigenous Peoples Victoria Tauli-Corpuz in her report of 2016. Sámi are recognized as Indigenous in Finland,42 but their determination of Sámi identity is more restrictive than Norway and Sweden, determined by ability to vote in the Sámi Parliament, which can lead to exclusion.43 Definitions of Sámi-ness by language can also be problematic, as many people deliberately suppressed or were forced to suppress their Sámi language in previous generations, leaving a disconnect.44 Language rights themselves vary across Sápmi - Russia has no provisions for Sámi languages. The "ethnic minority" distinction in Sweden gives Sámi people the right to education, eldercare, and contact with authority in Sámi, though education is limited by location (within traditionally Sámi areas only) and availability of teachers, and contact with authority is only available in Sámi in certain municipalities.45 Norway has adopted an Action Plan for Sámi Languages, which was praised by Corli-Taupuz in the 2016 report,46 but has faced difficulty in implementing the tenets of the plan. In Finland, Sámi-language education is guaranteed in the
40

Tanja Joona, "The Definition of a Sàmi Person in Finland and its Application", Indigenous Rights in Scandinavia: Autonomous Sàmi Law, ed. Christina Allard and Susann Funderud Skogvang, New York: Routledge, 2016, 155. 41 Victoria Tauli-Corpuz, "Report on the Human Rights Situation of the Sámi People in the Sápmi Region of Norway, Sweden and Finland", United Nations General Assembly Human Rights Council Thirty-Third Session, Agenda Item 3, 9 August 2016, http://unsr.vtaulicorpuz.org/site/index.php/documents/country-reports/155-reportSápmi-2016. 42 Ibid. 43 Joona, 156. 44 Ibid, 170 45 Victoria Tauli-Corpuz, "Report on the Human Rights Situation of the Sámi People in the Sápmi Region of Norway, Sweden and Finland", United Nations General Assembly Human Rights Council Thirty-Third Session, Agenda Item 3, 9 August 2016, http://unsr.vtaulicorpuz.org/site/index.php/documents/country-reports/155-reportSápmi-2016. 46 Ibid.

22

"Sámi homeland", but not outside of it, and faces the same logistical problems as in Sweden, though some distance learning is available to ameliorate the situation.47 However, a Sámi language revitalization programme has been approved by the Finnish government in 2014, with the hope of increasing the number of Sámi speakers by 2025.48 The Nordic Sámi Convention, drafted by an "Expert Group"49 composed of representatives from the governments, and the Sámi communities, of each Nordic country, seeks a shared approach to Sámi rights and infrastructure between the three states. Most prominently, it explicitly names the Sámi as a distinct Indigenous people with a right of self-determination.50 The 2005 draft of the convention includes consideration for Sámi legal customs, the existence and powers of Sámi parliaments, the right to a Sámi region (with "traditional use of land and water", as well as natural resources), and provisions for language, culture, goverment services, education and media in a Sámi context.51 The Russian Federation, it is hoped, would be added to negotiations following the adoption of the Convention in the Nordic countries.52 Though the draft was initially presented in 2005,53 and was completed in its final form in December 2016,54 it has yet to be ratified by Nordic national governments.

47 48

Ibid. Ibid. 49 Leena Heinämäki, "The Rapidly Evolving International Status of Indigenous Peoples: The Example of the Sámi People in Finland", Indigenous Rights in Scandinavia: Autonomous Sàmi Law, ed. Christina Allard and Susann Funderud Skogvang, New York: Routledge, 2016, 198. 50 Ibid. 51 "Nordic Saami Convention", Regjeringen.no [Norwegian government website], accessed 9 May 2017, https://www.regjeringen.no/globalassets/upload/aid/temadokumenter/Sámi/Sámi_samekonv_engelsk.pdf . 52 Timo Koivurova, "The Draft for a Nordic Saami Convention", European Yearbook of Minority Issues 6 (2008): 103, http://www.arcticcentre.org/loader.aspx?id=04e81223028e-4315 a669-cb8830b22d6b.
53 54

Heinämäki, 198. "Agreement on the Sámi Draft Convention Reached", Ministry of Justice of Finland, December 21, 2016, http://oikeusministerio.fi/en/index/currentissues/tiedotteet/2016/12/pohjoismaisestasaamelaissopimuksestaneuvottel utuloshallitusvieratifioitavaksi.html.

23

Outside of the Nordic countries, the situation in Russia gives few rights for Sámi people in practice, though the laws do grant some framework for self-autonomy. The Constitution offers protection for the "obshchiny [communities] of small-numbered peoples of the far North, Siberia and the Far East of the Russian Federation."55 The Sámi people are one of many Indigenous groups in Russia, and are small in number, a significant contrast to the situation in the Nordic countries, where the Sámi are one of few indigenous or official minority groups, and form larger communities. Article 18 of the Russian Constitution, concerning the protection of Indigenous rights, was abolished in 2004, but promised that "the members of obshchiny of small-numbered peoples enjoy privileges, established by the federal legislation and the legislation of the subjects of the Russian Federation in order to protect their aboriginal environment, to preserve and develop their traditional ways of life and economic activities."56 Article 69 of the Russian Constitution states that "the Russian Federation shall guarantee the rights of the indigenous small peoples according to the universally recognized principles and norms of international law and international treaties and agreements of the Russian Federation,"57 though at this time, Russia has not yet ratified ILO 169,58 and specific legislation regarding land protection and language rights does not exist. Russia's unstable legal environment and complex bureaucracy undermine the implementation of such laws. On Guarantees of the Rights of the Indigenous Small-numbered Peoples of the Russian Federation (ratified 1999), contains Article 13, which allows for support of living areas and traditional livelihood through establishing quotas of Indigenous
55

Vladislava Vladimirova, "Contested Political Representation of the Sámi in the Kola Peninsula, Northwest Russia", Re: mindings. Co-Constituting Indigenous/Academic/Artistic Knowledges, ed. Johan Gärdebro, May-Britt Öhman, Hiroshi Maruyama, Stockholm: Vulkan, 2014, 218. 56 Ibid. 57 "Chapter 3. The Federal Structure", The Russian Constitution, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.constitution.ru/en/10003000-04.htm. 58 Vladimirova, 219.

24

representatives in regional governments (this was later abolished in 2004). Instead, article 7, paragraph 6 (pg 220) gives these powers back to municipal administrations -- the theory is that regional self-governance will provide equality to all, including Indigenous peoples. Per Vladimirova, the laws "bear the character of recommendations" and put the management of Indigenous organizations and economic practices into the hands of regional and municipal administrations, forcing Indigenous groups to comply with local administrators.59 Foreign (often Fennoscandic) NGOs have also tried to help in Kola Peninsula, achieving some political improvements (such as establishing commitees), but creating little economic improvement. In 2010, the Kola Sámi Parliament was created to advocate for self-governance and political rights, but according to Vladimirova, it suffers from limited participation. She characterizes this as "vernacular politics," more akin to a social network than a legal system.60 In this disparity, it is also possible to trace the divergence of respective film industries across Sápmi. Generally, where Sámi autonomy and language rights are stronger, there is a greater framework for funding and creating Sámi film, such as film education, exhibition opportunities and production companies. Norway seems to have progressed the furthest in recognition of Sámi rights, especially with the ratification of ILO 169. Sweden, meanwhile, seems to lag behind Norway, with limited and disputed legal recognition of the Sámi. Finland, somewhere in the middle, bears some of the problems that Sweden has, but is in the process of implementing solutions to deal with many of them. The size of the film industry in each country corresponds to the relative freedom the Sámi have -- Norway and Finland both maintain Sámi institutions and infrastructure towards filmmaking that Sweden lacks, and each produces a far larger number of films. Furthermore, more of these films come from larger institutions such as
59 60

Vladimirova, 220. Ibid.

25

postsecondary educational organizations, state media, and non-profits, while Swedish films tend to be more inclined towards private funding (from companies or from individuals), which suggests greater support overall for Sámi filmmaking in Norway and Finland. In Russia, which offers limited rights and recognition to the Sámi people, and even less implementation of said rights, there is almost no Sámi film to speak of. Film production is a complex endeavour, requiring logistic and financial cooperation from a variety of parties. It is only when these factors come together that a film can be produced. While it is inaccurate to say that filmmaking is directly influenced by the legal and cultural standing of Sámi people within the Nordic countries, it is possible to make a case that increased recognition, legal and economic rights, and support for autonomy can lead to an environment in which a filmmaking industry, and the accompanying infrastructure, may flourish, and that the situation of filmmaking in each country parallels the general status of the Sámi people. With the creation of the International Sámi Film Institute, along with its intentions to even out funding across the Nordic countries, together with the prospect of ratification of the Nordic Sámi Convention, it is hopeful that more Sámi films will be produced, and that prospective filmmakers in Sápmi will have access to a stronger film industry, at a more comparable level in all three countries.

26

Appendix A: Sámi History and Facts Population Statistics Country Norway Sweden Finland Russia Other62 Population61 40,000 20,000 8,000 2,000 30,000 in North America63; European and other statistics unknown Total Est. 100,000

Sámi Language by Speaker Language64 Akkala Sámi Inari Sámi Kildin Sámi Lule Sámi Number of Speakers 0 300 350 2000 Countries spoken in Russian Federation Finland Russian Federation Norway, Sweden Language Status65 9 (dormant) 2 (provincial) 8b (nearly extinct) 2 (provincial)

61 62

"The Sámi - an Indigenous People in Sweden", Samediggi, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.samer.se/2137. Primarily USA, Canada, Ukraine, other former Soviet states; includes people of Sámi descent who are not necessarily Sàmi by official definition. 63 "About Báiki", Báiki: The International Sámi Journal, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.baiki.org/content/about.htm . 64 Considerable debate has been undertaken as to how many Sámi languages exist, as opposed to dialects; I have chosen to follow the ISO classification, as listed on ethnologue.com. 65 Taken from the EGIDS scale, a tool for measuring language endagerment; for further information, see https://www.ethnologue.com/enterprise-faq/what-egids-how-it-used.

27

North Sámi Pite Sámi Skolt Sámi South Sámi Ter Sámi Ume Sámi

25,700 20 300 600 350 20

Norway Sweden Finland Sweden Russian Federation Sweden

2 (provincial) 8b (nearly extinct) 7 (shifting) 2 (provincial) 8b (nearly extinct) 8b (nearly extinct)

Major Sámi Centres and Locations Place Inari Utsjoki Jokkmokk Kautokeino Rovaniemi Lovozero Population Country 680666 1239 510567 138668 62246 287169 Finland Finland Sweden Norway Finland Russia

66

"Municipality-Based Statistics Unit", Statistics Finland, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.stat.fi/tup/rajapintapalvelut/kuntapohjaiset_tilastointialueet_en.html. 67 "Population in the Country, Counties and Municipalities on 31/12/2016 and Population Change in 2016", Statistics Sweden, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.scb.se/en/finding-statistics/statistics-by-subjectarea/population/population-composition/population-statistics/pong/tables-and-graphs/yearly-statistics-municipalities-counties-and-the-whole-country/population-in-the-country-counties-and-municipalities-andpopulation-change/. 68 "Populaton and Area by Municipality", Statistics Norway, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.ssb.no/303784/population-and-area-by-municipality-sy-57. 69   ,  ,   , ,   ,    ­         3     [Ppulation of Russia, federal districts of the Russian Federation subjects, districts, urban localities, rural localities - administrative centers, and rural localities with population of 3000 people and more - 2010 Russian census],    [All-Russia Population Census] accessed May 9 2017, http://www.gks.ru/free_doc/new_site/perepis2010/croc/Documents/Vol1/pub-01-05.pdf.

28

Tromsø Kiruna Karasjok Hattfjelldal Arjeplog Tana Tysfjord Arvidsjaur Nesseby Snåsa Neiden Östersund Lakselv Alta Kirkenes Gällivare Enontekiö Kåfjord Umeå Luleå Royrvik

32774 23167 1858 594 2876 668 1187 6442 919 652 250 61745 2258 14272 3498 17956 1874 299 122892 76770 231

Norway Sweden Norway Norway Sweden Norway Norway Sweden Norway Norway Norway/Finland Sweden Norway Norway Norway Sweden Finland Norway Sweden Sweden Norway

29

Appendix B: Sámi Film History, Exhibition and Institutions Timeline of Sámi Film History  1963: First Sámi film, according to the Sámi Film Database. Any films prior to this date appear to be filmed by external filmmakers about Sámi communities, rather than coming from within the communities. 7071    1971: First Sámi Easter Festival.72 1982: First Sámi feature film, Skierri - Land of the Dwarf Birches.73 1987: Release of Ofelas, which would be nominated for an Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film,74      1991: First Riddu Riddu festival. 75 1999: First Skábmagovat, an Indigenous film festival hosted annually in Inari, Finland.76 2000: 300/323 films on the Sámi Film Database appear after this date. 2007: Establishment of International Sámi Film Centre in Kautokeino, NO. 77 2013: Establishment of Dellie Maa, first Sámi film festival in Sweden.78

70 71

"The Sàmi Film Database", Skábmagovat.fi, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Sàmifilm/movies/. Kaija Anttonen in Skype interview with the author, April 18, 2017. 72 "Doing it the Sàmi Way: Beassasmarkanat in Norway", The Nordic Page, last updated January 5, 2017, http://www.tnp.no/norway/exclusive/4466-doing-it-the-Sàmi-way-beassasmarkanat-in-norway. 73 "The Sàmi Film Database", Skábmagovat.fi, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Sàmifilm/movies/. 74 Academy Awards Database", Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, accesser May 9 2017, http://awardsdatabase.oscars.org/search/results. 75 "The History of Riddu Riddu", Riddu Riddu, accessed May 9 2017, http://riddu.no/en/about-riddu-riddufestivala/history-riddu-riddu. 76 "Skábmagovat Film Festival History", Skábmagovat.fi, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2010/historia_en.htm. 77 "International Sámi Film Institute", International Sámi Film Institute, accessed May 9 2017, http://www. isfi.no/eng/about/isfi/. 78 Oskar Östergren in Skype discussion with the author, February 20, 2017.

30

Sámi Film Education Name Type of Instituti on Fund ing Location Specifically Sámi? Film s in DB Fil ms in D B (jo int ) Sogsakk/ Saamelaisalue en koulutuskesku s SAKK/ Saamelaisalue en koulutuskesku s Sogsakk/Sámi Education Institute79 Vocatio nal college
80

Fil ms out of DB

Fil ms out of DB (joi nt)

Publi c

Inari/Toivoniemi/Ivalo/Het a, FI81

Yes

94

5

5

0

79

"The Sámi Education Institute", Saamelaisaluen koulutuskeskus, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.sogsakk.fi/index.php?lang=en. 80 Ibid.

31

Nordland College of Art and Film/NKFS82 Sámi University College85/Sám i allaskuvla/Sá mi University of Applied Sciences86/Th e Nordic Sámi Institute87 Academy of

Art and media college
83

Kabelvåg, NO84

No

8

5

0

0

Vocatio nal college

Publi c

Kautokeino, NO

Yes

5

2

0

1

Art and

Unkn Banská Bystrica, SK88

No

1

0

0

0

81 82

Ibid. "Welcome to Nordland kust og film- fagskole", Nordland Fylkeskommune, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.kunstfilm.no/english/. 83 Ibid. 84 Ibid. 85 "Sámi University College", UArctic, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.uarctic.org/memberprofiles/norway/8710/Sámi-university-college. 86 "Sámi University of Applied Sciences", Sámi Allaskuvla, accessed May 9 2017, http://samas.no/en. 87 "Research", Sámi Allaskuvla, accessed May 9 2017, http://samas.no/en/node/156. 88 "Institute of Documentary Film", Institute of Documentary Film, accessed May 9 2017, https://dokweb.net/database/organizations/about/3211aabf-8d4a-40bb-a1a1-82dd43babada/academy-of-arts-banskabystrica.

32

Arts

media college

own

Finnmark University College/Unive rsity of Tromsø89/Hog skolen i Finnmark Helsinki College Stadia/Helsink i Polytechnic Stadia/Helsink i Metropolia University of Applied Sciences91 Kalix Folkhögskola

Univers ity

Publi c

Tromsø/Alta/Hammerfest/ Narvik/Kirkenes/Harstad, NO90

No

2

1

2

0

Polytec hnic

Helsinki, FI

No

0

0

0

1

Adult Educati

Publi c

Kalix, SE92

No

1

0

0

0

89

"UiT2020: Towards a New Strategic Plan for UiT", University of Tromsø, last updated January 29, 2015, https://en.uit.no/om/art?p_document_id=356184&dim=179033. 90 "UiT Studiesteder", University of Tromsø, accessed May 9 2017, https://en.uit.no/studiesteder. 91 "EVTEK and Helsinki Higher Vocational School Stadia in Finland Merge", The Connection, last updated January 27 2011, https://theconnection.ece.org/NewsItem/86. 92 "Om Kalix" [about Kalix], Kalix Folkhögskola, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.kalix.fhsk.se/om-kalix/.

33

on Tampereen ammattikorke akoulu TAMK Luleå University of Technology Univers ity Publi c Luleå, SE94 No 1 0 0 0 Polytec hnic Publi c Tampere, FI93 No 3 0 0 0

Sámi Film Festivals and Events95 Name Dellie Maa Time, Frequency Autumn, annual Established 201396 Location Tärnaby/Östersund/Umeå, SE97 Skábmagovat Riddu Riddu Sámi Film Festival102 Late January, annual July, annual Springtime, annual 199998 1991100 1971103 Inari, FI99 Kåfjord, NO101 Kautokeino, NO

93

"Tampere University of Applied Sciences", Tampere University of Applied Sciences, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.tamk.fi/web/tamken/home. 94 "Luleå University of Technology", Luleå University of Technology, accessed May 9 2017, https://www.ltu.se/?l=en. 95 With the exception of the Sámi Easter festival, all festivals on this list are open to Indigenous filmmakers or artists worldwide, but show a large number of Sámi films due to their location. 96 Oskar Östergren in Skype discussion with the author, February 20, 2017. 97 Ibid. 98 "Skábmagovat Film Festival History", Skábmagovat.fi, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2010/historia_en.htm. 99 Ibid. 100 "The History of Riddu Riddu", Riddu Riddu, accessed May 9 2017, http://riddu.no/en/about-riddu-riddufestivala/history-riddu-riddu. 101 Ibid. 102 Part of the Sámi Easter Festival.

34

Winners of the Skábmagovat Prize Name104 Katja Gauriloff Johs. Kalvemo Nils Gaup Sverre Porsanger Liisa Holmberg Oula Näkkäläjärvi Inger-Marie Aikio Profession Filmmaker Filmmaker, Journalist Filmmaker Actor Producer Actor, Writer Poet, Journalist Year 2017

Sámi Presence at External Film Festivals and Award Ceremonies Event Film Festival specialization? Toronto International Film Festival Toronto International Film Festival Tundra of Arvas 2010 Toronto, CA In Competition, Films from the North106 Sameblod105 2016 Toronto, CA Year Location Awards or Honours

103

"Doing it the Sàmi Way: Beassasmarkanat in Norway", The Nordic Page, last updated January 5, 2017, http://www.tnp.no/norway/exclusive/4466-doing-it-the-Sàmi-way-beassasmarkanat-in-norway. 104 "Skábmagovat Prize to Katja Gauriloff", Skábmagovat.fi, last updated January 28, 2017, accessed May 9 2017, http://Skábmagovat.fi/Skábmagovat_2014/?page_id=10546. 105 "Sámi Blood", Toronto International Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.tiff.net/films/Sámi-blood/. 106 "The Tundra of Árvas", LittleBigProductions, accessed May 9 2017, http://littlebig.se/films/the-tundra-of-arvas/.

35

Venice Film Festival (Venice Days division)

Sameblod

2016

Venice, IT

Europa Cinemas Label (Best Film, Venice Days)107; Fedeora Award for Best Young Director, Amanda Kernell108

Thessaloniki Film Festival Tokyo International Film Festival

Sameblod

2016

Thessaloniki, GR

Human Values Award109 2nd place Juried Competition; Best Actress, Lene Cecilia Sparrok110

Sameblod

2016

Tokyo, JP

107

"Amanda Kernell's SÁMI BLOOD (Sameblod) Wins Europa Cinemas Venice Label", Europa Cinemas, last updated September 9, 2016, http://www.europa-cinemas.org/en/News/Activities/Amanda-Kernell-s-SÁMI-BLOODSameblod-wins-Europa-Cinemas-Venice-Label. 108 "Fedeora Awards in 2016", Fedeora (Federation of Film Critics of Europe and the Mediterranean), viewed May 9 2017, http://www.fedeora.eu/. 109 "57th Thessaloniki International Film Festival Closing Ceremony", Thessaloniki International Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.filmfestival.gr/default.aspx?lang=en-US&page=607&newsid=2381. 110 "The 29th Tokyo International Film Festival Award Winners", Tokyo International Film Festival, viewed May 9 2017, http://2016.tiff-jp.net/en/tiff/list_of_winners.html.

36

Sundance Film Festival111

Sameblod

2017

Park City, USA

Official selection, Spotlight Program

Gothenburg Film Festival

Sameblod

2017

Gothenburg, SE

Dragon Award Best Nordic Film; Sven Nykvist Cinematography Award - Sophia Olsson112

Santa Barbara International Film Festival Sundance Film Festival114

Sameblod

2017

Santa Barbara, USA

Valhalla Award - Best Nordic Film113

Stoerre Vaerrie

Independent Film

2015

Park City, USA

ImagineNative Tundra of Arvas

Indigenous Film

2010

Toronto, CA

Best Music Video -

111

Alexander Ortega, "Sundance Review: Sámi Blood", Slug Magazine, last updated January 18, 2017, http://www.slugmag.com/movie-reviews/sundance-film-review-Sámi-blood/. 112 Alissa Simons, "'Sámi Blood' Tops 40th Goteborg Film Festival", Variety, last updated February 4th, 2017, http://variety.com/2017/film/news/Sámi-blood-2017-40th-goteborg-film-fest-1201978308. 113 Sarah Ahern, "Santa Barbara Film Festival Announces 2017 Award Winners", Variety, last updated February 11, 2017, http://variety.com/2017/film/news/santa-barbara-film-festival-2017-award-winners-1201984675. 114 "Stoerre Vaerie (Northern Great Mountain) Accepted for Sundance 2015!", Bautafilm, accessed August 2, 2017, http://bautafilm.se/nyheter/stoerre-vaerie-norra-storfjallet-antagen-till-sundance-2015-och-nominerad-forstartsladden-2015/?lang=en.

37

Honorable Mention115 Ethnographic Film Festival Arctic Fury Film Festival Tampere Film Festival Lubeck Nordic Film Days Amanda Awards Finnish Critics' Association Festival de Ofelas 1988 Sitges, ES Special Non Profit 2007 Ofelas 1988 Haugesund, NO120 Annual Prize122 Best Film121 Give Us Our Skeletons Give Us Our Skeletons 1999 Lubeck, DE 1999 Tampere, FI A Shout Into the Wind The Brooch Arctic Cinema 2012 2008 Belgrade, RS Grand Prix (Shared)116 Rovaniemi, FI Honorable Mention117 Special Mention118 Best Documentary119

115 116

"The Tundra of Árvas", LittleBigProductions, accessed May 9 2017, http://littlebig.se/films/the-tundra-of-arvas. "A Shout Into the Wind", Sámi Film Database, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Sámifilm/movies/movie.php?id=101. 117 "The Brooch", Sámi Film Database, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Sámifilm/movies/movie.php?id=307 . 118 "Give Us Our Skeletons", Sámi Film Database, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Sámifilm/movies/movie.php?id=60. 119 Ibid. 120 "Amanda", Norwegian Internationa Film Festival, accessed June 20 2017, https://filmfestivalen.no/en/amanda-3. 121 "Ofelas", Sámi Film Database, accessed June 20 2017, http://www.skabmagovat.fi/samifilm/movies/movie.php?id=70. 122 "Non Profit", Sámi Film Database, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Sámifilm/movies/movie.php?id=85.

38

Cine de Sitges Academy Awards Ofelas 1987 Los Angeles, US

Mention123 Nomination, Best Foreign Language Film124

British Film Institute Yubari International Fantastic Film Festival Finnish Quality Support in Cinema Production Jussi Awards

Ofelas

1989

Sutherland Trophy125

Ofelas

1990

Yubari, JP

Grand Jury Prize126

Skierri Land of the Dwarf Birches127

1982

Skierri Land of the Dwarf

1983

Best Sound Design128

123

"Ofelas", Sámi Film Database, accessed June 20 2017, http://www.skabmagovat.fi/samifilm/movies/movie.php?id=70. 124 Academy Awards Database", Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, accessed May 9 2017, http://awardsdatabase.oscars.org/search/results. 125 "Ofelas", Sámi Film Database, accessed June 20 2017, http://www.skabmagovat.fi/samifilm/movies/movie.php?id=70. 126 "Ofelas", Sámi Film Database, accessed June 20 2017, http://www.skabmagovat.fi/samifilm/movies/movie.php?id=70. 127 "Skierri Land of the Dwarf Birches", Sámi Film Database, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Sámifilm/movies/movie.php?id=67. 128 Ibid.

39

Birches Swedish Television Awards Dieppe Festival Films on the Arctic Earth Vision Film Festival Global Indigenous Film Festival Pärnu International Documentary and Ethnographic Film Festival Wildlife Vaasa Film Last Yoik in Saami Forests 2008 Vaasa, FI Environmental Special Award Last Yoik in Saami Forests 2008 Pärnu, EE Skierri Land of the Dwarf Birches Skierri Land of the Dwarf Birches Last Yoik in Saami Forests Last Yoik in Saami Forests 2008 2008 Santa Cruz, US Kathmandu, NP Kathrine Knight Award131 The best topical relevance and interpretation132 The best film on relationship between man and changing nature133 1983 Distinction Award130 1984 Best Freelance Work129

129 130

Ibid. Ibid. 131 "Last Yoik in Sámi Forests", The Sámi Film Database, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Sámifilm/movies/movie.php?id=84. 132 Ibid. 133 Ibid.

40

Festival

by West Finland Environmental Centre134

The Green Planet Blues

Last Yoik in Saami Forests

2009

Sinaia, RO

The Mihail Cantacuzino High School Sinaia Prize135

Nordisk Panorama

Let's Dance

1991

Århus, DK

Best Children's and Young People's Film136

Tampere Film Festival

Let's Dance

1992

Tampere, FI

National Competition, Main Prize; Risto Jarva Award137

Nordic Film Festival Haugesund Norwegian Short Film

Let's Dance

1992

Haugesund, NO

Nordic Amanda, Films for the Young138

Let's Dance

1992

Grimstad, NO

Gullstolen Award139

134 135

Ibid. Ibid. 136 "Let's Dance", Sámi Film Database, accessed June 20 2017, http://www.skabmagovat.fi/samifilm/movies/movie.php?lang=en&id=16. 137 Ibid. 138 Ibid.

41

Festival Outokummun Kinokisa Competition Blue Sea Film Festival Competition Journalist of Finnmark Award142 Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues143 Arctic Fury Film Festival Jussi Awards Non-Sámi Women The Minister of State 1998 Arctic Cinema 2009 Rovaniemi, FI Animation Film Award144 Costume Design, Tiina Last Yoik in Sápmi 2006 New York, USA Premiere Copy Pupils 2008 Sincere Intentions Baltic amateur 2004 film? Rauma, FI Sincere Intentions 2004 First Prize, Best Fiction Film (Shared)140 Special Mention141

139 140

Ibid. Sincere Intention s", Sámi Film Database, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Sámifilm/movies/movie.php?id=99. 141 Ibid. 142 "Copy Pupils", Sámi Film Database, accessed June 20 2017, http://www.skabmagovat.fi/samifilm/movies/movie.php?id=103. 143 "Last Yoik in Sámi Forests", The Sámi Film Database, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Sámifilm/movies/movie.php?id=84. 144 "Non-Sámi Women", Sámi Film Database, accessed June 20 2017, http://www.skabmagovat.fi/samifilm/movies/movie.php?id=258.

42

Kaukanen; Art Direction, Risto Karhula (both shared with film Lunastus)145 Gothenburg Film Festival Lubeck Nordic Film Days Herdswoman 2008 Herdswoman146 2008 Gothenburg, SE Lubeck, DE Best Documentary147

Websites Showing Sámi Film  Youtube.com - largest video sharing site in the world and second most-visited site on the Internet 148 - headquartered in California, USA, and owned by Google149. Used by Sámi artists - some films may be on the site in violation of copyright.  Vimeo.com - Another large video sharing site, this time focused on creative works, including short films.150 Many films on this site are uploaded by the artists themselves, or small film companies, including those by Sámi artists.

145

"The Minister of State", Sámi Film Database, accessed June 20 2017, http://www.skabmagovat.fi/samifilm/movies/movie.php?lang=en&id=61. 146 "Herdswoman", Sámi Film Database, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Sámifilm/movies/movie.php?id=133. 147 Ibid. 148 "YouTube.com Traffic Statistics", Alexa, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/youtube.com. 149 Michael Arrington, "Google Has Acquired YouTube", TechCrunch, last updated October 9, 2006, https://techcrunch.com/2006/10/09/google-has-acquired-youtube. 150 "About Vimeo", Vimeo, accessed May 9 2017, https://vimeo.com/about.

43



Nuorajtv.no - Based in Norway. Lule Sámi website created by Sámi youth (founder Lars Theodor Kintel) to offer Lule-language media for young people151. Funded by the Sámi Parliament, Nordland county and Ministry of Government Administration, Reform and Church Affairs152.



Isuma.tv - Multimedia online platform for Indigenous artists worldwide. Based in Montreal, Canada, and driven by Canada's Inuit community. Contains multiple Sámi "communities" containing videos by or about Sámi people. 153



Samediggi.fi - Website of the Sámi Parliament in Inari, FI. Showcases student media projects, including film, video, audio, and photography. Links from Sámi Film Database are mostly dead. 154



sogku.fi - Website of the Sámi Education Centre in Inari, FI. Features films produced by Indigenous Film Skabma, the regional centre for filmmaking in Inari - however, most links to video (from Sámi Film Database) appear to be dead.155

151 152

"Om NuorajTV", nuoraj.tv, accessed June 5 2017, http://nuorajtv.no/om-nuorajtv/. (Norwegian) "About Us", Isuma.tv, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.isuma.tv/about-us. 153 "Search", Isuma.tv, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.isuma.tv/channels/Sámi. 154 "Samediggi", Samediggi.fi, accessed June 20 2017, http://www.samediggi.fi. 155 "SOGSAKK Medialinja", sogku.fi, accessed June 20 2017, http://sogku.fi.

44

Appendix C: List of Sámi Films Films Listed on the Sámi Film Database156 Film Count ry 01:25.3 NO Nordland College of Art and Film 1000 Years FI Sámi Siida Ry Non-profit Producer Type of Producer Educational Marja Bål Nango, Daniel Bianchini, Vidar Wikran Jussi Isokoski, Niilo Rasmus, Utsjoen nuoret 365 Days NO Finnmark University College 9175 Sveagruva A Childhood in Prison A City Sámi in the Woods SE Liselotte Wajstedt Individual Liselotte Wajstedt 2007 4 min 40 sec Short NO NO Roger Mandal NRK State media Johs. Kalvemo, Tove Austad 2005 30 min Individual Roger Mandal 2007 26 min Docume ntary Docume ntary Educational Lemet Ailo Holmestrand 2011 19 min Docume ntary 2008 4 min Short 2011 2 min Short Filmmaker Year Runtime Genre

156

"The Sàmi Film Database", Skábmagovat.fi, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Sàmifilm/movies.

45

A Dedicated non-Sámi A Good Life in the North A Long Lesson Beyond Lake Inari A Migratory Bird

NO

Barentsfilm A/S

Private company

Anne Kjersti Björn

1996 8 min

Docume ntary

FI

Sogsakk

Educational

Eeva Nykänen

2009 8 min

Short

FI

Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us Sogsakk

Educational

Ulpu Siponen

2012 21 min

Short

FI

Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us SAKK

Educational

Pia Mikkilä

2011 10 min

Docume ntary

A Possibility A Red Girls Reasoning

FI

Sogsakk

Educational

Anneli Lappalainen

2009 15 min

Short

CA

Rose Stiffarm, The Crazy8s Film Society

Mixed (Individual, non-profit)

Elle-Maija Tailfeathers

2012 10 min

Short

A Sámi in the City A Shout

SE

Liselotte Wajstedt

Individual

Liselotte Wajstedt

2007 8 min

Docume ntary

FI

Oktober Oy

Private

Katja Gauriloff

2007 55 min

Docume

46

Into the Wind A Smoking Grandma A Son of Two Worlds A Sprinkle FI of Laughter Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us SAKK A Summer NO Bird in the Land of Winter A Wish FI Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us Sogsakk Aallokosta FI Aanaar Eennam FI Sogsakk Yleisradio Oy, SVT NRK, Sámi Radio FI Ima FilbmaFI Sogsakk

company

ntary

Educational

Kirsti Länsman

2008 5 min

Short

Private

Ima AikioArianaik

2007 27 min

Docume ntary

ja sátneduodji company

Educational

Ima AikioArianaik

2005 26 min

Short

State media

Nils John Porsanger

2009 28 min

Docume ntary

Educational

Onneli Halonen

2012 2 min

Short

Educational State media

Marjo Ulkuniemi Ella Sarre

2011 2 min 1983 35 min

Short Docume ntary

47

The Land of Inari Adventure at Sea Against the Time in the Lyngen Alps Agent Hahkaoajv ve Ailo Sets Out North NO The Nordic Sámi Institute/Sám i Instituhtta Ajggie Time Almost Like a Winter Dream An FI Saamelaisalu Educational Irene Länsman 2011 13 min Short FI Sogsakk Educational Marianne Aikio 2010 7 min Short SE Indigee Non-profit Liselotte Wajstedt 2013 8 min Short NO Nuoraj TV Mixed (multiple funding) Educational Solveig Joks 2007 38 min Short Simon Piera Paulsen 2010 2 min Short NO Semferno Private company Kate Hilde Nilsen, Bente Fernando Sem FI Sogsakk Educational Maria Kosonen 2012 1 min 30 sec 2008 62 min Docume ntary Short

48

Outsider at Home

een koulutuskesk us SAKK

Ancestors

FI

Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us Sogsakk

Educational

Sunna Kitti

2012 6 min

Short

Ancient Forces And in the winter we live in iglu And the Mountains are the Same And Then Came the Flood

NO

Unknown

Niels Ovlla Dunfjell

2011 3 min

Short

FI

Samediggi

Non-profit

Milla Pulska

2006 1 min

Short

NO

Gjert Rognli

Individual

Gjert Rognli

2006 6 min

Short

FI/SE/ Filmpool NO Nord, NRK/Sámi Radio, SVT, YLE, NRK, Filbmagoahti AS, Zentropa

Mixed (State media, educational, private company)

Kalle Mannela, Johs. Kalvemo, Per Niia

1976 35 min

Docume ntary

49

Entertainmen ts7 ApS, Sogsakk, Nordland College of Art and Film, Film Form AB and, the movement from the past Anders Forsdahl's Curve NO Ellen-Astri Lundby, University of Tromsø Animated Ants Appearanc FI e and Disappear ance Art From Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us Sogsakk NO/FI NRK/Sámi State media Jaana 2002 30 min Docume Educational Susanna Rauno 2013 20 min Short FI Sogsakk Educational Jouni West 2010 3 min Short Mixed (individual, educational) Ellen-Astri Lundby 2011 15 min Docume ntary NO Daban Dan Unknown Gjert Rognli, Asbjörn Forsöget 2006 9 min Short

50

the Heart

Radio

Niittyvuopio, John Erling Utsi

ntary

Art in the Forestland Bahcan guohtoeat namat Baptizing

SE

Hans-Olov Utsi AB

Private Company State Media

Ann-Christine Haupt Thoralf Balto

2007 28 min

Docume ntary

NO

NRK/Sámi Radio

2004 30 min

Docume ntary

NO

NRK/Sámi

State Media

Eilif Aslaksen

2004 5 min

Docume ntary

(Sápm Radio i) Barents Fashion Week Bazo NO Filmpool Nord, Filbmagoahti AS, Zentropa Entertainmen ts7 ApS, Nordland College of Art and Film, Film Form Mixed (Private Company, Educational ) Lars Göran Pettersson 2003 1 hr 32 min NO Kautokeino Film AS Private Company Nils Gaup 2008 55 min

Docume ntary

Feature

51

AB BBB FI Unknown Ima AikioArianaick Before She Came, After He Left Before She Came, After He Left Behind the NO Silverwidt hs Between Two Realities Beyond Day and Night FI/NO Nordfilm Oy, /SE PAS Film AB, Yleisradio Oy, SVT, SVT 2 Luleå, Mixed (State media, private company) Paul-Anders Simma 1988 49 min Children' s Film FI Sogsakk Educational Erika Satta 2007 6 min Docume ntary Unknown Gjert Rognli 2005 4 min Short NO Nordland College of Art and Film Educational Marja Bål Nango 2012 22 min Short NO Nordland College of Art and Film Educational Marja Bål Nango 2011 25 min Docume ntary 2013 3 min Short

52

Nordnorsk filmsenter, Statens filmcentral, Giron-filmi Oy, Suomen elokuvasäätiö SES, SFI Svenska Filminstitutet Bloodland CA Elle-Maija Tailfeathers Brothers in Kiruna Building a Turf Hut in the Traditiona l Way ButtNiillas Canned Dreams FI NO Per-Josef Idivuoma Oktober Oy Private Company Individual Per-Josef Idivuoma Katja Gauriloff 2012 78 min Docume ntary 2009 2 min Short NO RiddoDuottar Museat Non-profit Solveig Joks 2010 10 min Short SE SVT Sápmi State media Elle-Maija Tailfeathers Per Niia 2004 28 min Short 2011 4 min Short

53

Carried By the Stream Citizens Without Rights Citroen Trip Cockoo

FI

Ima Filbma-

Private

Ima AikioArianaick

2013 3 min

Short

ja sátneduodji Company

FI

Yleisradio FST Asiaohjelmat

State media

Agot Jung

1971 50 min

Docume ntary

NO

NRK/Sámi Radio

State media

Johs. Kalvemo

2001 30 min

Short

NO

Linda Overli Nilsen

Individual

Ken Are Bongo

2014 6 min

Short

Copy Pupils

NO

NRK/Sámi Radio

State media

Jan Henrik Heatta, Maret Elin Kemi

2008 20 min

TV Producti on

Countless Strokes on the Teno River Crafted By the Past

NO

NRK/Sámi

State media

Thoralf Balto

2005 28 min

Docume ntary

(Sápm Radio i)

FI

Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us SAKK

Educational

Vilma Rautakangas

2011 18 min

Docume ntary

Cujaju

NO

Sonar Film/Britt

Mixed (individual,

Gustav Kvaal

2010 3 min

Short

54

Kramvig

private company)

Dancing Virgin Darned Lapp Dead Soon After Birth Debt Denied Education in the Lule Sámi Language Det nya vädrets offer Different Kind of Reindeer Herder

NO

Siivet AS

Private company

Anstein Mikkelsen Per-Josef Idivuoma Anne Merete Gaup

2010 14 min

Short

SE

IdiStudios

Private company

2010 3 min

Short

NO

Kautokeino Film AS

Private company

2011 7 min

Short

FI NO

Sogsakk Nuoraj TV

Educational Mixed

Henri Portti Maria Mikkelsen

2011 2 min 2010 4 min

Short Short

SE

SVT Sápmi

Private company

Mariela Idivuoma

2008 28 min

TV Producti on

FI

Sogsakk

Educational

Janne Kyrö

2010 2 min

Short

55

Distance Dog's Life

FI FI/FR

Sogsakk Telegoahti O/S, PAS Film AB, AB Saamifilm Oy

Educational Private Company

Pia Mikkilä Paul-Anders Simma, Erling Söderström

2010 1 min 1996 24 min 59 sec

Short Short

Down and Out

FI

Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us SAKK

Educational

Virva Guttorm

2005 17 min

Docume ntary

Duoggidonto gavdnosat Duottareai su - A Trip to the Fell Country Eallima ravddas Earth of Rage

FI

Sogsakk

Educational

Onneli Halonen

2011 1 min 20 sec

Short

FI

Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us SAKK

Educational

Oula Järvensivu

2006 1 min

Children' s Film

NO

NRK/Sámi Radio

State Media

Suvi West

2006 30 min

Docume ntary

FI/NO Telegoahti O/S, PAS Film AB, AB

Private Company

Paul-Anders Simma

1994 28 min 53 sec

Docume ntary

56

Saamifilm Oy, Motlys Film og-TV produksjon, A/S Ella the Fishergirl Faces SE NO Polarfilm ja TV Liselotte Wajstedt Fear of the NO Boundless Finland Entered Sápmi FinnishSá miFinnish FI Ima Filbmaja sátneduodji, Inarin Elokuvateolli suus Fishing FI Sogsakk Educational Henri Portti 2011 1 min 20 sec Fishing FI Saamelaisalu Educational Maria Kosonen 2013 13 min Short Short Mixed (private company and nonprofit) Ima AikioArianaick 2013 28 min Docume ntary FI NRK/Sámi Radio Ima FilbmaPrivate Anja Ahola 2010 54 min State Media Johs. Kalvemo Individual Liselotte Wajstedt 2008 3 min 26 sec 2002 28 min Docume ntary Docume ntary Unknown Stine Sand Eira 2007 29 min Docume ntary Short

ja sátneduodji Company

57

een koulutuskesk us Sogsakk Fishing With Hooks Fishing With Nets in Winter Following in the Footsteps of a Famous Reindeer Herder Forest Gnome Forgivene ss (Andagass ii) NO Filmpool Nord, Film Ateljen, Kautokein Film AS, Private Companies Nils Gaup, Kine Boman FI Sogsakk Educational Janne Kyrö 2011 1 min 30 sec 2008 4 min Short Short FI FI FI Inari Sámi Language Society Inari Sámi Language Society Sogsakk Educational Anne Kirste Aikio 2004 2 min 40 sec Short Non-profit Anneli Lappalainen 2010 7 min Short Non-profit Anneli Lappalainen 2010 5 min Short

58

Hans-Olov Utsi AB Fox Från landet till Country FI SE Sogsakk Filmpool Nord, SVT, Hans-Olof Utsi AB From an Eye to an Eye From Home to Home From Reindeer Skin Into a Boot From Sápmi to Alaska Ganda ja beana FI Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk Educational Tero Titoff 2004 Children' s Film NO NRK/Sámi Radio State Media Johs. Kalvemo 1993 45 min Docume ntary FI Sogsakk Educational Ima AikioArianaick 2010 13 min 10 sec Docume ntary NO The Nordic Sámi Institute Educational Beate Mortensen Nesheim 2007 18 min Short SE Sámi allaskuvla Educational Mixed (private company, state media) Educational Per-Josef Idivuoma 2007 32 min Short Sunna Kitti Hans-Olov Utsi 2010 1 min 2006 30 min Short Short

59

us SAKK Garanas ja skuolfi Getting a New Driver's License Give Us Our Skeletons! Goavddes gurra Gold in a Trash Can Good Enough for Karasjohk a? Granny Stumbles FI Yle Sámi Radio, Sogsakk Mixed (State Media, Educational Marianne Aikio 2008 3 min Docume ntary FI Sogsakk Educational Irene Länsman 2010 4 min Short FI NO Ovttas Project Sogsakk Educational Heli Ahola 2009 13 min Short Non-profit Silja Somby 2006 10 min Short FI Safi Oy Private Company Paul-Anders Simma 1999 52 min Docume ntary NO NRK State Media Ronald Pulk FI Sogsakk Educational Tamara Navgo 2011 4 min 30 sec 2008 29 min TV Producti on Short

60

) Great Grandmot hers Guoros Sorbmi Hand in Hand Hare FI FI NO Sámi Kompania AB Tuupa Records FI/NO Sámi allaskuvla Yleisradio/T V 2, Yle Sámi Radio, Sogsakk Heads Down Hello There Jambo! How's My Reindeer Doing? Helping the World NO Filmpool Nord, NRK, Filbmagoahti Mixed (private companies, John Erling Utsi, Liv-Inger Somby 2004 30 min Docume ntary FI Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us SAKK Educational FI Unknown Ima AikioArianaick Ann-Christine Haupt 2004 8 min Short 2013 2 min Short State Media Daniel Gelencser 2008 1 min Short Music Label Educational Jussi Isokoski, Aape Lehtinen Aura Nordberg 2008 8 min Short 2010 4 min Short Private Company John Erling Utsi 2012 58 min Feature

61

AS, Zentropa Entertainmen ts 7 ApS, Nordland College of Art and Film, Film Form AB Herdswom SE an Filmpool Nord, Film Ateljen Heritage Hi there, little kid Historical Journey By Horse NO Filmpool Nord, NRK/Sámi Radio, NRK, Filbmagoahti AS, Zentropa Entertainmen ts7 ApS, Sogsakk, FI NO Sogsakk

state media)

Private company

Kine Boman

2008 58 min

Short

Educational Unknown

Kirsti Länsman Ken Are Bongo

2007 5 min 2005 5 min

Short Short

Mixed (Private company, state media, educational)

Johs. Kalvemo

2003 30 min

TV Producti on

62

Nordland College of Art and Film, Film Form AB Hodet Over Vannet NO Filmkamerate Private ne AS, Svensk Filmindustri House of Winds How the Lavvo is also a Goahti NO Sámi Allaskuvla, ISF AS, Traditional Knowledge Project NO JabFilm Private company Mixed (private company, educational, nongovernment organization , unknown) How to Dance With Bears FI Saami-Filmi Oy Private company Paul-Anders Simma 2008 48 min Docume ntary Magnar Mikkelsen Anne Merete A. Gaup 2009 11 min 2009 58 min Docume ntary Short company Nils Gaup 1993 1 h 40 min Docume ntary

63

I Feel Nature Breathing I Like the Green Colour I Will Miss You

NO

NRK/Sámi Radio

State Media

Johs. Kalvemo

2002 28 min

Docume ntary

NO/S ápmi

Ninne Film AS

Private Company

Nils John Porsanger, Eilif Aslaksen

2004 30 min

Docume ntary

FI

Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us Sogsakk

Sunna Kitti

2012 4 min

Short

Inari Sámi Endangere d But Not Dying Internet Addict Joiking Lawyer Jokers on the Road

FI

Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us SAKK

Educational

Ima AikioArianaick

2004 7 min

Short

FI

Sogsakk

Educational

Matti Kukkola

2010 1 min

Short

NO

NRK

State media

Stein-Åge Isaksen

2002 29 min

Docume ntary

NO

NRK

State media

Nils John Porsanger

2003 30 min

TV Producti on

Jokers on

NO

NRK

State media

Nils John

2003 39 min

Short

64

the Road Jon vis-avis the winds SE/F R Sámi Kompania AB, Arwestud Films Karine and the Lost Rhyme Kiruna Space Road Kiurrels FI Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us SAKK, Samediggi Knute Are Explores Sámi Words Koltloop SE Liselotte Individual NO Nuoraj TV Mixed (educational , unknown) SE LittleBig Productions Private company NO Siivet AS Private company Private companies

Porsanger Corto Fajal 2010 59 min Docume ntary

Anstein Mikkelsen

2007 22 min

Short

Liselotte Wajstedt

2013 52 min

Feature

Pauliina Fedoroff

2007 3 min

Short

Maria Mikkelsen

2010 2 min

Short

Liselotte Wajstedt

2005 3 min

Docume

65

Wajstedt Last Yoik in Saami Forests? FI Osuuskunta Marjarinteen Metsäpuutarh a Leammero ggi Legacy of NO/S Motlys Film og TV Produksjon A/S, Epidem Oy Lesbian in Kautokein o Let's Dance FI/SE Nordfilm Oy, Telegoahti O/S, PAS Film AB Leu'dd Light in the Dark Little FI Samediggi Non-profit Suvi West 2008 3 min 30 FI FI Sogsakk Sogsakk Educational Educational Eeva Nykänen Aura Nordberg 2008 3 min 2006 3 min Private companies Paul-Anders Simma, Kalle Mannela 1991 18 min NO Cinema Oslo Private Company Nils John Porsanger 2001 25 min Private companies Paul-Anders Simma 1994 1 h 18 min Sogsakk Educational Kirsti Länsman 2008 3 min Non-profit Hannu Hyvönen 2006 58 min

ntary Short

Short

Docume ntary

the Tundra E/FI

Docume ntary

Short

Short Short

Short

66

Sister Longing for Silence Looking Forward FI Sogsakk Educational NO Unknown Niels Ovlla Dunfjell Sinituuli Kalttopää, Emma Eira, Mira Kärki Love is Lost FI Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us Sogsakk Made in Sápmi FI Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us Sogsakk Making Delicacies FI Inari Sámi Language Society Man was Born in the Sea Meahcce vulle SVT Sápmi State Media FI Sogsakk Educational Sunna Kitti Non-profit Anneli Lappalainen Educational Jarkko Remahl Educational Marjo Ulkuniemi

sec 2011 4 min Short

2010 1 min

Short

2013 12 min

Short

2013 21 min

Short

2010 13 min

Short

2008 1 min

Short

2002 30 min

TV Producti on

67

Meeting Min guovlu Miniature Variety Show

FI NO

Sogsakk

Educational

Marjo Ulkuniemi Egil Pedersen

2011 2 min 2013 4 min

Short Short

Egil Pedersen Individual

FI

Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us Sogsakk

Educational

Susanna Rauno

2012 18 min

Short

Mirror Misery Harbour Mon, Mollett ja Don Mosquito Shelter

FI NO

Sogsakk Motlys A/S

Educational Private company

Mikkal Morottaja Nils Gaup

2007 4 min 1999 1 h 40 min

Short Docume ntary Short

SE

IdiStudios

Educational

Per-Josef Idivuoma

2011 5 min

FI/NO SVT, YLE, /SE NRK

State media

Iisko Sara, Kalle Mannela, Frode Grönmo

1987 25 min

Docume ntary

Mother's Words Mountain Mrs and Mrs Sarri

NO

Siivet AS

Private company

Anstein Mikkelsen Tor Lundberg Lisbeth Blind

2009 28 min

Docume ntary

SE SE

Tor Lundberg Individual Sámi Kompania AB Private company

2012 4 min 2006 28 min

Short Short

Muhto

FI

Saamelaisalu

Educational

Suvi West

2004 7 min

Short

68

stuoramus dain lea rahkesvuot a Mummon kuumat jalat My Anar My Car and the Song of a Girl My Deer Ones NO FI NO FI

een koulutuskesk us SAKK

Sogsakk

Educational

Sunna Kitti

2011 4 min

Short

Sogsakk

Educational Unknown

Irene Länsman Ken Are Bongo

2010 2 min 2009 3 min

Short Short

Movttegis Máhtte Media

Individual

Mattias Sikku Valio

2012 40 min

Feature

My Family Portrait My Grandmot her and I

NO

Pandora Film

Private company

Yvonne Thommassen

2013 59 min

Feature

SE

Luleå University of Technology, Department of Med

Educational

Ann-Christine Haupt

2006 13 min

Docume ntary

69

My Hearts Voice

SE

Marit Kuhmunen Sogsakk

Individual

Marit Kuhmunen

2009 14 min

Short

My Hobby FI

Educational

Eero Mattus

2008 1 min 30 sec

Short

My Home is In My Heart Neeta Inari Niiles Nils Nilsson Skum Non Profit

NO/FI NRK/Sámi Radio

State media

Liv-Inger Somby

2001 58 min

Docume ntary

SE

IdiStudios

Private company

Per-Josef Idivuoma Jouni West John Erling Utsi, Lisbeth Blind

2013 6 min

Short

FI SE

Sogsakk Sámi Kompania AB

Educational Private company

2008 1 min 2002 30 min

Short Docume ntary

FI

Periferia Productions Oy

Private company

Pauliina Fedoroff

2008 1 hr 26 min

Docume ntary

Non-Sámi Women Ofelas

FI

Sogsakk

Educational

Kauko Mustonen

2009 10 min

Short

FI

Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us SAKK

Educational

Ritva TorikkaGelencser, Petra Magga

2008 3 min

Children' s Film

Olbmo

FI

Yleisradio/T

State media

Esko Faven

1996 50 min

Docume

70

Dolggit On the Wave of Life One Shot Closer Passing On the Language Path of Life FI FI SE FI

V2 Sogsakk Educational Kirsti Länsman 2009 8 min

ntary Short

Kalix Folkhögskola Anarâskielâ servi ry

Educational

Lars Svonni, Elle Porsanger

2008 15 min

Docume ntary

Non-profit

Ima AikioArianaick, Anneli Lappalainen

2013 25 min

Docume ntary

Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us SAKK

Educational

Erkki Feodoroff, Aki Harju

2012

Short

Pathfinder

NO

Filmkamerate Private ne AS company Educational

Nils Gaup

1987 1 h 28 min

Feature

Pauli

FI

Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us Sogsakk

Henri Portti

2012 12 min

Docume ntary

Pei'vv Past FI

Tampereen ammattikorke akoulu TAMK/Taide

Educational

Katja Gauriloff

2004 14 min

Short

71

ja viestin Pesku Peter Gets Even FI NO Sogsakk ISF AS Educational Nongovernment Daniel Gelencser Sven Thomas Holm, Anja Marja 2008 5 min 2009 7 min Short Short

organization Keskitalo, Johan (mixed funding) Eivind Bals, Ole Marius Holm, Inga Birgitte Haetta, Maret Michelle, Mienna Eira, Annele Gaup Pictures of My Life Pilvi Aloittaa yliopistoss a Playing With Fire NO Nordland College of Art and Film Poazovazz i FI Suomen Televisio Unknown Antero Ruuhonen 1963 30 min Docume ntary Educational Anne Merete Gaup 2012 16 min Short FI Samediggi Educational SE SVT Sápmi State media Bjarne StoreJakobsen Suvi West 2008 1 min 40 sec 2002 30 min Docume ntary Short

72

Portraits from Varangerfj ord Quite an Ugly Frog Radja

NO

Egil Pedersen Individual

Egil Pedersen

2013 13 min

Docume ntary

FI

Sogsakk

Educational

Jouni West, Pia Mikkilä

2010 4 min

Short

FI/SL

Academy Of Arts

Educational

Lukas Palatinus

2011 20 min

Docume ntary

Rahkistan, in mun ge Reborn Reindeer Princess Respect Sámi Culture!

NO

Unknown

Geir Tore Holm

2005 5 min

Short

FI NO

Sogsakk Ninne Film AS

Educational Private company

Suvi Kivelä Nils John Porsanger Nils Anders Inga

2010 10 min 2007 28 min

Short Docume ntary

SE

2008 10 min

Short

Retaliation SE for a Greater Good Ride Free FI

IdiStudios

Private company

Per-Josef Idivuoma

2012 9 min

Short

Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk

Educational

Kevin Francett

2013 15 min

Short

73

us Sogsakk Ritva and Xia FI Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us SAKK Rock Reindeer Rockabilly SE Liselotte Wajstedt Rome, Here I Come! Sacred Stone Safari Sámi Belly Dancer Sámi Daughter Yoik Sámi Drum FI Sogsakk Educational Sampo Issakainen 2010 1 min 58 sec Short SE LittleBig Productions Individual Liselotte Wajstedt 2007 58 min Short FI NO SE Migma Film AB Sogsakk NRK Private company Educational State media Jarkko Remahl Niels Ovlla Dunfjell 2011 1 min 2013 4 min Short Short Åsa Simma 1996 24 min Short FI Sogsakk Educational Sirpa Taivainen 2007 6 min Short Individual Liselotte Wajstedt 2006 9 min Short FI Sogsakk Educational Jarno Kiimala 2010 2 min Short Educational Ritva Torikka 2002 15 min Docume ntary

74

Sámi manat helssegis

FI

Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us SAKK

Educational

Katja Gauriloff

2006 15 min

Docume ntary

Sámi moment Sámi vision, a lost vision Sámi Winter Clothing Sammeli's Law

NO

Kautokeino Film AS

Private company Individual

Ken Are Bongo

2011 6 min

Short

FI

Aslak Paltto

Aslak Paltto

2009 27 min

Docume ntary

FI

Sámi Siida Ry

Non-profit

Ima AikioArianaick

2006 13 min

Short

FI

Yleisradio Oy

State media

Juhani Nousuniemi, Aila Rantala

1976 42 min

Docume ntary

Sapmelas

FI

Giron-filmi Oy, Liisa Holmberg

Mixed (private company, individual)

Markku Lehmuskallio, Anastasia Lapsui

2006 82 min

Docume ntary

Sauna School for the Childish

FI SE

Sogsakk SVT/SVT Sápmi

Educational State media

Jarno Kiimala Maj-Lis Skaltje

2010 2 min 2003 30 min

Short TV Producti on

75

Savagas Sincere Intentions FI Tampereen ammattikorke akoulu TAMK/Taide ja viestin Sister FI Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us SAKK Sister Eija: Caring For People Skierri Land of the Dwarf Birches Smierru NO The Nordic Sámi Institute Snow Theatre So It SE FI Yle Sámi Radio Eva Nutti Individual State media Educational Beate Mortensen Nesheim Anneli Lappalainen Eva Nutti 2005 5 min 2008 3 min 2005 32 min Docume ntary Children' s Film Short FI/SE Giron-filmi Oy Private company Markku Lehmuskallio 1982 1 h 58 min Feature FI Ima Filbma Private Suvi West 2009 29 min Short Educational Ritva TorikkaGelencser 2005 14 min Short Educational Katja Gauriloff 2004 26 min Short

ja satneduodji company

76

Should Be Somby Soria Moria FI NO Sogsakk Siivet AS Educational Private company Erkka Haavisto Anstein Mikkelsen, Monica Iren Hansen Spiritual Fashion Star Successful ly Lucky Day (For a Sámi) FI SE NO NRK/Sámi Radio Sogsakk Nordland College of Art and Film, IdiStudios Educational Mixed State media Dan Robert Larsen Kevin Francett Per-Josef 2011 3 min 2011 5 min 2008 30 min Docume ntary Short Short 2008 4 min 2010 28 min Short Docume ntary

(educational Idivuoma, Marja , private company) Bål Nango, Daniel Bianchini, Vidar Wikran

Suddenly Sámi Suhtadit

NO

Ellen-Astri Lundby

Individual

Ellen-Astri Lundby

2009 52 min

Docume ntary

NO

Crazevill Records

Music Label Private company

Egil Pedersen

2012 4 min

Short

Sverre's Roots Swift and Energetic

NO

Siivet AS

Anstein Mikkelsen Nils John Porsanger

2010 28 min

Docume ntary

NRK Sápmi

State media

2013 29 min

TV Producti on

77

Taming a Reindeer The Abstract Ones The Awakenin g

FI

Sogsakk

Educational

Anneli Lappalainen

2008 5 min

Short

NO

Nordland College of Art and Film

Educational

Marja Bål Nango

2011 5 min

Short

FI

Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us SAKK

Educational

Matti Kukkola

2011 6 min

Short

The Bear

FI

Cinemaker Oy

Private company State media

Paul-Anders Simma Nils John Porsanger, Eilif Aslaksen

1994 27 min

Short

The Bear Man

NO

NRK Sápmi

2013 39 min

Docume ntary

The Best Clothing The Big White One The Bird of Light

FI

Sogsakk

Educational

Anneli Lappalainen

2008 3 min

Short

FI

Sogsakk

Educational

Anneli Lappalainen

2007 4 min

Short

NO

NRK/Sámi Radio

Educational

Liv-Inger Somby, Hans-Olov Landsverk

2010 49 min

Docume ntary

The Blizzard

NO

IdiStudios

Private company

Per-Josef Idivuoma

2013 5 min

Short

78

Whistles The Brooch FI Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us SAKK The Brother Asks The Busy World of Aaslak The Career Woman From the Tundra The Chamber maid SE Den Norske Filmskolen, Åshild Ariane Ramborg The Christmas NO Nordland College of Educational Marja Bål Nango 2011 13 min 30 sec Children' s Film Mixed (individual, educational) Ann Holmgren 2008 23 min Short NO Polarfilm ja TV Unknown Stine Sand Eira 2005 25 min Docume ntary FI Sogsakk Educational Marianne Aikio 2009 7 min Short SE Bauta Film AB Private company Oskar Östergren 2014 4 min Short Educational Marjo Ulkuniemi 2012 21 min 31 sec Docume ntary

79

Troll The Christmas Troll The Colonial Gaze Sámi Artists Collective The Color of Pain The Colourful Life of Sámi Children The Forgotten Place The Frog and the Owl The Girl FI NO NO FI NO NO

Art and Film Nordland College of Art and Film Alexandra Wingate Individual Marja Bål Nango, Elle-Maija Tailfeathers 2012 15 min Short Educational Marja Bål Nango 2012 12 min Short

Sogsakk

Educational

Marianne Aikio

2010 4 min

Short

Unknown

Anne Merete Gaup

2012 4 min

Short

Gjert Rognli

Individual

Gjert Rognli

2009 10 min

Short

Sogsakk

Educational

Camilla Arjasmaa

2011 1 min

Short

Unknown

Ann Holmgren

2008 6 min

Short

80

Who Lost Her Dreams The Girls of Sevetti FI Liisa Individual Pauliina Fedoroff 2007 2 min Short

(Sápm Holmberg i)

The Hardest of These is Love The Kautokein o Rebellion The Kidnapped

FI

Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us SAKK

Educational

Suvi West

2005 25 min

Docume ntary

NO/S E/DK

Rubicon TV AS

Private company

Nils Gaup

2008 1 h 37 min

Docume ntary

NO

Ninne Film AS

Private company

Nils John Porsanger, Eilif Aslaksen

2002 30 min

Docume ntary

The Language of my Heart The Last Day of His

NO

University of Tromsø

Educational

Sirkka Seljevold

2007 36 min

Docume ntary

FI

Tampereen ammattikorke

Educational

Katja Gauriloff

2003 7 min

Short

81

Life

akoulu TAMK/Taide ja viestin

The Last Night of Jänispää Fell The Last Nomad? The Last Winter The Lost Land of the Sámi The Minister of State

FI

Sogsakk

Educational

Ulpu Siponen

2007 5 min

Short

NO

Siivet AS

Private company

Alf Johanssen

2013 50 min

Feature

NO

NRK/Sámi Radio

State media

Ole Rune Heatta

2005 53 min

Docume ntary

FI

Yle TV 1

Pauliina Fedoroff, Peter Launo

2003 30 min

Docume ntary

FI/NO Filmpool /SE Nord Yleisradio Oy Northen Lights AS Kinotuotanto Oy MovieMaker

Mixed (private company, state media)

Paul-Anders Simma

1997 1 h 25 min

Feature

82

s Sweden Ab Eurimages Nordisk film& TV-fond SVT Drama Svenska filminstitutet The Only Image of My Father The Peace of the Lemmings The Power FI of the River FI SE Film Ateljén, Hans-Olov Utsi AB Inari Sámi Language Society Saamelaisalu een koulutuskesk us SAKK The Right to the Land and the Water The Roots of the Sky FI Saamelaisalu een Educational Susanna Rauno 2012 6 min Short NO Sámi Art Festival Unknown Geir Tore Holm 2010 13 min Short Educational Ima AikioArianaick 2004 11 min Children' s Film Non-profit Suvi Kivelä 2011 4 min Short Private companies Kine Boman 2003 58 min Short

83

koulutuskesk us Sogsakk The Sámi Alphabet The Sámi Church Days in Inari The Sámi Headdress The Sámi: A Bait for Luring Tourists The Secret Helpers NO Govas film & mediaproduk sjon AS The Secrets of a Mountain The Son of the Sun FI Sogsakk Educational Pälvi Magga 2008 3 min Short NO NRK/Sámi Radio State media Thoralf Balto 2010 28 min Docume ntary Private company Harry Johansen 2012 59 min Feature NO NRK/Sámi Radio State media Johs. Kalvemo 1986 30 min Docume ntary FI Sogsakk Educational Eeva Nykänen 2008 4 min Short NO Unknown Elle Sofe Henriksen 2010 8 min Short FI Sogsakk Educational Heli Ahola 2008 2 min Short

84

The Sound FI of Calves in the Wind The Spiritual Kiss The Story of Arctic Love The Story of Johan Turi The Taking of Sámiland NO SE NO

Sogsakk

Educational

Anne Lantto

2003 8 min

Short

Unknown

Gjert Rognli

2009 5 min

Short

Firstfilm & Television AB SVT

Private company

Paul-Anders Simma

2000 30 min

Short

State media

Maj-Lis Skaltje

2005 45 min

Short

Davvi Media /Vara ng film

Private companies

Skule Eriksen, Kåre Tannvik

1983 30 min

Docume ntary

The Trout Gets Angry

FI

Ima Filbmaja sátneduo dji

Mixed (private company, nonprofit)

Ima AikioAirianack

2013 4 min

Short

85

Inarin Elokuvat eollisuus The Tundra Settlers The Wild Tundra NO Kautokei no Film AS, ISF AS Mixed (nongovernment, private company) Anne Merete A. Gaup Johan Ante Utsi Inga Marie Risvik Elle Marja P. Eira Yvonne Thommassen Håkon Isak Vars The Wind Whispers There Is Someone Behind the Tundra The Yoiking Hand NO Kautokei no Film AS, ISF Mixed (nongovernment, private Elle Sofe Henriksen 2011 5 min Short NO KABong o Producti ons Private Company Ken Are Bongo, Elle Sofe Henriksen 2006 10 min Short 2009 6 min Short NO Filbmag oahti AS Private company Anne Lajla Utsi 2004 52 min Docume ntary

86

AS Thoughts of the Moment Threats NO NKFS FI Sogsakk

company) Educational Janne Kyrö 2011 2 min 10 sec Short

Educational

Anne Merete Gaup

2013 11 min

Short

Three Reindeer and One Apartment Thrown on Land Time

NO

NRK, Bengt Roger Kåven

Mixed (state media, individual)

Wenche Marie Haetta

2009 29 min

TV Producti on

NO

NRK

State media

Harry Johansen

2009 45 min

Docume ntary

NO

Unknown

Niels Ovlla Dunfjell, Ante Mahtte Eira

2013 3 min

Short

Time Time Changes, Habits Not

FI FI

Sogsakk Samedig gi, Sogsakk, theonemi nutesJr.

Educational Mixed (nonprofit, educational)

Sunna Kitti Salla-Mari West

2010 1 min 2006 1 min

Short Short

To Herd Reindeer

NO

Kautokei no Film

Private company Ken Are Bongo, Elle-Marja P. Eira

2012 6 min 22 sec

Short

87

AS To the End of the Line Totem SE/C O Trackback -A Lappish Soul Trambo FI Marja Helander Treffan peaäccam ne'kk FI Yleisradi o Oy, TV2, SVT Tundra of Arvas SE LittleBig Producti ons Tunnel FI Sogsakk Educational Camilla Arjasmaa 2011 1 min 40 sec Twinkle FI Sogsakk Educational Vilma Rautakangas 2011 2 min Short Short Private company Liselotte Wajstedt 2009 3 min 30 sec Short State media Elli Rantala, Sukio Aikio 1983 20 min Individual Marja Helander 2013 4 min Docume ntary Docume ntary SE Filmpool Nord NO Norsk Telemus eum Unknown Bjarne StoreJakobsen Private company Anette Niia 2000 30 min 2002 27 min Docume ntary Docume ntary Non-profit Nils John Porsanger 2006 25 min Short

88

Unplugge d

NO

SynligProsjekt, Finnmar k

Unknown

Ken Are Bongo

2003 3 min

Short

Unto Dust Thou Shalt Return Urri-Uula

NO

NRK/Sá mi Radio

State media

Johs. Kalvemo

1999 45 min

Docume ntary

FI

Unilumi Oy

Private company Matti Morottaja, Aune Kuuva Music label Mika Luovi

2001 20 min

Short

Uuh!

FI

Tuupa Records

2007 3 min

Short

Vanishing Frontier Vehicles

RU/N O FI

Govat AS

Private company Nils Gaup, Magne Ove Varsi Unknown Ima AikioAirianack

1993 22 min 43 sec 2013 3 min

Docume ntary Short

Vermin

SE

Bauta

Private

Jonas Ernhill, Tage Hervén

2013 7 min

Docume ntary

Film AB, companies Lampray Voices of Sápmi Vuomasel kä Hill FI Sogsakk Educational FI/UK Unknown

Alistair Fowler

2013 58 min

Docume ntary

Pälvi Magga

2009 19 min 20 sec

Short

89

Wanna b cool

NO

ISF AS

Mixed (nongovernment,

Save Marie Kvitfjell

2009 6 min

Short

multiple funding Tonje Halonen sources) Maren Benedicte Storslett Anne Merete A. Gaup Karianne Aho Silja Katrine Hansen Warm Shoes FI Inari Sámi Languag e Society Wearing the Sámi Dress What Are Today's Young Like in the Future? What RU Sámi Mixed (private Sergei Gavrilov 2013 29 min Short NO Nuoraj TV Unknown Simon Piera Paulsen 2010 2 min Short FI Sámi Siida Ry Non-profit Ima Aikio Arianaick 2005 3 min 10 sec Short Non-profit Anneli Lappalainen 2010 15 min Short

90

Now?

Allaskuv la, Gavrilov Media

company, educational)

When We're Born We Don't Know Which Way We're Heading Where Are You, Grandpa? Where Do You Come From? Wide As Oceans Wind in my Heart

FI

Sogsakk

Educational

Kauko Mustonen

2007 5 min

Short

NO

NRK

State media

Suvi West

2007 29 min

Docume ntary

(Sápm Faktor i) FI Suomen Televisio Unknown Kirsti Lindberg 1963 4 min

Short

SE

Bautafil m AB

Private company Oskar Östergren

2013 4 min

Docume ntary

NO/S E

NRK/Sá mi

State media

Johs. Kalvemo, John Erling Utsi

2002 30 min

Docume ntary

91

Radio, SVT Sápmi Wind Power Winged FI NO Pomor Film Ima Filbmaja sátneduo dji Inarin Elokuvat eollisuus Woman is My God Yoik Yoik Fever SE NO NO NRK/Sá mi Radio Unknown Unknown Maj-Lis Skaltje Ellen-Astri Lundby 2013 84 min 2013 55 min State media Johs. Kalvemo 2011 30 min Docume ntary Feature Feature Mixed (private company, nonprofit) Ima Aikio Arianaick 2012 28 min Docume ntary Private company Stein Bjorn 2012 52 min Feature

92

Films Outside of the Sámi Film Database157 Film Country Producer Type of Producer 8 Arstider
158

Filmmaker

Year

Runti me

Genre

SE

Unknown

Oskar Östergren

2014 38 min

Short

A Bloody Joik159 A Soul of a City160

SE

Unknown

Jorun Collin

2006 28 Min

SE

Unknown

Liselotte Wajstedt

2012 5 min 50

Short

Aftenland NO et161 Ahkku162 FI

NRK

State media

Erik Poppe

1994 14 min

Short

Sami education institute

Educational

Xia Torikka

2016 27 min

Docum entary

Ahpi163

SE

Unknown

Oskar Östergren

2013 4 min

Music Video

157

In some cases, I was unsure about the origins of specific films, and whether they could be considered examples of Sámi filmmaking. Any films that appeared ambiguous have been omitted from this section. In addition, some works shown in mixed media exhibitions were simply listed by title, without clarification as to which medium the artist used; in the absence of additional information, these, too, have been omitted. 158 "Dellie Maa Program", Dellie Maa Festival, 2014, digital PDF file courtesy of Oskar Östergren. 159 "Indigenous Peoples' Film Festival, Siida, Inari Jan 24th-28th, 2008", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2008/ohjelma_en/ohjelma_perjantai.htm. 160 "CV", Liselotte Wajstedt, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.liselottewajstedt.com/bio. 161 "Skábmagovat 2004-05", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2005/800en.html. 162 "Áhkku", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=7992. 163 "Skábmagovat 2014", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen.

93

Aigin164

Jukka Vidgren, Mutant Koala Pictures

Mixed (individual, private company)

Jouni West

2014 10 min

Short

Aile Ja Ahkku165 Amoc Vuosmus
166

NO

Julev Film

Private company

Silja Somby

2015 12 min

Short

FI

Unknown

Ima Aikio

2015 30 min

Docum entary

Ara167

NZ

Unknown

Kath AkuhataBrown, Sara Margrethe Oskal , Echota Kilsnight

2016 8 min

Assimilat ion Blues168 Att dela allt169

FI

Tuupa Records

Music Label

Eetu Nieminen

2014 3 min

Music Video

SE

Hannasofia

Private company

Amanda Kernell

2009

Short

164

"Short Films Funded by the International Sámi Film Centre", International Sámi Film Institute, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.isfi.no/eng/films/short. 165 "7 Sámi Films", International Sámi Film Institute, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.isfi.no/eng/films/7Sámistories. 166 "Skábmagovat 2016: Kaamoksen Kuvia/Reflections of the Endless Night", Inari: Skábmagovat Film Festival, 2016. 167 "Ara", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8647 168 "Skábmagovat 2015", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen.

94

Atte munnje sáni saji170 Aurora Borealis
171

NO

Unknown

Sara Margrethe Oskal

2016

Music Video

Unknown

Martti Rikonen

Aurora Mirror172

FI

Sami education institute

Educational

Tomi Rantonen

2016 3 min

Short

Axis 49 Coryphee
173

SE

Unknown

Ann Holmgren

2016 6 min

Short

BBB174

FI

Unknown

Ima AikioArianaick

2013 3 min

Short

Bihttos175

Violator

Private

Elle-Maija

2014 14

Docum

169

"Amanda Kernell", Swedish Film Institute Database, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.sfi.se/en-GB/Swedishfilmdatabase/Item/?type=PERSON&itemid=325817&iv=MOVIE&ref=%2ftemplates%2fSwedishFilmSearchResult.asp x%3fid%3d1225%26epslanguage%3denGB%26searchword%3damanda+kernell%26type%3dPerson%26match%3dBegin%26page%3d1%26prom%3dFalse. 170 "Atte munje sáni saji", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=10351. 171 "Skábmagovat 2003", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 20 2017, http://www.skabmagovat.fi/skabma_vanhat/skabma_2003/800en.html. 172 "Aurora Mirror", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8344. 173 "Axis 49 Coryphee", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8530. 174 "Skábmagovat 2014", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen. 175 "Documentary Films Funded by the International Sámi Film Centre", International Sámi Film Institute, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.isfi.no/eng/films/documentary.

95

Films Bivdoagi
176

company Unknown

Tailfeathers Suohpanterror

min 2015 7 min

entary Music Video

FI/NO

Bloodlan d177 Boaimma sbardni178

CA

Elle-Maija Tailfeathers ISFI, Sámi University College

Individual

Elle-Maija Tailfeathers

2011 4 min

Experi mental

Mixed (nongovermnent, educational) Unknown Aslak Paltto

2013 13 min

Tv product ion

Boazodoa FI lli Calmmiin guin179 Boazolih kku180 Boazzova SE zzit181 SVT/PerJosef Idivuoma NO NRK

2015 20 min

Docum entary

State media

Gunnar Hammer

2008 40 min

Unknown

August Sandström

2016 30 min

Docum entary

176

"Skábmagovat 2016: Kaamoksen Kuvia/Reflections of the Endless Night", Inari: Skábmagovat Film Festival, 2016. 177 "Film and Video Works", Elle-Maija Tailfeathers.com, accessed May 9 2017, http://elle-maijatailfeathers.com/?page_id=311. 178 "Short Films Funded by the International Sámi Film Centre", International Sámi Film Institute, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.isfi.no/eng/films/short. 179 "Skábmagovat 2016: Kaamoksen Kuvia/Reflections of the Endless Night", Inari: Skábmagovat Film Festival, 2016. 180 "Skábmagovat 2008", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2008/ohjelma_en/ohjelmainfo_su.htm#. 181 "Boazzovazzit", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8530.

96

Bonki182

Odd Levi Paulsen, Julev Film

Unknown

Silja Somby

2014 19 min

Short

Burn the Drums183

SE

Unknown

Liselotte Wajstedt

2016 2 min 4 secon ds

Short

Calbmera vkaleame s184 Ceahppi
185

NO

Unknown

Jan Helmer Olson

2016 6 min

Short

FI

Sámi educational centre

Educational

Docum entary

Checkma te186

FI

Sami education institute

Educational

Lada Suomenrinne

2016 4 min

Short

Christma s Magic187

NO

Medieprodu ksjon Høgskolen i

Educational

Inge Renate Buljo

2013 6 min

Short

182

"Short Films Funded by the International Sámi Film Centre", International Sámi Film Institute, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.isfi.no/eng/films/short. 183 "CV", Liselotte Wajstedt, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.liselottewajstedt.com/bio/ 184 "Calbmeravkaleams", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8528. 185 "Skábmagovat 2002", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2002/800en.html. 186 "Checkmate", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8147.

97

Finnmark Colors of Life188 Davas189 Deadline Torp190 Det kommer aldrig att gå over191 SE SE NO NRK Drama Direktörn och Fabrikörn Handelsbola g Detention CA
192

NO

Unknown

Harry Johansen

2014 40 min

Short

Unknown State media

Akkil Nils Gaup

2016 3 min

Short

2005 1 h 56 Feature min

Private company

Amanda Kernell

2011 18 min

Short

NFB

State media

Elle-Maija Tailfeathers

2017 39 sec Short

Dolastall at193 Du lahka194
187 188

FI

Unknown

Marja Helander

2016 6 min

Experi mental

Unknown

Ann Mari Andersen

"Skábmagovat 2014", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen. "Dellie Maa Program", Dellie Maa Festival, 2014, digital PDF file courtesy of Oskar Östergren. 189 "Davas", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8534. 190 "Deadline Torp", Salomonsson Agency, accessed June 22 2017, http://www.salomonssonagency.se/scripts/deadline-torp. 191 "Amanda Kernell", Swedish Film Institute Database, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.sfi.se/en-GB/Swedishfilmdatabase/Item/?type=PERSON&itemid=325817&iv=MOVIE&ref=%2ftemplates%2fSwedishFilmSearchResult.asp x%3fid%3d1225%26epslanguage%3denGB%26searchword%3damanda+kernell%26type%3dPerson%26match%3dBegin%26page%3d1%26prom%3dFalse. 192 "Film and Video Works", Elle-Maija Tailfeathers.com, accessed May 9 2017, http://elle-maijatailfeathers.com/?page_id=311. 193 "Dolastallat", ImagineNative, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.imaginenative.org/dollastallat.

98

Eahparas
195

NO

Unknown

Anne Merete Gaup

2011 7 min

Short

Edith and Aljosja196 Ellos Sápmi197 Elsa Laula Renberg
198

SE

Julev Film

Private company

Ann Holmgren

2015 8 min

Short

SE

Julev Film

Private company

Per-Josef Idivuoma Per Christian Olsen

2015 12 min 2017 28 min

Short

NO

NRK Sapmi State media

Docum entary

Fievrrut
199

FI

Unknown

Inger-Mari Aikio

2015 3 min

Music Video

Firekeepe NO rs200 From Kalahari NO

Unknown

Rosella Ragazzi

2007 57 min

Docum entary Docum entary

Unknown

2004 28 min

194

"Skábmagovat 2008 - Programme", Skábmagovat.fi, accessed June 20 2017, http://www.skabmagovat.fi/skabma_vanhat/skabma_2008/ohjelma_en/ohjelmainfo_su.htm#21. 195 "Skábmagovat 2016: Kaamoksen Kuvia/Reflections of the Endless Night", Inari: Skábmagovat Film Festival, 2016. 196 "7 Sámi Films", International Sámi Film Institute, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.isfi.no/eng/films/7Sámistories. 197 "7 Sámi Films", International Sámi Film Institute, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.isfi.no/eng/films/7Sámistories. 198 "Elsa Laula Renberg", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8440. 199 "Skábmagovat 2016: Kaamoksen Kuvia/Reflections of the Endless Night", Inari: Skábmagovat Film Festival, 2016. 200 "Skábmagovat 2008", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2008/ohjelma_en/ohjelmainfo_su.htm#.

99

to Sápmi201 From the Fell to the Ice Globe Theatre
202

NO

NRK

State media

Johs. Kalvemo

2003 30 min

Docum entary

Gavavuo hta203

RU

Unknown

Valentina Sovkina

2016 30 min

Short

Gichikiiw CA enging204 Giksasuv van Ealli205 Giron206 SE NO

Elle-Maija Tailfeathers Rein Film

Individual

Elle-Maija Tailfeathers

2016 53 sec Docum entary 2015 15 min Short

Private company

Egil Pedersen

Unknown

Liselotte Wajstedt

2011 3 min 56 sec

Short

Glassduk

NO

Eira Film

Private

Nils Gaup

2014 92

Feature

201

"Skábmagovat 2006", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2006/800en.html. 202 "Skábmagovat 2004", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 20 2017, http://www.skabmagovat.fi/skabma_vanhat/skabma_2004/800en.html. 203 "Gavavuohta", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=10435. 204 "Film and Video Works", Elle-Maija Tailfeathers.com, accessed May 9 2017, http://elle-maijatailfeathers.com/?page_id=311. 205 "7 Sámi Films", International Sámi Film Institute, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.isfi.no/eng/films/7Sámistories/. 206 "CV", Liselotte Wajstedt, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.liselottewajstedt.com/bio.

100

kene207 Goahti208 SE

AS

company Unknown Liselotte Wajstedt

min 2016 10 min 26 secon ds Docum entary

Great Grandmo thers209 Greater than ourselves
210

SE

Unknown

John Erling Utsi

58 min

Docum entary

NO

Unknown

Anita Lervoll

2003 35 min

Docum entary

Guolli211 Guovssah as oaidna du212 Guovza

FI Freedom From Fear

Unknown Private company

Jouni West Sara Margrethe Oskal

2016 4 min 2015 12 min

Short Short

FI

Unknown

Paul-Anders

1994

207

"Glassdukkene", Norwegian Film Institute, accessed June 22 2017, http://www.nfi.no/english/123037/glassdukkene. 208 "CV", Liselotte Wajstedt, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.liselottewajstedt.com/bio. 209 "Dellie Maa Program", Dellie Maa Festival, 2013, digital PDF file courtest of Oskar Östergren. 210 "Skábmagovat 2004-05", Skábmagovat Fim Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2005/800en.html. 211 "Guolli", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8438. 212 "7 Sámi Films", International Sámi Film Institute, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.isfi.no/eng/films/7Sámistories.

101

213

Simma FI Unknown Elmeri Harkonen 2015 15 min

Hate Slash Love214 Hear the Spirits Cry215

NO

Govas Film & Mediaprodu ksjon AS

Private company

Harry Johansen

2014 4 min

Music Video

Heijasta mattomin Askelin
216

FI

Unknown

Jonne Jarvinen

2015 7 min

Hej Da Halleluja h217 Hilbes Biiga218 NO Marja Bal Nango ja Marie

Unknown

Ann Holmgren

2015 72 min

Individuals

Marja Bål Nango

2015 18 min

Short

213

"Guovza", Internet Movie Database, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0373879/?ref_=fn_al_tt_1. 214 "Skábmagovat 2016: Kaamoksen Kuvia/Reflections of the Endless Night", Inari: Skábmagovat Film Festival, 2016. 215 "Skábmagovat 2015", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen. 216 "Skábmagovat 2016: Kaamoksen Kuvia/Reflections of the Endless Night", Inari: Skábmagovat Film Festival, 2016. 217 "Dellie Maa Program", Dellie Maa Festival, 2016, digital PDF file courtesy of Oskar Östergren. 218 "7 Sámi Films", International Sámi Film Institute, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.isfi.no/eng/films/7Sámistories.

102

Lagerkvist Hilda219 FI Sami education institute Hjerterått
220

Educational

Niki Rasmus

2016 7 min

Short

NO

NRK

State media

Nils Gaup

2013 8 x 25 TV min series Short

How Far Will You Go to Vote?221 Hur gor man for att rada ett folk222

CA

Elle-Maija Tailfeathers

Individual

Elle-Maija Tailfeathers

2015 1 min

SE

Världsålder AB in cooperation with Sveriges Television and Filmpool Nord

Mixed (private company, state media)

Maja Hagerman

2014 58 min

Docum entary

Hurry Up

CA

Elle-Maija

Individual

Elle-Maija

2015 10

Docum

219

"Hilda", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8322. 220 "Hjerterått", NRK, accessed June 22 2017, http://tv.nrksuper.no/serie/hjerteraatt. 221 "Film and Video Works", Elle-Maija Tailfeathers.com, accessed May 9 2017, http://elle-maijatailfeathers.com/?page_id=311. 222 "Dellie Maa Program", Dellie Maa Festival, 2014, digital PDF file courtesy of Oskar Östergren.

103

You Stupid Cripple223 I am in Lavvu224 I Have a Friend225 FI SE

Tailfeathers

Tailfeathers, Terreane Derrick

min

entary

Unknown

Liselotte Wajstedt

2011 4 min 56 sec

Short

Sámi educational centre

Educational

Ritva TorikaGelencser

2004 6 min

Docum entary

I Will Always Love You Kingen226 Icebreake r Iditsilba
227

SE

Bob Film Sweden AB

Private company

Amanda Kernell

2017

Short

NO

Unknown

Elle Marja Eira

2016 3 min

Music Video

Davas Film

Private company

Elle Marja Eira

2015 12 min

Short

Ima

FI

Unknown

Ima Aikio

2015

Music

223

"Film and Video Works", Elle-Maija Tailfeathers.com, accessed May 9 2017, http://elle-maijatailfeathers.com/?page_id=311. 224 "CV", Liselotte Wajstedt, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.liselottewajstedt.com/bio. 225 "7 Sámi Films", International Sámi Film Institute, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.isfi.no/eng/films/7Sámistories. 226 "Amanda Kernell", Swedish Film Institute Database, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.sfi.se/en-GB/Swedishfilmdatabase/Item/?type=PERSON&itemid=325817&iv=MOVIE&ref=%2ftemplates%2fSwedishFilmSearchResult.asp x%3fid%3d1225%26epslanguage%3denGB%26searchword%3damanda+kernell%26type%3dPerson%26match%3dBegin%26page%3d1%26prom%3dFalse. 227 "Short Films Funded by the International Sámi Film Centre", International Sámi Film Institute, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.isfi.no/eng/films/short.

104

Hutkosat - 12 Musihkka video228 In the Stream of Life229 Ivnnit ja eallin230 Harry Johansen, Govas Mixed (individual, private company) Jahki il leat jagi viellja231 Job Interview
232

Video

NO

Unknown

Anstein Mikkelsen

2003 50 min

Short

Harry Johansen

40 min

Docum entary

NO

Unknown

Mai-Lis Eira

2015 12 min

Short

FI

Unknown

2006 5 min

Joik233

SE

Unknown

Maj-Lis Skaltje

2014 85

Docum

228

"Skábmagovat 2016: Kaamoksen Kuvia/Reflections of the Endless Night", Inari: Skábmagovat Film Festival, 2016. 229 "Skábmagovat 2004", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2004/800en.html. 230 "Documentary Films Funded by the International Sámi Film Centre", International Sámi Film Institute, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.isfi.no/eng/films/documentary. 231 "Skábmagovat 2016: Kaamoksen Kuvia/Reflections of the Endless Night", Inari: Skábmagovat Film Festival, 2016. 232 "Skábmagovat 2006", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2006/800en.html. 233 "Dellie Maa Program", Dellie Maa Festival, 2015, digital PDF file courtesy of Oskar Östergren.

105

min Jorinda/C herry on Top234 Jorindas Resa235 Juoigangi ehta236 Just Do It237 NO Kautokeino Film Norsk Filminstitut et, Eva Faerevagg Juuret on238 FI Private company Mixed (individual, government organization) Mixed (individual, private company) Kaisa's Enchante Satu Maijava, Katja Gauriloff Suvi West, Anssi Kömi 2016 13 min Elle Sofe Henriksen Nils Gaup 1994 SE Unknown Liselotte Wajstedt 2014 16 min 2011 5 min SE Unknown Liselotte Wajstedt 2014 9 min

entary Short

Short

Short

Short

Short

Docum entary

234 235

"CV", Liselotte Wajstedt, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.liselottewajstedt.com/bio. "CV", Liselotte Wajstedt, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.liselottewajstedt.com/bio. 236 "Short Films Funded by the International Sámi Film Centre", International Sámi Film Institute, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.isfi.no/eng/films/short. 237 "Just Do It", filmrommet.no, accessed June 22 2017, https://www.filmrommet.no/film/details.aspx?filmid=44880. 238 "Juuret On", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8430.

106

d Forest239 KaissiU'lljanMä'rjjU'lljan ­ Heidi Gauriloff
240

Oktober Film FI Sami education institute Educational Aleksi Ahlakorpi 2016 10 min Docum entary

Kielen Päällä

FI

Sami education institute

Educational

Piia Kangas, Lada Suomenrinne

2016 5 min

Short

Kiruna Rymdväg en241

SE

Filmpool Nord, Sirel Peensaar och Sveriges Telivision AB, Eva Sandelin,

Mixed (private company, government organization, individual)

Liselotte Wajstedt

2013 52 min

Docum entary

239

"Documentary Films Funded by the International Sámi Film Centre", International Sámi Film Institute, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.isfi.no/eng/films/documentary. 240 "Kaissi-U'lljan-Mä'rjj-U'lljan ­ Heidi Gauriloff", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8335. 241 "CV", Liselotte Wajstedt, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.liselottewajstedt.com/bio.

107

LittleBig Productions , SFI Kiruna the Driftbloc k242 Leaving the Herd243 NO Mathis Ståle Mathisen, Rein Film Leivänm uruseni244 Lies245 FI Unknown Ville-Riiko Fofonoff Ludiin Nahkkui
246

SE

Unknown

Liselotte Wajstedt

2016 (ong oing

Experi mental

Mixed (individual, private company) Unknown

Egil Pedersen

2013 5 min

Short

FI

Oskari Sipola

2011 3 min

Short

2016 5 min

Music Video

NO

Unknown

Johan Sara Jr.

2014 3 min

Short

Luhtat's

FI

Sámi

Educational

Ritva Torika-

2004 10

Short

242 243

"CV", Liselotte Wajstedt, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.liselottewajstedt.com/bio. "Skábmagovat 2015", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen. 244 "Skábmagovat 2012", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2012/800en.html. 245 "Lies", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8644. 246 "Ludiin Nahkkui", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8057.

108

Lunch247

educational centre

Gelencser

min

Maan muisti248

FI

Giron Filmi Oy

Private company

Markku Lehmuskallio, Anastasia Lapsui

2009

Docum entary

Maccâm madduid ­ tánssájeij ee maainâs

FI

Sami education institute

Educational

Maria-Riitta Mällinen

2016 10 min

Docum entary

Maison249 SE Majja ja Sujujujja
250

Unknown NRK State media

Ann Holmgren Sverre Porsanger

2005 7 min 2004 90 min Feature

NO

Märät säppikkää t251

FI

Yleisradio TV 2

State media

Anne Kirste Aikio/Suvi West

2009

TV product ion

247

"Skábmagovat 2004-05", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2005/800en.html. 248 Skábmagovat 2010, Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2010/800en.html. 249 "Skábmagovat 2006", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2006/800en.html. 250 Skábmagovat 2004-05", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2005/800en.html. 251 "Skábmagovat 2010", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2010/800en.html.

109

Maverick s, Dr Esther Tailfeath ers, Blood Reserve
252

CA

Unknown

Elle-Maija Tailfeathers

2015 11 min

Docum entary

May of the Black H'mong
253

FI

Unknown

Mika Aleksandroff

2015 13 min

Docum entary

Melkevei en254

NO

NRK Sápmi State media

Frode Grønmo, Elle Márja Eira

2014 2 x 28 TV min Product ion

Merja255

FI

Unknown

Miikka Miinala

2015 14 min

Miel256

FI

Unknown

Xia Torikka

2015 21 min

252

"Film and Video Works", Elle-Maija Tailfeathers.com, accessed May 9 2017, http://elle-maijatailfeathers.com/?page_id=311. 253 "Skábmagovat 2016: Kaamoksen Kuvia/Reflections of the Endless Night", Inari: Skábmagovat Film Festival, 2016. 254 "Skábmagovat 2015", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen. 255 "Skábmagovat 2016: Kaamoksen Kuvia/Reflections of the Endless Night", Inari: Skábmagovat Film Festival, 2016. 256 "Skábmagovat 2016: Kaamoksen Kuvia/Reflections of the Endless Night", Inari: Skábmagovat Film Festival, 2016.

110

Min Mormor och jag257 Mino258

SE

Unknown

Ann-Christine Haupt

2006 13 min

Docum entary

NO

Unknown

Johan Sara Jr.

2014 7 min

Music Video

Moonflo wer259 My Girlfriend 's Grandma
260

NO

Viktorfilm

Private company

Viktor Enoksen

2014 4 min

Music Video

FI

Sami education institute

Educational

Aleksi Ahlakorpi

2016 8 min

Short

Nar Speilbild et Lyver261

NO

UiT ­ Norges arktiske universitet Fritt Ord

Educational

Niels Ovllá Dunfjell, Daniel Wetherell, Stian Sætermo

2013 22 min

Docum entary

Nils Joran262

NO

Unknown

4 min

Music Video

257

" Skábmagovat 2008", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 17 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2008/ohjelma_en/ohjelmainfo_su.htm#. 258 "Mino", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8672. 259 "Skábmagovat 2015", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen. 260 "My Girlfriend's Grandma", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8326. 261 "Skábmagovat 2015", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen. 262 "Skábmagovat 2014", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen.

111

Nini263

NO

NRK

State media

Nils Gaup

1998 5 x 55 TV min series

North Star264

NO/FR/ UK/IT

Warner Bros., AFCL Prods., M6 and Federal Films coproduction

Private company

Nils Gaup

1996 1 h 30 Feature min

Oktavuoh FI ta265

Sami education institute

Educational

Aleksi Ahlakorpi, Tomi Rantanen

2016 4 min

Short

Olga266

SE/NO/ FI/RU

Safi Oy

Private company

Paul-Anders Simma Ole Mahtte H. Gaup

2013 67 min

Docum entary

Our Songs267

NO

NRK Sápmi Mixed (state / World Indigenous Television media, nonprofit)

2014 3 x 29 TV min Product ion

263 264

Skábmagovat 2014", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen. Joe Leydon, "Review - North Star French-British-Norwegian Italian", Variety, November 4 1996, http://variety.com/1996/film/reviews/north-star-french-british-norwegian-italian-1200447837. 265 "Oktavuohta", Skábmagovat Film Festival, 266 Olga, Internet Movie Database, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2646256/?ref_=nm_flmg_dr_1. 267 "Skábmagovat 2015", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen.

112

Broadcaster s Network (WITBN) Paradiset
268

SE

Salmonfox AB

Private Company Unknown

Amanda Kernell

2014 20 min

Short

Porot Kuuluvat Tuulelle
269

FI

Paivi KapiainenHeiskanen

2015 39 min

Docum entary

Portraits of Varanger
270

NO

Unknown

Egil Pedersen

2013 13 min

Docum entary

Reindeer Dreaming
271

Unknown

Aanti Haase

2001 27 min

Reindeer Herding

NO

Siivet

Private Company

Anstein Mikkelsen, Alf

2004 25 min

Short

268

"Amanda Kernell", Swedish Film Institute Database, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.sfi.se/en-GB/Swedishfilmdatabase/Item/?type=PERSON&itemid=325817&iv=MOVIE&ref=%2ftemplates%2fSwedishFilmSearchResult.asp x%3fid%3d1225%26epslanguage%3denGB%26searchword%3damanda+kernell%26type%3dPerson%26match%3dBegin%26page%3d1%26prom%3dFalse. 269 "Skábmagovat 2016: Kaamoksen Kuvia/Reflections of the Endless Night", Inari: Skábmagovat Film Festival, 2016. 270 "Dellie Maa Program", Dellie Maa Festival, 2014, digital PDF file courtesy of Oskar Östergren. 271 "Skábmagovat 2002", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2002/800en.html.

113

or Into the World272 Reindeers SE
273

Johansen

Unknown

Liselotte Wajstedt

2008

Reisen till julestjern en274 Sää'nte'm es275

NO

Moskus Film

Private Company

Nils Gaup

2012 1 h 20 Feature min

FI

Unknown

Working group of Media Programme students/Erkki Feodoroff

2016 7 min

Music Video

Sahtan ja Mahtan
276

FI

Unknown

Tarmo Lehtosalo, Ailu Valle, Raquel Raqn

2012 4 min

Music Video

Sameblod SE
277

Nordisk

Private

Amanda Kernell

2017 1h 50 min

Feature

Filmprodukt Company

272

"Skábmagovat 2005", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://www.skabmagovat.fi/skabma_vanhat/skabma_2005/800en.html. 273 CV", Liselotte Wajstedt, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.liselottewajstedt.com/bio. 274 "The Journey to the Christmas Star", Norwegian Film Institute, accessed June 22 2017, http://www.nfi.no/english/search/film?key=98221. 275 "Sää'nte'mes", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8119. 276 "Skábmagovat 2016: Kaamoksen Kuvia/Reflections of the Endless Night", Inari: Skábmagovat Film Festival, 2016. 277 "Amanda Kernell", Swedish Film Institute Database, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.sfi.se/en-GB/Swedishfilm-

114

ion Sverige AB Sámi Boja278 NO Kautokeino Film/EYEF EED DOCS Sammakk FI o, joka oli aika ruma279 Sapmi Love280 Sápmi Sessions
281

Private Company

Elle Sofe Henriksen

2015 9 min

Short

Unknown

Jouni West, Pia Mikkila

2010 4 min

Short

SE

Unknown

Lisa Marie Kristensen

2016 28 min 2014 30 min

Short

SE

SVT

State media

TV Product ion

Semester systern282

SE

Direktörn och

Private company

Amanda Kernell

2008 13 min

Short

database/Item/?type=PERSON&itemid=325817&iv=MOVIE&ref=%2ftemplates%2fSwedishFilmSearchResult.asp x%3fid%3d1225%26epslanguage%3denGB%26searchword%3damanda+kernell%26type%3dPerson%26match%3dBegin%26page%3d1%26prom%3dFalse. 278 "7 Sámi Films", International Sámi Film Institute, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.isfi.no/eng/films/7Sámistories/. 279 "Skábmagovat 2016: Kaamoksen Kuvia/Reflections of the Endless Night", Inari: Skábmagovat Film Festival, 2016. 280 "Sápmi Love", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8681. 281 "Skábmagovat 2014", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen. 282 "Amanda Kernell", Swedish Film Institute Database, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.sfi.se/en-GB/Swedishfilmdatabase/Item/?type=PERSON&itemid=325817&iv=MOVIE&ref=%2ftemplates%2fSwedishFilmSearchResult.asp x%3fid%3d1225%26epslanguage%3denGB%26searchword%3damanda+kernell%26type%3dPerson%26match%3dBegin%26page%3d1%26prom%3dFalse.

115

Fabrikörn Handelsbola g, Dreamfield Group Shipwrec ked283 NO/SE/ USA Walt Disney Pictures, Filmkamera tene AS Shitty Shitty Bang Bang284 Small Fish Crying285 FI Ima filbmaja sátneduodji & Inarin elokuvateoll isuus Mixed (private company, non-profit) Ima AikioArianaick 2014 3 min Music Video NO Cecilia Sundkvist Individual Kjartan Nilsen 2014 4 min Short Private company Nils Gaup 1990 1 h 32 Feature min

283

Mark Caro, "Shipwrecked Springs Leaks But Doesn't Sink", Chicago Tribune, March 3 1991, accessed June 22 2017, http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1991-03-03/features/9101200116_1_haakon-haakonsen-director-nils-gauphakon. 284 "Skábmagovat 2015", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen. 285 "Skábmagovat 2015", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen.

116

Snolejoni nna286 Soajjalac cat287 Social Animals
288

FI

Unknown

Sofia Jannok

2015 4 min

Music Video

FI

Unknown

Ima AikioArianaick

2013 28 min 2013 16 min

Docum entary Docum entary

RU

Unknown

Ilya Zheltyakov

Son of the Sun289 Sound of the Sami Plains290 Sparruoa bban291 Spel292

SE

Unknown

Gunilla Bresky

2017 58 min

Docum entary Docum entary

NO

Unknown

Britt Jorunn Hundsnes

2015 58 min

FI

Unknown

Suvi West

2016 67 min

Docum entary Short

SE

Direktörn och

Private company

Amanda Kernell

2008 13 min

286

"Skábmagovat 2016: Kaamoksen Kuvia/Reflections of the Endless Night", Inari: Skábmagovat Film Festival, 2016 287 "Dellie Maa Program", Dellie Maa Film Festival, 2014, digital PDF file courtesy of Oskar Östergren. 288 "Skábmagovat 2014", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen. 289 "Son of the Sun", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=10523. 290 "Sound of the Sámi Plains", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8403. 291 "Skábmagovat 2016: Kaamoksen Kuvia/Reflections of the Endless Night", Inari: Skábmagovat Film Festival, 2016. 292 "Amanda Kernell", Swedish Film Institute Database, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.sfi.se/en-GB/Swedishfilmdatabase/Item/?type=PERSON&itemid=325817&iv=MOVIE&ref=%2ftemplates%2fSwedishFilmSearchResult.asp x%3fid%3d1225%26epslanguage%3denGB%26searchword%3damanda+kernell%26type%3dPerson%26match%3dBegin%26page%3d1%26prom%3dFalse.

117

Fabrikörn Handelsbola g Spin and Feast, Ferret293 FI Ima filbmaja sátneduodji & Inarin elokuvateoll isuus State of the Nations (250 Years Honour Your Words)294 Stoerre Vaerie295 Oskar Östergren, Bautafilm Mixed (individual, private Amanda Kernell 2015 15 min Short CA Elle-Maija Tailfeathers Individual Elle-Maija Tailfeathers 2013 6 min Docum entary Mixed (private company, non-profit) Ima AikioArianaick 2014 3 min Short

293 294

"Skábmagovat 2015", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen. "Film and Video Works", Elle-Maija Tailfeathers.com, accessed May 9 2017, http://elle-maijatailfeathers.com/?page_id=311 295 "7 Sámi Films", International Sámi Film Institute, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.isfi.no/eng/films/7Sámistories.

118

company) Tawhaow NZ hao296 Unknown Himiona Grace, Blackhorse Lowe, Sunna Nousuniemi The Borderlin es of Memory
297

2016 6 min

Short

FI

Unknown

Tiina Meling

2013 20 min

Docum entary

The Fire298 The Kautokei no Confront ation I and II299 The King Crab -

SE

Unknown

Liselotte Wajstedt

2017 9 min 50 sec

Short

NO

NRK

State Media

Arne O. Holm

2006 2 x 29 Docum min entary

FI

Unilumi Oy/Uhak

Private Company,

Helena Sahavirta

2003 30 min

Docum entary

296

"Tawhaowao", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8649. 297 "Skábmagovat 2014", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen. 298 "CV", Liselotte Wajstedt, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.liselottewajstedt.com/bio. 299 "Skábmagovat 2007", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2007/800en.html.

119

Threat or Treasure of the Barents Sea300 The Kings Reindeer Racing301 The Last King302 NO FI

iisi Koivisto unknown

Helsinki College Stadia

Educational

Sasha Silvala and Jouni Rantala

27 min

Paradox Rettigheter AS

Private Company

Nils Gaup

2016 99 min

Feature

The Light303 The Lost One304

NO

Unknown

Johan Sara Jr.

2016 5 min

Short

SE

Unknown

Liselotte Wajstedt

2014 6 min 30 secon ds

Short

The Right CA

Elle-Maija

Individual

Elle-Maija

2014 1 min

Remix

300

"Skábmagovat 2004", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2004/800en.html. 301 "Skábmagovat 2002", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://www.skabmagovat.fi/skabma_vanhat/skabma_2002/800en.html. 302 "The Last King", Norwegian Film Institute, accessed June 22 2017, http://www.nfi.no/english/119346/birkebeinerne. 303 "The Light", Skabmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8399 . 304 "CV", Liselotte Wajstedt, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.liselottewajstedt.com/bio.

120

Thing to Do305 The Sámi and Her Body306 The Sun307 This is My Land308 To Kill a Reindeer
309

Tailfeathers

Tailfeathers

16 sec

SE

Unknown

Liselotte Wajstedt

2007 4 min 52 sec

Short

FI

Stadia

Unknown

Sampo Karvo

2002 10 min

Short

SE

Unknown

Sofia Jannok

2016 6 min

Music Video

FI

Safi Oy

Private Company

Paul-Anders Simma

2012 59 min

Docum entary

Trambo
310

FI

Unknown

Marja Helander

2013 4 min

Short

Triffon from

Yleisradio TV 2, SVT

State Media

Elli Rantala, Sulo Aikio

1983 20 min

Docum entary

305

"Film and Video Works", Elle-Maija Tailfeathers.com, accessed May 9 2017, http://elle-maijatailfeathers.com/?page_id=311. 306 "CV", Liselotte Wajstedt, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.liselottewajstedt.com/bio. 307 "Skábmagovat 2004", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2004/800en.html. 308 "This is My Land", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8362. 309 "To Kill a Reindeer", DokWeb, accessed May 9 2017, http://archive.dokweb.net/en/documentary-network/easteuropean-docs/-to-kill-a-reindeer-6549. 310 "Skábmagovat 2014", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen.

121

Petcheng a311 Troll Hideawa y312 FI Ima filbmaja sátneduodji & Inarin elokuvateoll isuus Turistern e313 Våra Discon314 SE Direktörn och fabrikörn handelsbola g Våren315 Vidas Voktere SE NO Unknown NRK Sapmi State Media Patrick Muskos Roger Mandal 2003 3 min 2014 30 min Short Docum entary Private Company Amanda Kernell 2007 8 min NO Unknown Mai-Lis Eira 2014 9 min Docum entary Short Mixed (private company, non-profit) Ima AikioArianaick 2014 3 min Short

311

"Skábmagovat 2003," Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2003/800en.html. 312 "Skábmagovat 2015", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen. 313 "Skábmagovat 2016: Kaamoksen Kuvia/Reflections of the Endless Night", Inari: Skábmagovat Film Festival, 2016. 314 "Amanda Kernell", Swedish Film Institute Database, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.sfi.se/en-GB/Swedishfilmdatabase/Item/?type=PERSON&itemid=325817&iv=MOVIE&ref=%2ftemplates%2fSwedishFilmSearchResult.asp x%3fid%3d1225%26epslanguage%3denGB%26searchword%3damanda+kernell%26type%3dPerson%26match%3dBegin%26page%3d1%26prom%3dFalse. 315 "Skábmagovat 2014", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen.

122

316

Vihtta Vahkku Vieljain
317

NO

Unknown

Bieret Ravdna Rognerud Eira

2016 17 min

Docum entary

Viikate318 FI

Sogsakk

Educational

Jonne Jarvinen

2014 12 min

Short

Vilda Duottar
319

NO

ISFI

Non-profit

Johan Ante Utsi, Inga Marie Risvik, Elle Marja P. Eira, Yvonne Thommassen, Anne Merete A. Gaup, Hakon Isak Vars

2009 6 min

Short

Virtauksi a320 Vuoinnal as

FI

Sogsakk

Educational

Tapio Seppala

2014 13 min

Short

NO

Unknown

Gjert Rognli

2009 5 min

Short

316

"Viddas Voktere", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8679. 317 "Vihtta Vahhku Vieljain", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8434. 318 "Skábmagovat 2015", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen. 319 "Short Films Funded by the International Sámi Film Centre", International Sámi Film Institute, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.isfi.no/eng/films/short. 320 "Skábmagovat 2015", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen.

123

cumma321 Vuosttas lavkkit322 We are Still Here323 Where the F*ck is Vuotso?
324

NO

NRK Sápmi State Media

Ole Mahtte H. Gaup

2014 39 min 2016 5 min

Docum entary Music Video

SE

Unknown

Sofia Jannok, Matti Aikio

FI

Tuupa Records

Music Label

Jussi Isokoski

2014 3 min

Music Video

Who is Left on the Shore?325 Wimme
326

NO

Hommit AS

Private Company

Niillas A. Somby

2003 38 min

Docum entary

FI

Unilumi

Private Company

Juha-Iisakki Koivisto Suohpanterror

2008 30 min 2016 7 min

Docum entary Music Video

Ylva: Lipn327

Sápmi

Unknown

321

"Skábmagovat 2010", Skábmagovat Film Festvial, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2010/800en.html. 322 Skábmagovat 2015", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen. 323 "We are Still Here", ImagineNative, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.imaginenative.org/we-are-still-here. 324 "Skábmagovat 2015", Skábmagovat Film Festival, Microsoft Word document courtesy of Kaija Anttonen. 325 "Skábmagobat 2004", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2004/800en.html. 326 "Skábmagovat 2009", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2009/800en.html.

124

Yoik328

SE

Unknown

Liselotte Wajstedt

3 min

Docum entary

Yoiking Away329

FI

Unknown

Julani Valasvaara

1971 30 min

Docum entary

327

"Ylva: Lipn", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed June 22 2017, http://skabmagovat.fi/skabmagovat_2014/?page_id=8373. 328 "Skábmagovat 2008", Skábmagovat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2008/ohjelma_en/ohjelmainfo_su.htm. 329 "Skábmagovat 2013", Skábmagobat Film Festival, accessed May 9 2017, http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Skábma_vanhat/Skábma_2013/800en.html.

125

Appendix D: Sámi Films by the Numbers

Number of Films by Type of Producer in Each Country (Database)

Education al

Individu al

State Compa Med ia ny

Non-Profit Mixe or Collective d

Musi c Labe l

Unknow n or not specifie d 2 15 5 0 0

Tota l

Sweden Norway Finland Russia Sápmi Joint incl. Sweden Sápmi joint not incl. Sweden Sápmi/N onSápmi

3 13 96 0 0

9 11 3 0 0

5 26 7 0 2

14 27 14 0 3

1 3 13 0 0

5 17 4 1 3

0 1 2 0 0

39 113 144 1 8

0

0

2

2

0

0

0

0

4

1

0

0

2

0

0

0

1

4

126

joint inclu. Sweden Sápmi/N onSápmi joint not incl. Sweden NonSápmi Country not specified Total 115 24 44 64 18 30 3 25 323 1 0 2 1 0 0 0 1 5 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 2 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 3

127

Number of Films by Type of Producer in Each Country (Outside Database)

Education al

Individu al

State Medi a

Compan Nony Profit or Collecti ve

Musi c Labe l 0 0 2 0 0

Mixe d

Unknow Tota n l

Sweden Norway Finland Russia Sápmi (otherwise unspecifie d) Sápmi Joint incl. Sweden Sápmi joint not incl. Sweden Sápmi/No n-Sápmi

0 2 15 0 0

0 2 0 0 0

1 13 1 0 0

10 10 7 0 0

0 1 0 0 0

3 2 0 0 0

27 19 28 2 1

41 49 53 2 1

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

128

joint inclu. Sweden Sápmi/No n-Sápmi joint not incl. Sweden NonSápmi Country Not Specified Total 17 8 17 34 1 2 11 85 175 0 0 1 4 0 0 6 4 15 0 6 1 0 0 0 0 3 10 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1

Sámi Film Database by Country Country Norway Sweden Finland Russia Joint (Sápmi only) Number 113 38 144 1 13 SE included? (Joint) N/A N/A N/A N/A 9

129

Joint (Sápmi/non-Sápmi) Exclusively non-Sápmi Country not specified

6 2 6

3 N/A N/A

Sámi Film Database by Genre Genre330 Children's Film Documentary Feature Short TV Production Number 7 100 12 194 9

Films Outside the Database by Country Country Sweden Norway Finland Russia Sápmi (not otherwise Number 41 49 53 2 1 SE Included? N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A

330

Taken from the descriptions in the Sámi Film Database - see Appendix C.

130

specified) Other Joint (Sápmi) Joint (Sápmi/NonSápmi) Country not specified 15 N/A 10 2 2 N/A 1 1

Films Outside the Database by Genre Genre331 Documentary Feature Remix Experimental Short TV Production Music Video Genre not specified Number 50 8 1 3 71 7 20 15

331

Taken from the descriptions of the Skábmagovat programme (or other film festivals), the filmmakers' own writing, or other film databases, depending on the source.

131

Bibliography Sami Films and their Content Christensen, Cato. "Reclaiming the Past: On the History-Making Significance of the Sámi Film The Kautokeino Rebellion."Acta Borealia: A Nordic Journal of Circumpolar Societies 29, no 1 (2012): 56-76. Downing, John and Charles Husband. Representing 'Race': Racisms, Ethnicities and Media. London: Sage Publications Ltd., 2005. Iversen, Gunnar. "Learning from Genre: Genre Cycles in Modern Norwegian Cinema". Transnational Cinema in a Global North: Nordic Cinema in Transition, ed. Andrew K. Nestingten and Trevor Glen Elkington. Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 2005. 261 278. Lehtola, Veli-Pekka. The Sámi People: Traditions in Transitions. Fairbanks: University of Alaska Press, 2005. Pearson, Wendy Gay. "Once Upon a Time in a Land Far, Far Away". Reverse Shots: Indigenous Film and Media in an International Context. Ed. Wendy Gay Pearson and Susan Gabe. Waterloo: Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 2015. 147 Pietikainen, Sari. "'To Breathe Two Airs': Empowering Indigenous Sámi Media." in Global indigenous media: Cultures, Poetics, and Politics, ed. P Wilson & M Stewart. Durham: Duke University Press, 2008. 197-213. Ramnarine, Tina K. "Sonic Images of the Sacred In Sámi Cinema." Interventions 15, no. 2 (June 2013): 239-254.

132

Skardhamar, Anne Yr. "Changes in Film Representations of Sámi Culture and Identity." Nordlitarbeidtstidsskrift i literatur 12, no. 2 (2008): 293-304. "Sámi Film Database". Skábmagovat.fi. Accessed April 3, 2016. http://www.Skábmagovat.fi/Sámifilm/index.php?lang=en

Sami Political Status and History

Alia, Valerie. The New Media Nation: Indigenous Peoples and Global Communication. New York: Berghahn Books, 2010. Allard, Christina and Susann Funderud Skogvang. Indigenous Rights in Scandinavia: Autonomous Sámi Law. New York: Routledge, 2016. Anaya, James. "The Situation of the Sámi People in the Sápmi Region of Norway, Sweden and Finland." James Anaya: Former United Nations Special Rapporteur On the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. Last Modified June 6, 2011. http://unsr.jamesanaya.org/country reports/the-situation-of-the-Sámi-people-in-the-Sápmi-region-of-norway-sweden-and finland-2011 Markelin, Lia and Charles Husband. "Contemporary Dynamics of Sámi Media in the Nordic States." Media International Australia: Incorporating Culture and Policy 149, Indigenous Media Practice (2013): 70-81. Markelin, Lia and Charles Husband. "The Sámi Media, State Broadcasting and Transnational Indigeneity." In Transnational Lives and the Media: Re-Imagining Diaspora, ed. Olga G.

133

Bailey, Myria Georgiou and Ramaswami Harindranath. London: Palgrave McMillan, 2007. 115-132. Josefson, Eva. "The Sámi and the National Parliaments: Channels for Political Influence."United Nations Development Programme: New York, 2010. 7-10 Koivurova, Timo. "The Draft for a Nordic Saami Convention". European Yearbook of Minority Rights. Issue 6 (2008): 103. http://www.arcticcentre.org/loader.aspx?id=04e81223028e4315a669-cb8830b22d6b "Discrimination of the Sámi - the Rights of the Sámi from a Discrimination Perspective". Ombudsmannen mot etnisk diskriminering [Ombudsman against ethnic discrimination]. Stockholm: Lenanders Grafiska AB, 2008

Reed-Bowers, India. "Preparatory Report from the Sámi Parliament in Sweden/Sámediggi/Sámedigge/Saemiedigkie/Sametinget for the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, Ms. Victoria Tauli-Corpuz, prior to her 2015 August visit to Sápmi and Sweden" Samediggi, August 2015. Tauli-Corpuz, Victoria. "Report on the Human Rights Situation of the Sámi People in the Sápmi Region of Norway, Sweden and Finland". United Nations General Assembly Human Rights CouncilThirty- Third Session, Agenda Item 3, 9 August 2016, http://unsr.vtaulicorpuz.org/site/index.php/documents/country-reports/155-report-Sápmi 2016 Vladimirova, Vladislava. "Contested Political Representation of the Sámi in the Kola Peninsula, Northwest Russia." Re: mindings. Co-Constituting Indigenous/Academic/Artistic
134

Knowledges, ed. Johan Gärdebro, May-Britt Öhman, Hiroshi Maruyama. Stockholm: Vulkan, 2014. 215-229.

135

