CATALOGUING MICHAEL SNOW : PHOTO-WORKS by Ariel Bader-Shamai B.A, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, 2013 A thesis  presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in the Program of Film and Photographic Preservation and Collections Management

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2017 © Ariel Bader-Shamai 2017

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. This is a true copy of the thesis, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I understand that my thesis may be made electronically available to the public.

Ariel Bader-Shamai

ii

Abstract



Cataloguing Michael Snow: Photo-Works, master's degree thesis by Ariel Bader-Shamai,

for the Film and Photographic Preservation and Collections Management program at Ryerson University, 2017.



This thesis project focuses on a photographic collection of the multidisciplinary artist,

Michael Snow (Canadian, b. 1929 - ), which is currently in the artist's possession and has not been previously studied. The collection includes over 5,000 photographic materials related to Snow's photo-works and his work in other media. The term photo-work is used in this thesis to appropriately reflect the intermedia character of Snow's photographic compositions. The first chapter explores Snow's artistic career and photo-work. Chapter two overviews cataloguing standards in Canada, discusses issues in photographic deterioration, and outlines proper storage techniques. Chapter three discusses the cataloguing process of Snow's photographic collection, including information about the present condition of these materials, and provides recommendations for its future acquisition and potential use. This thesis argues that insight into an artist's practice is an important part of the cataloguing process, particularly for collections with materials related to the production and/or documentation of intermedia works. With this knowledge, objects can be better identified and understood in relation to the collection to which they belong and the artist's overall body of work.



iii

Acknowledgements



So much gratitude to my family for their endless support and encouragement. My love of

photography in practice and study began with my dad, who gave me my first camera and went shooting with me; and my mom, who has always promoted and cultivated art and creativity throughout our lives.  Thank you to Michael Snow and Peggy Gale for welcoming me into your home for three months,

and for delicious soups; I have learned so much from you. I am also appreciative of Mani Manzini for your help throughout this process.  Thank you to Izabella Pruska-Oldenhof and Don Snyder for your invaluable guidance. To all my

FPPCM classmates and our teachers through this program: thank you.

!

iv

Table of Contents Author's Declaration Statement Abstract          Acknowledgements  Introduction             The Artist           Chapter 1: The Artist                                                                                                        ii iii iv 1 3 3 3 9 15 18 18 20 24 29 29 31 32 33 36 37 43 43 48 55 59

i. Background and Artistic Practice  ii. Photo-Works: Output and Process  iii. Snow Himself i. Arrangement    

Chapter 2: Photographic Deterioration & Preservation ii. Storage and Environmental Conditions  iii. Digital Preservation and Access  i. Cataloguing Process ii. Condition          

Chapter 3: The Collection: Cataloguing Process and Object Analysis

iii. Objects in the Collection               

iv. Recommendations and Future Prospects 

Conclusion Appendices    

Bibliography 

Appendix A: Michael Snow Photo-Works Collection: Reference Images Appendix C: Michael Snow Photo Works Collection: Object Counts Appendix D: Michael Snow Photo-Works Collection: Catalogue 

Appendix B: Michael Snow Photo-Works Collection: Cataloguing Guide 

v

Introduction



Michael Snow's (Canadian, b. 1929 - ) artistic contributions are important within the

history of Canadian art, with an oeuvre spanning over seventy years and including music, painting, sculpture, photography, holography, films, and books. In the 1960s, Snow expanded the scope of his visual art to also include photo-based and holographic works. Many of these works are in public collections in Canada and around the world, including the National Gallery of Canada (Ottawa), Art Gallery of Ontario (Toronto), the Musée des beaux-arts, and Musée d'art contemporain, both in Montreal, Museum of Modern Art (New York City), Museum Ludwig (Cologne), Museum Moderner Kunst Stiftung Ludwig (Vienna), Centre Georges-Pompidou (Paris).1 I have chosen to use the term photo-work rather than photography because of the intermedia2 character of these photographic compositions; this term is also used by the artist in describing these works. This thesis project focuses on the photo-works collection of Michael Snow. Snow's photo-works, like his works in other media, are largely experimental in nature, often exploring perception, and combining photographic media with other media.  A large portion of Snow's photographic materials3 are currently in his possession at his

home in Toronto (see figure 1 in appendix A), and it is his wish that this collection will soon be in possession of the National Gallery of Canada (NGC). My thesis investigates the process and issues related to cataloguing a multidisciplinary artist's collection4 that consists of photographic

1 2

"Michael Snow", last modified 2011< http://www.fondation-langlois.org/html/e/page.php?NumPage=94>. Accessed 24 November 2016.

The term intermedia was coined in 1965 by Dick Higgins, who was a member of the New York Fluxus group, to describe works that would reside between two or more media (e.g. between photography and painting, or photography and sculpture), such as many of Snow's photo-works. See Dick Higgins, "Intermedia," Leonardo 34, no. 1 (2001): 49-54. These materials include photographic transparencies (negatives and 35mm slides), prints, and Polaroids, some of which are production components of certain photo-works, and others which are documentation of these works at the various stages of their production.
3 4

I have chosen to refer to this body of materials as a collection, as opposed to a personal or an artist archive.

"1

works and related materials. This process is not straightforward, and there are no set standards or practices and procedures for collections of this nature. I have produced a catalogue that lists all of the objects in Snow's collection (appendix D). The majority of these materials the artist has not made available before to view or study, and it is the intent of this project to bring to light their potential value in a critical understanding of Snow's artistic process across media. In order to understand the significance of the objects in this collection, one must be familiar with Snow's art work, particularly his photo-works, and possess a basic knowledge of archiving and preservation of photographic materials.  In All This Stuff: Archiving the Artist, Anna McNally, the assistant archivist at the University

of Westminster, discusses the necessary steps and choices in the process of cataloguing an artist's collection. McNally insists that archivists must have good knowledge of the artist's work in order to understand the potential significance of what they find; the first step should be to survey everything in the collection, followed by the process of arrangement in a meaningful manner. 5 With this in mind, the first chapter of this thesis introduces Michael Snow as a multidisciplinary artist, provides a sketch of his creative process, and discusses his photo-work. Chapter two provides an overview of cataloguing standards in Canada, discusses issues in photographic deterioration, and outlines proper storage techniques. Chapter three discusses the cataloguing process of Snow's collection, including information about the present condition of materials in the collection. This chapter also offers general advice on arrangement, storage, and preservation of such materials for collecting institutions, and considers possible future uses of this collection and its potential users.

5

Anna McNally, "All that Stuff !" In All This Stuff: Archiving the Artist, ed. Judy Vaknin et al. (UK: Libri, 2013), 100.

"2

Chapter 1: The Artist



In 1962, Michael Snow completed his first photo-work, Four to Five. This photo-work was

one among many artworks in various media that comprise the Walking Woman series (1961-67). At this point, there exist numerous (over one thousand) articles, books, and other texts that analyze Michael Snow's work and contributions.6 The following is a selected literature review focusing on sources most relevant to this project.



Background and Artistic Practice



Snow's long artistic career has included experiments in various media, often combining

them with one another, or using several media in a series to express the same idea, for example the Walking Woman series. Medium and material are integral to the meaning of Snow's work, who often investigates these properties through the formal and/or conceptual elements of the piece. Snow studied art (mainly painting, drawing and sculpture) and design at the Ontario College of Art.7 Following a trip to Europe in 1952-53, Snow returned to Toronto and began to build a following through the Avrom Isaac's gallery 8, where his first exhibition was held in 1956.9 In the late 1950s, Isaac's artists were "entirely outside the Canadian art establishment,"10 all but totally rejected from art societies, public galleries, and major collectors. In the early 1960s, Snow moved
Some of these entries and PDFs are available online Digital Snow ANARCHIVE project, the working notes of which were provided to the author by the artist and the project's chief researcher, Peggy Gale.
6 7 8

Martha Langford, Michael Snow: Life & Work (Ontario: Art Canada Institute, 2014): 5.

The Isaac's gallery,, originally a framing shop, was the first gallery in Toronto that was committed to displaying contemporary/modern Canadian painting. Isaacs represented numerous Canadian artists, including Michael Snow, Joyce Wieland, Jack Chambers, William Kurulek, and many more. See: York University, Clara Thomas Archives, Avrom Isaacs fonds, F0134, biographical sketch/administrative history.
9

Fulford, Robert, and Snow, Michael. Michael Snow: A Survey. (Ontario: Art Gallery of Ontario in collaboration with Isaacs Gallery, 1970): 1. Ibid.

10

"3

to New York with his first wife, visual artist and filmmaker Joyce Wieland (1930-1998) where they remained for nearly a decade.11 Upon their return in 1971, there was a growing optimism in Canadian cultural production with a thriving network of artist-run centres12, and both private and public commitments to art production in both traditional and experimental media.13 With the founding of the Canada Council for the Arts in 1957, government spending on arts and culture increased significantly throughout the country in the subsequent decades. 14 New facilities were built, existing facilities expanded, in an attempt to provide wider access to the Canadian public.15 The 1970s saw a boom in photography on the art market, leading to the opening of many commercial galleries devoted to the medium. 16 Further, colleges and universities across Canada (including Concordia, University of Ottawa, and the Nova Scotia College of Art and Design) began to offer both undergraduate and graduate programs in photography studies.17  The 1970s were a period of heavy productivity for Michael Snow; Louise Dompierre, the

CEO and president of the Art Gallery of Hamilton, claims that Snow may have reached the peak of his career as an artist in this decade. Dompierre considers his most important works to have been made during this time, including Venetian Blind (1970), A Casing Shelved (1970), Sink (1970), Crouch, Leap, Land, (1970) as well as La Région Centrale (1971), a significant film in his

11 12

Langford, 6.

Some that have been assisted by the Canada Council for the Arts, which since 1973 has "provided program and operating funds to several artist-run spaces specializing in photography." See: Katherine Tweedie and Penny Cousineau, "Photography," The Canadian Encyclopedia, last modified March 4, 2015, http://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.ca/en/article/photography/. Accessed 8 February 2017.
13 14

Ibid., 7.

Jocelyn Harvey, "Canada Council for the Arts." The Canadian Encyclopedia, last modified March 4, 2015, http:// www.thecanadianencyclopedia.ca/en/article/canada-council-for-the-arts/ Jocelyn Harvey, "Arts, Heritage and Cultural Industries Funding," The Canadian Encyclopedia, last modified December 16, 2013, http:// www.thecanadianencyclopedia.ca/en/article/arts-heritage-and-cultural-industries-funding. Accessed 8 February 2017.
15

Martha Langford, "Michael Snow: Reflections at the Speed of Light." In Michael Snow @ MOCCA 2007. Toronto: Museum of Contemporary Canadian Art, 2007.
16 17

Tweedie and Cousineau, "Photography."

"4

career18. In addition, institutions began holding retrospectives of his work, and Snow was chosen to represent Canada at the Venice Biennale in 1970.19  In Michael Snow: Life & Work, Martha Langford, in consultation with the artist, selected

sixteen works by Snow from over five decades to demonstrate the themes present in his artistic production, as well as the discernible questions that his work has raised. The defining moments of Michael Snow's life and career illuminate the history of Canadian art since the Second World War. In concert with the development of a unique culture, a national identity, and an international presence was the creative impetus among Canadians to rethink art in relation to process, technology, and everyday experience. Snow's process has been additive. A leading figure in new media and Conceptual art, Snow has never rejected painting and sculpture, measuring his own achievements alongside the work that inspired his generation.20 She calls Snow's process "additive,"21 and indicates that it was led by the guiding principle of duality in terms of both materials and themes present in the work. This can be seen in his interest to create illusions that challenge perception, and his appreciation of the immateriality of light, which despite being immaterial has the capacity to inscribe itself tangibly in objects (in photographs) or representations of moods. Form, material and content all reflect one another in Snow's art - they are interconnected. Every medium he works with is always selected with intention and carefully considered within the totality of the artwork.  The tension between concept and medium is a theme that Snow confronts in many of his

works, labeled as "fundamental conflict of modern art"22 by art and media theorist and historian,
With the exception of La Région Centrale, the works Dompierre refers to are all photo-works. It is important to note that Wavelength (1967) is considered by many among the most significant films in Canadian cinema and international experimental cinema, which dates from his New York period.
18

Louise Dompierre, "Embodied Vision: The Painting, Sculpture, Photo=Work, Sound Installation, Music, Holographic Work, Films and Books of Michael Snow from 1970 to 1973." in The Michael Snow Project: Visual Art, 1951-1993 e.d. Dennis Reid et. al. (Toronto: Art Gallery of Ontario, The Power Plant, and Knopf Canada, 1994): 392.
19 20 21 22

Langford, Michael Snow: Life & Work, 41. Ibid. Gene Youngblood, "Icon and Idea in the World of Michael Snow." Artscanada 27 (1970): 4.

"5

Gene Youngblood, who surveyed Snow's work in the 1970 retrospective exhibition held at the Art Gallery of Ontario (AGO), Michael Snow / A Survey. Youngblood explains that Snow challenges established aesthetic boundaries by creating pieces that combine multiple media in a way that avoids simple categorization.23 Similarly, Snow rejects categories that others ascribe to his art and classifications of him as an artist within specific art movements. He has often been connected with the Conceptual art movement (or lauded as the "first major figure in Canadian Conceptual art"24), however he rejects this classification by insisting that his work is about form; likewise he rejects the label of Minimalist by insisting that he is, in fact, a "maximalist."25 While he rejects these labels, as many artists do, some theorists have made compelling arguments regarding the conceptual and minimalist streak in Snow's work. One example is P. Adams Sitney, in his Visionary Film (1974), he describes parallels between structural films and minimalism in sculpture (both originated in New York and date to the same period and focused on stripping compositions of personal expression down to basic shapes or geometric forms, as well as aimed to blur distinctions between artistic media), ultimately hailing Wavelength (1967) as a "supreme achievement" of Structural film.26  The juxtaposition of different media in an artwork transforms them, along with the

object status of the artwork, into intermedia. Intermedia works cannot be reduced to any one particular medium, and as such refuse the art object to be also reduced to any one of them. In an

Since 1967, Youngblood has had a weekly column in the Los Angeles Free Press, "Intermedia," the subjects of which range from film and the arts to science and technology. This culminated in the book Expanded Cinema (1970), where Snow's film Wavelength (1967) is treated at length from an intermedia perspective. See: Gene Youngblood, Expanded cinema. New York: Dutton, 1970.
23

Robert J. Belton. Sights of resistance: approaches to Canadian visual culture. (Calgary: University of Calgary Press, 2001): 71.
24 25 26

Langford, Michael Snow: Life & Work, 54.

P. Adams Sitney, Visionary Film: The American Avant-Garde, 1943-2000, 3rd e.d (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002): 355. Sitney identified the overall shape of Snow's film Wavelength as a cone. This simple cone shape is perceived over the course of the film's duration of 45 minutes, during which we experience a continuous zoom, beginning in a wide angle shot and progressively zooming into a close-up shot, ending with an extreme close-up of a photo of water waves.

"6

intermedia work, its media become also the content of that work by virtue of their juxtaposition and sometimes are also present as representations, i.e., a medium is (visually, sonically, etc.) represented through another medium. For example, Snow's Door (1979) is a photographic representation of a drawing of a door, where both the thing represented (door) and medium represented through the photo (drawing) are both representations; the first is a representation of the object itself and the second is of the (drawing) medium. More importantly, this second type of representation serves a self-reflexive function in this work, as it draws attention to the various media of representation present in this work - including linguistic representation (visual and sonic) in the title itself - and to the intermedia nature of the work.  In writing on the subject of Snow's films, Rameau's Nephew by Diderot (Thanx to Dennis Young

by Wilma Shoen) (1972-74) and *Corpus Callosum (2002), Martha Langford also refers to a number of paintings and sculptures Snow produced at the same time that relate to these films, and calls all of these works "clusters, or multi-generational families of resemblance." 27 These clusters make it worthwhile for the viewer to seek out patterns (conceptual, thematic, or aesthetic) through these different forms of representation and media, i.e., through "families of resemblance." Snow has often executed an idea in multiple media and material, which is most evident in his Walking Woman series. This series deals with the malleability inherent in all plastic arts, the limits of which are bound by the material and the medium chosen by the artist. Creating a representation of a walking woman in bronze sculpture imposes different limits and introduces different possibilities than one done in a charcoal drawing on paper. In the same way as his other works, the works in Snow's Walking Woman series contemplate both the medium- and the material-specific conditions, along with limits and possibilities, in the process of their making. The Walking Woman (a silhouette

27

Langford, 44.

"7

of a woman in a dynamic pose) brings the centuries-long subject in painting, a woman in repose, into the dynamic state of walking, an activity more reflective of the 20th century and its incessant hustle. In other words, in Walking Woman works, Snow engages with ideas of malleability and dynamic state, which are represented in the contents, media and materials, as well as the overall composition of these works.  In 1994, The Power Plant (Toronto) and the AGO undertook a major retrospective of

Snow's work that featured four simultaneous exhibitions, creating a comprehensive display of Snow's work across media. The Michael Snow Project retrospective was accompanied by a series of three catalogues and one book.28 The Michael Snow Project: Visual Art 1951-1993 is one of the publications in this series, and contains detailed and personal accounts of Snow's work and life. It is largely composed of texts and reproductions of Snow's visual art, and includes examples of sketches and preparatory drawings for his artworks, which provide a glimpse into this artist's process. Louise Dompierre's chapter "Embodied Vision: The Painting, Sculpture, Photo-Work, Sound Installation, Music, Holographic Work, Films and Books of Michael Snow from 1970 to 1993," analyzes and contextualizes several of Snow's works throughout this period. Dompierre asserts that in Snow's "methodical"29 way of producing art, nothing is ever taken for granted, each element of the work is carefully thought out before execution30 (see figures 2 and 3 in appendix A for examples of Snow's detailed notes for specific works).  Many of Snow's works play with the duality of illusion and reality, and invite the

audience to identify the ways that media of representation (photography, painting, etc.)

The exhibition catalogues include: The Michael Snow Project: Visual Art 1951-1993; The Michael Snow Project: Music/Sound: The Performed and Recorded Music/Sound of Michael Snow; and The Michael Snow Project: Presence and Absence: The Films of Michael Snow from 1956 to 1991). The accompanying book is titled, The Michael Snow Project: Collected Writings.
28 29 30

Dompierre, 401. Ibid.

"8

participate in the process of constructing (re-presenting) the world.31 In her book, Figuring Redemption: Resighting My Self in the Art of Michael Snow, Tila Landon Kellman draws attention to this aspect of Snow's work in her discussion of the self-referential nature of Snow's work.32 She argues that through Snow's exploration of the "intrinsic properties and capabilities of a medium," 33 there is an expectation of the audience to become aware of the material functions of the work.34



Photo-Works: Output and Process



In Michael Snow: Sequences: A History of His Art (2015), Bruce Jenkins notes that photography

began to displace painting as Snow's primary medium by the early 1970s. Snow ventured to define his photo-based works in distinctly painterly terms, explaining how the forms of the threedimensional world are transformed in a photograph as an "incredibly thin distribution of chemicals...now all on the same physical plane, a physical object, the support of the image."35  In discussing Snow's style and technique, Langford notes that in Snow's photo-works,

images are carefully constructed for the purpose of being photographed, or objects are made specifically for this purpose. This can be seen in Meeting of Measures (1983), a photo-work in which the subjects are sculptures that Snow made by hand, with colour added to the resulting photograph using watercolour paints.
31 32

Ibid., 404.

It is important to note that the self-referential aspect of Snow's work has been explored by many others, especially in the case of his films. See: P. Adams Sitney, Visionary Film: The American Avant-Garde (1974); Bruce Elder, Image and identity: Reflections on Canadian Film and Culture (1989); Michael Snow, Cover to Cover (1975); Alan Fleischer and Hubert Damisch, Panoramique (1999); Dennis Reid et al., The Michael Snow Project: Visual Art, 1951-1993 (1994).
33 34 35

Tila Landon Kellman, Figuring Redemption: Resighting My Self in the Art of Michael Snow. (Ontario: Wilfrid Laurier Press, 2002), 1. Ibid. Bruce Jenkins, Michael Snow, and Gloria Moure, Michael Snow: Sequences: A History of His Art, Ediciones Polígrafia, 2015: 23.

"9



According to R. Bruce Elder, avant-garde film in Canada (which began in the 1960s -

decades following other countries) is rooted in the photographic image.36 However, photography resists the modernist principle that a work of art should remain within the boundaries of the medium in which it was made. Elder refers to several artworks that exemplify this principle 37, but especially painting, where "the process of emptying an art form of all but its essential elements was destined to culminate on a work that was about nothing at all."38 A photograph resists being "about nothing" - it is always about something, signifying that which was once before the camera lens or in the photographic enlarger. The camera has transformational capabilities: [Snow] demonstrates how an image from one medium is transformed when it is incorporated in another. In One Second in Montreal (1969), for example, a series of thirtyone still photographs are reproduced in a motion picture. Each is presented for a protracted duration [...] Duration, Snow demonstrates, is one of the filmmaker's fundamental materials, even more fundamental than motion because without duration there can be no motion [...] In a similar vein, Side Seat Paintings Slides Sound Film (1970) shows that a photograph of a slide produces different effects than does the slide itself, and that a slide of a painting produces different effects than does the painting itself.39 The advantage that film has over photography is time (duration) and the capacity for movement. Snow resists another notion, to which modernist artists drew much of their attention and efforts, that "representational elements reduced a work of art from an object to an image; rather than being (or presenting) itself, it represented something else."40 He defies it by using multiple media in his compositions and establishing a dialogue between them.

R. Bruce Elder, "The Photographic Image in Avant-Garde Film," in Image and Identity: reflections on Canadian film and culture (Ontario: Wilfrid Laurier University Press in collaboration with the Academy of Canadian Cinema & Television, 1989), 263.
36

Elder refers to Kazimir Malevich's White on White paintings (c.1918), the novels of Alain Robbe-Grillet, and particularly the novels of Gustav Flaubert. See: Elder, 264.
37 38 39 40

Ibid. Ibid. Ibid., 266.

"10



Re-presentation, or what Langford calls "repetition with a difference,"41 became an

important element of Snow's art practice, especially in his work with the photographic medium. Snow's sculpture Atlantic (1967) and his film Wavelength (1967), serve as very good examples of visual and thematic re-presentation. Langford points out that Wavelength concludes with a close-up of a photograph (a black and white photograph of water waves), which was one of many photographs of waves that Snow shot for Atlantic; several of these were used in the sculpture and likely also the one included in the film. In both works, Snow explores two main themes: waves (light waves, sound waves, water waves, which are fundamentally dynamic and in sync with planetary movements) and movement (of waves, of images in cinema, of light in photography as in writing with light, and of photons that travel at the speed of light from the Sun to earth and to our eyes). Because these themes are re-presented differently in both works, one could conclude that in these works thematic re-presentation as a "repetition with a difference" aims at further variance, whereas visual re-presentation as a "repetition with a difference" aims to maintain a certain degree of visual affinity between these works.  Snow's photo-works have been exhibited across North America, Europe, Asia, and

Australia. However, there are fewer critical and analytic texts that focus on his photo-works than on other areas of his artistic practice. In her review of the 1976 exhibition at MoMA, "Projects: Michael Snow, Photographs," film critic Amy Taubin observed how, compared to his work in film, Snow's photo-work received very little attention, which she called "disturbing."42 According to Taubin, Snow's photo-works do not capture candid moments but rather the inherent character of the photographic medium (to blend reality and illusion together), thereby leading viewers to

41 42

Langford, 45. Taubin, Amy. "Doubled Visions." October 4 (1977): 33.

"11

investigate the nature of perception itself.43All of Snow's photo-based works are pre-conceived although he has always been open to the element of chance, should it suit the overall composition -- carefully composed and (nearly always) shot in a studio.44  In 1999, Panoramique was among the largest retrospective exhibitions of Snow's photo-

works and films: it took place at the Palais des Beaux-Arts in Brussels, and subsequently traveled to Paris and Geneva.45 In the accompanying exhibition catalogue, Michael Snow: Panoramique: Photographic Works and Films, 1962-1999, Walter Klepac states that Snow's first photographic work, Four to Five (1962), was a part of the on-going Walking Woman series, and was made up of sixteen gelatin silver prints documenting the Walking Woman (a life-sized cut out) around New York City. He asserts that Four to Five, in blurring the lines between high art and urban street life, reflects the changing attitudes toward art at the time of its production, i.e. the nature of artwork and how it relates to the broader cultural production of the times.46 Klepac refers to several of Snow's works as self-referential and therefore also representational, because "the camera makes representations, and the photograph can be a representation of its own making."47 He uses the examples of Red5 (1974) and Morning in Holland (1964), photo-works that were created methodically and document the accumulation (Red5) and the revealing (Morning in Holland), in the case of Morning in Holland) of photographs, thus being representations of the process of their own making.  The Philadelphia Museum of Art held a retrospective exhibition of Snow's photo-works

in 2014 titled, Photo-Centric. This was the only North American museum exhibition of his photo-

43 44 45 46

Ibid., 35. There are some photo-works that were not shot in the studio, e.g. Four to Five (1962), Venetian Blind (1970), and Atlantic (1967). The Centre national de la photographie in Paris, France; the Centre pour l'image contemporaine, Saint-Gervais in Geneva, Switzerland.

Walter Klepac, "Photo-Philosophical Investigations: Photographic Works of Michael Snow 1962-1999" in Michael Snow: Panoramique, Photographic Works & Films 1962-1999, (Paris: Centre national de la Photographie), 83.
47

Ibid.

"12

works since Projects at MoMA in 1976, the first exhibition of his photo-works.48 In the Photo-Centric exhibition, Snow's photo-works were displayed in a chronological arrangement, starting with the first piece Four to Five up until Powers of Two (2003). The exhibition catalogue includes two essays, one by curator Adelina Vlas and the other by Snow. The essay by Vlas examines each of the thirty-four works in this exhibition, and describes this body of work as a study of transformations "of subject into image by whatever means available."49 Vlas also explains how these photo-works by Snow construct realities that require active participation from viewers to "engage an embodied perception."50 When displayed in physical space of an exhibition, some of these photoworks take on the qualities of a sculpture or an installation, offering opportunities for the audience to engage with photography outside of a frame. Moreover, the physical presence of some of these photo-works solicits varying degrees of physical participation from viewers. Works such as Crouch, Leap, Land (1970), where photographs are suspended from the ceiling and one must crouch underneath to look up and see the image, or Digest (1970), where one must put on gloves to move through a series of photographs that methodically document the process in making of this work (digest as a compendium) and its final stage (digest as a summary: a photograph of protruding objects submerged in a sink filled with a black resin), do not allow a viewer to remain passive.51  In an article from a 2005 issue of October, Jean Arnaud examines four of Snow's photo-

works52 to illustrate that the artist's overall approach takes into consideration how the work's
Karen Rosenberg, "Multiple Exposures, Looking Both Ways: Michael Snow's Photographs and Other Works in Philadelphia," New York Times, February 6, 2014. <http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/07/arts/design/michael-snowsphotographs-and-other-works-inphiladelphia.html>. Accessed January 30, 2017.
48 49 50 51 52

Adelina Vlas, e.d. Michael Snow Photo-Centric (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2014): 9. Ibid., 16. Martha Langford, "Strange Bedfellows: Appropriations of the Vernacular by Photographic Artists." Photography and Culture 1 (2008): 76. Imposition (1976), VUEEUV (1998), Places des peaux (1998) and Digest (1970).

"13

meaning will be received through its medium and materials.53 This idea has its roots in the modernist perspective, namely that the content of an art work should not be external to the reality of the medium through which it is created, however, as Arnaud implies, it is taken further in Snow's works. . However, Snow's photo-works, in fact, unsettle the cornerstone of the modernist perspective by introducing an element of disruption through their intermedia existence, i.e. through the refusal of these works to be fixed in any one medium, by occupying the in-between position or "inter," which their content equally reflects.54 Being attuned to the material properties of each medium, rather than making work that speaks to one particular materiality, Snow engages in a postmodernist media bricolage that places these media, their materialities and forms of visual representation in an ongoing dialogue, which is actualized by viewers. Hubert Damisch compares Snow to Marcel Duchamp, as they each invite the viewer into the work to investigate and consider what it is really about, because it is deeper than a first glance allows.55 Indeed, as already implied by Arnaud, Snow's photo-works are a continual exploration of "things and their representation. Most of his work affirms the materiality of the image by situating the image in the space of sculpture, and his overall approach considers how the viewer will receive the image through the mediums and surfaces that are used."56 Across media, the content and material structure of artworks are put into dialogue with one another.

53 54

Arnaud, Jean and Stevens, Molly. "Touching to See." October 114 (2005): 5.

Bruce Elder also defines Snow's films and photo-works within a postmodern framework, which he distinguishes from modernism. For more, see: Bruce Elder, "The Photographic Image in Canadian Avant-Garde Film" in Image and identity: reflections on Canadian film and culture (1989): 269. Hubert Damisch, "Concert (Portrait of an Artist as Michael Snow)" in Michael Snow: Panoramique, Photographic Works & Films 1962-1999 (Paris: Centre National de la Photographie), 26.
55 56

Arnaud, 5.

"14



Snow Himself



Michael Snow has written extensively on his own work. On the occasion of his

retrospective exhibition at the Art Gallery of Ontario in 1994, a book of his writings was published, titled The Collected Writings of Michael Snow (1994). Snow and Louise Dompierre worked together on the selection of texts by Snow for his book. This collection includes texts written by Snow at different points in his career, as well as several interview transcripts in which Snow reflects on a number of works and artists important to him throughout his career. In "Admission (or, Marcel Duchamp)," Snow notes Duchamp as an important influence on him since 1948.57 For example, in the Walking Woman series, Snow's works flipped Duchamp's idea of bringing ordinary objects into the realm of the art gallery, by bringing art objects ("a `sign' from within the art context") out into the world.58  The catalogue for the 1999 exhibition Panoramique includes a text written by Snow that

speaks at large to his photographic practice, but also explicitly to the works selected for the exhibition. It is evident in this text that the transformation of a photo-work's subject in the process of becoming a photographic object is most important to Snow.59 Furthermore, it would be incorrect to assume that the photographic object itself is the end point of Snow's photo-work or that the fixed, material object itself is the goal. To the contrary, the viewers step in where the artist has left off, viewers activate the object through their inquiries into the nature of the photowork's composition and the interplay between its elements (form, material, content). Indeed,
57 58

Michael Snow, "Admission (or, Marcel Duchamp)" in The Collected Writings of Michael Snow (Waterloo: Wilfred Laurier Univ. Press, 2010): 286.

Ibid., 287. Four to Five (1964) is a good example of this, since its contents are documentations of the Walking Woman in different parts and streets of New York City. Snow also painted the Walking Woman on the door of Graeme Ferguson's car, who drove it around Manhattan. This way, Walking Woman would ride around the city or be stuck in its traffic. Michael Snow, "Notes on the Whys and Hows of my Photographic Works," in Michael Snow: Panoramique, Photographic Works & Films 1962-1999 (Paris: Centre National de la Photographie), 113.
59

"15

Snow's photo-works entice the viewer to step in and engage with the work, and for those familiar with his other artwork the inquiry extends beyond the present work, as it might share thematic and visual elements with other works by Snow. This is why his works appear to be often made in dialogue with one another. For example (and as previously noted), the photograph of water that is slowly zoomed in on in Wavelength (1967) was taken on the same day as the photographs that make up the photo-based sculpture Atlantic (1967); additionally, next to this photograph is an image of the Walking Woman.  One of the possibilities offered by photography is the control over size, an important area

of inquiry for Snow in his photo-works. A very good example of Snow's exploration of size in a photo-work is Door (1979). Door is a colour photograph of a drawing printed to the size of a standard house door, with the intention to create what Snow called a "mental/optical jump in scale from the original (a kind of zoom)". 60 The subject (content) of this photo-work is a watercolour painting of a door61 (which was made specifically for this piece). A lit match is the only source of illumination in this work -- the only photographic representation in this photowork and the final layer of representation (among several others) in its composition. Snow's plastic playfulness with the notion of reality and representation in photography and painting really comes to the fore in his description of this work, when he states: "Some of the shadows (for example, the doorknob) were painted, some were `real.' When the `door' is normal door size (Western) the hand is gigantic."62 In works like this, Snow explores "materiality and scale to create visual juxtapositions."63 Many of Snow's photo-works explore size in relation to the subject
60 61

Michael Snow and Louise Dompierre, The Collected Writings of Michael Snow (Waterloo: Wilfrid Laurier Univ. Press, 2010), 291.

This photo-work is concerned with the tension between reality and representation, which is intrinsic to photographic media. It is explored through various juxtapositions (of media, of scale, of texture, of illumination) in the work's composition, thus bringing attention to tension and prompting viewers to consider the nature of photographic image and representation itself.
62 63

Snow and Dompierre, 291. Martha Langford, "Style & Technique," 57.

"16

of the composition and combine other visual media and sometimes multiple photographic objects, treating them as graphic layers in the visual composition, which become layers of experience and meaning for viewers. It is evident that Snow accords great attention in his photoworks to the nature of their physical existence; however, this introduces one significant limitation: it is extremely challenging to document these works. He explains: "because they are not just `images' (if it were even possible), all my photo-works involve the physical nature of their existence, whether it's a framed color print, a light box, or a suspended transparency cloth. This is an important factor, as is size. For this reason, many of these works are difficult to fully document."64 Although film and photography became Snow's dominant modes of art production beginning in the 1960s, it is evident that painting and sculpture, are incorporated into these works. For the most part, this is done through photographing objects he made, as in Waiting Room (1978); alternatively, art materials are applied directly to photographs, for example in Handed to Eyes (1983) oil paint is applied to the surface of the photograph. Most importantly, by not fully departing from his roots in painting and sculpture, while exploring the possibilities of photographic media and combining these with other and newer media, Snow's photo-works endure as do the inquiries into these works by viewers.

64

Michael Snow, Michael Snow: Sequences: A History of His Art, Ediciones Polígrafia, 2015: 181.

"17

Chapter 2: Photographic Deterioration and Preservation



Arrangement



Collections in archives contain the original accessioned materials (the primary sources),

which have been selected, arranged, and described by an intermediary (archivists, librarians, etc.).65 The order and arrangement of a collection may contain more complexities and nuances than may be implied in the catalogue. In All This Stuff: Archiving the Artist, Anna McNally, assistant archivist at the University of Westminster, provides recommendations on how to catalogue an artist's collection. In her recommendations, McNally insists that the archivists must have a good knowledge of the artist's work in order to understand the potential significance of what they find.66 The first step should be to survey everything, and then to begin arranging the collection in a meaningful way. After objects have been arranged in series, the archivist should then describe each file or item, depending on time and resources, followed by re-housing into acid-free storage enclosures (folders, boxes, sleeves, etc.) with reference numbers that will link the physical objects with their catalogue record. Preserving original order, so as to respectfully retain original context and link between the materials and their provenance, is an important principle in archival theory and practice. In fact, it is the first tenet of the Rules for Archival Description (RAD). RAD was developed by the Canadian Council of Archives and covers all types of materials (textual, object, graphic, multimedia, etc.) and its guidelines have been followed in the cataloguing process of this thesis project.

65 66

McNally, 100. Ibid.

"18



RAD is based on the principle of respect des fonds, a principle founded on two key concepts

in archival studies: original order and provenance. This principle, therefore, asserts that the items in a collection that are undergoing archival arrangement must maintain their original physical and intellectual order, so that connections between objects and their provenance will not be severed.67  When it comes to the arrangement of documents, preservationists Mary Lynn

Riztenthaler and Diane Vogt-O'Connor emphasize in Photographs: Archival Care and Management that meaningful internal order will help researchers to identify relationships among individual documents.68 Arrangement produces two kinds of control over objects: physical and intellectual. Physical control ensures that documents in storage can be located and accessed, intellectual control ensures that users can identify which objects will be of interest or use to them.69 Various types of physical enclosure systems are used in the archives in order to protect photographic materials from continuous exposure to light. Enclosure systems, therefore, belong within the purview of physical control. Archivists are required to take into account both the storage requirements for different photographic formats, and the "complex relationship between photographs and accompanying textual material,"70 so as not to divorce objects from their contextual details, which is the function of the intellectual control in arrangement of a collection.

Canadian Committee on Archival Description. "Statement of Principals" in Rules for Archival Description (Ottawa: Bureau of Canadian Archivists, 2008): xxiii.
67

Mary Lynn Riztenthaler and Diane Vogt-O'Connor, Photographs: Archival Care and Management. (Illinois: Society of American Archivists, 2006): 145
68 69 70

Ibid., 145. Ibid., 147.

"19



Storage and Environmental Conditions



Proper storage conditions extends the functional life of film and photographic materials.

In terms of housing for physical objects, Riztenthaler and Vogt-O'Connor emphasize the use of acid-free plastic over paper enclosures for the ease of handling; however, opaque paper envelopes, sleeves, or four-flap enclosures are recommended for storing film as they will provide protection from exposure to light. Objects with flaking or chipping emulsions should be housed in paper four-flap enclosures, as a way to reduce static electricity that could disperse emulsion fragments.71 The Northeast Document Conservation Center (NDCC) provides an online resource for the care of photographs. In terms of storage systems, the NDCC recommends powder-coated steel cabinets as opposed to wood, for example, because wood often generates offgases and peroxides that are deleterious to photographic objects.72  There are many ways of producing photographs. For this reason, there exist many types

of photographic objects that archivists have to be able to identify, in order to store them according to the guidelines created for each type.73 Prints and transparencies (negatives and reversals) require different storage and environmental considerations depending on the chemical makeup of the emulsion and the carrier. The rate of deterioration in photographic objects is directly connected to both the quality of processing, and the environmental conditions: temperature, relative humidity (RH), and lighting.74 Arguably, proper storage and environment
71 72

Ibid., 243.

"5.3 Care of Photographs," last modified 1999, <https://www.nedcc.org/free-resources/preservation-leaflets/5.-photographs/5.3-care-ofphotographs>. Accessed January 30, 2017. The variety of photographic objects include (but not limited to): Daguerreotypes, tintypes, cyanotypes, platinum and palladium prints, collodion prints, gelatin silver prints, gelatin dry plate negatives, gelatin silver negatives, gelatin silver reversal film, Polaroids, etc.). For more information on these types of processes, see Stroebel et al., Photogrpahic Materials and Processes (1986); Lavédrine, Photographs of the Past: Processes and Preservation (2009); James, The Book of Alternative Photographic Processes: 3rd edition (2015); Farber, Historic Photographic Processes (1998).
73 74

Bertrand Lavédrine, A Guide to the Preventive Conservation of Photograph Collections (California: The Getty Conservation Institute), 2003: 12.

"20

are the two most important preservation measures for collections of photographic prints and transparencies. Photographic materials are both chemically and physically vulnerable, due to their complex structures. 75 All enclosures used to house prints and transparencies should meet the specifications set out by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). ISO 18902:2013 and ISO 18916:2007 provide the standards for enclosure formats, papers, plastics, adhesives, printing inks, all of which may be used in the storage and documentation process of photographic objects. These materials must also pass the Photographic Activity Test (PAT).76  ISO standards for the archival storage of black and white prints state that environmental

conditions should consist of temperature no greater than 18°C (65°F) and of humidity between 30-50% RH. 77 These standards support the use of transparent plastic sleeves, providing these are made from appropriate material such as polyethylene, polypropylene, and polyester. 78 Interestingly, Harvey and Rowman note that prints should not be stored with their corresponding transparencies; although, this may make sense from the standpoint of organizing a collection. Deteriorating transparencies can off-gas and negatively impact prints. Further, for security reasons it is recommended to store transparencies and prints in different locations, so that should a disaster happen, such as damage by fire or water, some version of the image is still possible to be retrieved.79 A Guide to Preventive Conservation of Photograph Collections by Bertrand Lavédrine et al. includes detailed methods for identifying film bases and paper substrates. They identify different

75 76

Ross Mahard Harvey, Martha R. Rowman, The Preservation Management Handbook, (Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2014): 184.

"Imaging materials - Processed imaging materials - Photographic activity test for enclosure materials," last modified November 1, 2007, <211.67.52.20:8088/xitong/bz%5CISO-18916-2007.pdf> Accessed 23 March 2017.
77 78 79

Harvey and Rowman, 184. Ibid., 187. Ibid., 190.

"21

forms of image degradation that are common to gelatin silver and chromogenic prints, (which comprise the bulk of the photographic objects currently in Snow's collection). 80  The instability of dyes in chromogenic processing means that these materials (including

prints, transparencies, and 35mm reversals) are the most susceptible to change. Additionally, the three dyes (yellow, cyan, and magenta) fade at different rates and in the respective order, creating tonal imbalance that becomes evident to the naked eye.81 The American National Standards Institute recommends near-freezing conditions for the extended-term storage of chromogenic materials and objects.82 According to the Library of Congress (LOC), for a collection containing photographic objects, as well as paper documents, the ideal relative humidity (RH) is between 40-50%. This RH, however, might be detrimental to transparencies, which should be stored at around 20-50%.83 Storage temperatures should be kept as low as possible (0°C or below), and the highest recommended temperature for extended-term storage of black and white prints and transparencies with a polyester base is 18°C.84  According to J.M. Reilly, the founding director of the Image Permanence Institute in New

York, Polaroids constitute the largest portion of non-chromogenic colour images.85 Beginning in 1948 (one year after Dr. Edwin Land announced to the public his invention of instant photography), Polaroid hired "art consultants [...] to test Polaroid cameras, films, and related

According to the authors, gelatin silver prints are more susceptible to image fading, sulphiding and staining, yellowing, redox spots and silver mirroring; chromogenic prints are more susceptible to dye fading, highlight staining, binder degradation, microorganisms and insects, and physical degradation. For more see: Lavédrine et al, "The Vulnerability of Photographs," in A Guide to the Preventive Conservation of Photograph Collections, 3-23.
80 81 82 83

Lavédrine, 12. J.M. Reilly, Storage Guide for Color Photographic materials (New York: Image Permanence Institute, 1998): 11.

Library of Congress, "Care, Handling, and Storage of Photographs, Rev. d. 2002" (IFLA Core Programme Preservation and Conservation International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions). <http://www.loc.gov/preservation/care/photolea.html>. Accessed December 5, 2016.
84 85

Ibid. Reilly, 7.

"22

products in the studio as well as in the field."86 Art consultants included Ansel Adams, Jack Butler, Barbara Kasten, André Kertész, Robert Mapplethorpe, Andy Warhol, among many others.87 Aesthetic possibilities aside, Polaroid's instant film was also a handy tool for photographers, who used it to test for exposure settings before committing the image to film transparency.  While they may have superior dye stability, Polaroids have their own physical problems,

these are mostly related to the chemicals inherent in their constitution. There are two types of Polaroid films: peel-apart and integral instant. The latter is what most people are familiar with when we talk about Polaroids, and it was introduced with the SX-70 model camera in 1972. 88 The integral instant film is also called "inherent", because the chemicals used to develop the image remain within the photographic object. Polaroid published a guide in 1983 titled Storing, Handling and Preserving Polaroid Photographs: A Guide. Its recommendations for storage (for both peelapart and integral instant films) are at a temperature of 16-21°C (60-70°F), and at a RH of 30-50%, with regular fluctuations in both to be avoided. The guide also states that high humidity is more harmful than high temperatures, "thus, a warm and dry storage place is preferable to a cool and moist one, although both should be avoided if possible." 89  Authorization (1969), one of Snow's best-known works, takes a conceptual approach to

instant photography. For this photo-work, Snow took multiple photographs of himself in a mirror, adhering each photograph to the mirror before shooting the next. The temporal aspect of Polaroid's instant film has been transformed into the compositional element of this photo-work.

86 87 88 89

Mary-Kay Lombino, The Polaroid Years: Instant Photography and Experimentation (Munich: Vassar College and Prestel Verlag, 2013): 12. Ibid. Sylvie Penichon, Twentieth-Century Color Photographs: Identification and Care. LA: The Getty Conservation Institute, 2003: 262. Polaroid Corporation, Polaroids : Storing, Handling and Preserving Polaroid Photographs: A Guide. Boston : Focal Press, c1983.

"23

90

In Authorization, five Polaroids are taped to the surface of a mirror, "and in the image Snow is

no longer visible behind the photos; the photographer disappeared as fast as the images developed."91 John P. McElhone, Chief Conservator at the National Gallery of Canada, had written recently about the unstable nature of the Polaroids in Authorization: "[These have been an] important point of concern over the years because it raises questions about the effectiveness of the coating step in protecting the silver image-forming particles and the aging characteristics of the coating material itself."92 McElhone is ultimately optimistic about the long-term life of these objects, which have remained in steady condition over the years in collection at the National Gallery.  Digital Preservation and Access   Today, all information can be stored and transmitted as electronic data, and this has

contributed to a significant change in the nature of archiving.93 According to Geoffrey Batchen (a professor, curator, and writer focused on the history of photography), the principal function of the archivist in the digital age is "exchange rather than storage."94 The archive has become a ceaseless stream of data, living outside the confines of geographical borders and physical repositories. In other words, from the preservation perspective, the focus today is less on the conservation of the material objects and more on access (presentation, exhibition, circulation,
Walter Klepac, "Photo-philosophical investigations: Photographic Works of Michael Snow, 1962-1999", in Michael Snow: Panoramique, Photographic Works & Films 1962-1999 (Paris: Centre National de la Photographie), 83.
90

As described by David Barrett in an exhibition review of "Shake It: An Instant History of the Polaroid" at the Pump House Gallery in London, 2009. For more see: David Barrett, "Shake It: An Instant History of the Polaroid," Art Monthly 11.09: 20.
91 92 93

John P. McElhone, "Michael Snow's Authorization: Materials and Preservation," in National Gallery of Canada Review 7 (2016): 89.

Geoffrey Batchen, "The Art of Archiving" in Deep Storage: Collecting, Storing, and Archiving in Art, ed. Ingrid Schaffner and Matthias Winzen (New York: Prestel-Verlag, 1998): 47.
94

Ibid.

"24

and dissemination in general of data and objects as data [digitized objects]).95 What was once available only to a very select few, often for a price, is now accessible (and often for low or no cost) to the masses on our devices. Though time consuming and costly, digitization efforts at institutions, primarily in the West (due to the low costs and openness of governments that allow this material to be shared with the public on the Internet), have introduced new forms of access, and opened new possibilities for innovation in archiving.  Digital Snow is an interactive, database-driven website and DVD-ROM created by La

Fondation Daniel Langlois in Montréal, Canada. It is a great example of possibilities created through digital media and the web in the area of archiving and preservation, and it was also a very useful resource for this thesis project. First launched in 2002, Digital Snow, which has since been updated, includes a list of Snow's works (780 in total and across media) from 1938-2012, and of select, key exhibitions, as well as an extensive bibliography (a substantial selection of significant texts, some available in the PDF format) on Snow and his work.  Digital Snow is one component of a larger project, ANARCHIVE (edited by Anne-Marie

Duguet), which was one of the first digital archives of media arts. ANARCHIVE also contains digital collections of other artists: of Antonio Muntadas, Thierry Kuntzel, Jean Otth, Fujiko Nakaya, Masaki Fujihata, and Peter Campus. Through the use of database software and the Internet, ANARCHIVE created a new, more participatory mode of engaging the public with digital assets and databases of interdisciplinary artists and their art, while resolving the difficult issue of adequately presenting interdisciplinary practices of these artists through the use of hyperlinks. 
95



However, storage and management of digital assets has its own problems: server malfunction, system compatibility, data rot, as well as migration and storage (the perpetual need to increase the storage capacity of servers) are some of the new issues that archivists have to contend with today. Digitizing material objects that are already conserved is one thing, but maintaining the access to digital objects (with formats changing at rapid pace, and material deterioration through data depredation always being a threat) is another matter, one that requires even faster interventions than our relatively stable decades-old photochemical media.

"25

ANARCHIVE introduced new ways to think of cultural memory and preservation in the age of digital media and the Internet by emphasizing connections (through hyperlinks) that already exist within archives, as well as possibilities of new ones.96 Bruno Lessard, an Associate Professor in the School of Image Arts at Ryerson University, asserts that ANARCHIVE considers "central issues in digital archiving, virtual museum studies, and new media studies,"97 allowing new media to investigate preservation in an interactive manner.98 The Digital Snow database contains images, sounds, interviews, excerpts of films, music performances, documentations of installations, holographic works (all of which are difficult to capture on a page in a single picture or in text), all working to create a bigger, non-linear and interconnected picture of the artist. Lessard asserts that a goal of these projects is to make available through documentation and preservation, ephemeral art works, new media, and performance and/or site-specific works that are otherwise difficult to contain or describe outside of exhibition contexts. 99 In addition to making ephemeral works available through documentation and preservation, in Snow's case ANARCHIVE connects these works with hundreds of other works in physical media (painting, sculpture, etc.). ANARCHIVE deploys the hyperlink as a way to present a large body of Snow's artistic output in a new way, in an interconnected manner, and with links to texts, thus approaches Snow's body of work through the perspective of intertextuality and each data object in the database as a text (be it a representation of an artwork, of writing, or of an interview with Snow). As exciting and encouraging about the future digital initiatives like ANARCHIVE might be, digital assets and

Bruno Lessard, "Between Creation and Preservation: The ANARCHIVE Project," Convergence: The International Journal of Research into New Media Technologies 15 (2009): 316.
96 97 98 99

Ibid. Ibid., 317. Ibid., 320.

"26

databases have their own share of challenges, and decomposition and obsolescence do not spare them.  Bertrand Lavédrine's Photographs of the Past: Preservation and Process offers a brief chapter on

the best practices in digitization of photographic collections and the preservation of digital files.100 When it comes to the digital reproduction of photographs, it is important to be aware of technical specificities and constraints. The transfer medium must be appropriate and determined by the original, whether it be a print or transparency. Lavédrine makes a distinction between "copying," which applies only to an image that is visible in reflected light (paper prints), and "duplicating", for images visible by way of refracted light through transparency (negatives, slides, etc.) 101 This distinction is important because "each type of photograph (e.g., negative, positive, reversal) has individual characteristics. The transfer medium must be appropriate."102 An inherent aspect of these modes of analogue reproduction is that information is lost with each new facsimile; the challenge, according to the author, is to minimize that loss. Lavédrine's recommendation is to use large format film in order to retain the information of the original. 103 Under the right conditions, analogue images (prints and transparencies) have a superior lifespan to digital images, which will often lose data or become corrupted over time unless maintained through migration to new formats and codecs, as well as accessed periodically (depending on the storage media) to prevent data degradation.  In the preservation guide by the National Film Preservation Foundation (NFP), the

"Duplication" chapter concentrates on duplication in protecting the originals. Duplicates are

100 101 102 103

Bertrand Lavédrine, Photographs of the Past: Process and Preservation (California: The Getty Institute, 2009): 305-310. Lavédrine, A Guide to the Preventive Conservation of Photograph Collections, 180. Ibid. Ibid.

"27

made for public access so that original films can be kept in cold storage, which slows the deterioration process. While this guide is speaking specifically to motion picture film, the same rules can apply to transparencies (negative and reversal) used for photographic purposes. NFP states that the highest standard for protecting an original film, is by creating new film masters; however, this task is expensive and laborious.104 New film masters and duplicates (known as access copies) ensure the protection of film content, and film originals from handling and damage.105 Film-to-film preservation is preferred to digitization, which fails to capture inherent qualities and information from original films, and has unknown consequences for archival values of long-term preservation.

104

42.
105

National Film Preservation Foundation, "Duplication" in The Film Preservation Guide (California: National Film Preservation Foundation, 2004): Ibid.

"28

Chapter 3: The Collection: Cataloguing Process and Object Analysis



Cataloguing Process



The collection analyzed and catalogued for this project has resided in a wooden cupboard

on the third floor of Michael Snow's house in Toronto, which, even in mid-January can get very hot. Needless to say, some of the photographic materials in this collection are no longer in good condition. This collection consists largely of photographic objects with some notes and sketches by Snow, as well as paper copies of e-mail messages pertaining to his photo-works included and related to this collection. It spans Snow's artistic career, with a date range of ca.1940-2012. Their original arrangement was somewhat arbitrary, with items partially grouped by projects and stored in recycled folders and envelopes, often with crossed out and multiple inscriptions (see figure 4 in appendix A). As this collection will likely not stay in its current location for much longer, and will be acquired by an institution with its own standards and procedures, this collection has been left in the order it was found, which the catalogue I produced for this thesis reflects.  My cataloguing process began in December of 2016 and was completed at the end of

March, 2017. The total count of items in this collection is 6,351. The sum of objects according to photographic materials (appendix C includes further breakdown of these, according to size), includes: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. Gelatin silver prints: 1040 Chromogenic (colour) prints: 2713 35mm slides: 1085 Gelatin silver transparencies (35mm): 589 Gelatin silver transparencies (other sized): 132 Chromogenic transparencies (35mm): 624 Chromogenic transparencies (other sized): 275 Contact sheets (both gelatin silver and chromogenic): 244 "29

9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 

Polaroid: 521 Instax prints: 11 16mm film (strips): 58 Inkjet prints: 66 Duratrans: 62 I tried to make this process simple by using a spreadsheet format, which can be imported

into a museum database in the future (please refer to appendix D to see the order in which this collection was inventoried). The inventory contains 232 entries, based predominantly on the enclosure (folder or envelope) that contained the objects (to see the final breakdown of photographic objects in the collection according to their type (based on film and paper substrates) and physical size, please refer to appendix C). The elements, or areas of description, used in this spreadsheet include a reference number (corresponding to the housing and order in the collection), creator, title, scope, date, extent, scale, inscriptions, photographic materials, two sections for notes, physical condition, and publishing information. Definitions and more information on these areas are available in the guide that I produced for this catalogue, Michael Snow Photo-Works Collection: Cataloguing Guide (please see appendix B). Throughout the cataloguing process, Snow was very generous with offering information; first, by pointing out which objects and shelves in the cupboard that contained the collection did not fully pertain to this cataloguing project and, second, by helping identify several photographs. His presence during the cataloguing process helped ensure that the objects in the collection are being properly identified, arranged and described in the catalogue, while providing me with reassurance that the provenance of this collection is intact.

"30



Condition



In Snow's collection, chromogenic prints and transparencies have sustained the most

damage, after forty years of residing in a wooden cupboard of a hot attic (see figure 5 in appendix A). Even when kept in a dark environment, chromogenic transparencies are susceptible to fading, and if left unattended too long, shifts in colour may be not even possible to correct digitally.106 Numerous chromogenic materials (specifically 35mm transparencies) in this collection suffer from significant colour shifts, the main causes of which have been temperature and relative humidity in the attic that accelerated the chemical decomposition of these materials. Many of the black and white (peel-apart) Polaroids in this collection have also deteriorated, due to sulphiding (see figures 6 and 7 in appendix A). Sulphiding is caused by the residual chemicals, mainly fixer (sodium thiosulphate) that breaks down in high relative humidity and releases reactive sulphur, which reacts with the leftover silver ions. Sulphiding causes yellowing of the non-image areas of the photograph, and eventually these become brown. Colour Polaroids in this collection have also deteriorated. Many of the colour integral film Polaroids display cracking in the emulsion (please refer to figure 8 in appendix A). Because these materials have substantially deteriorated, they must be digitized as soon as possible and placed into proper enclosures and environmental conditions. Prints and transparencies will have to be separated, due to their different preservation requirements.  Despite the less than ideal environment and enclosures for photographic objects, the

majority of materials in this collection appear to be in adequate condition, and will benefit from archival storage conditions. Given Snow's reputation as a world renowned artist and one of

106

Lavédrine, Photographs of the Past: Process and Preservation, 262.

"31

Canada's greatest artists, and the amount of upcoming exhibitions and forthcoming publications on his work, it is likely that this collection will be of particular interest to curators and scholars. Future enclosures for this collection should accommodate handling concerns by using transparent plastic sheets for prints, to minimize damage. Due to their fragility, transparencies should not be handled unless by trained individuals (archivists or conservators ideally), and should be kept in cold storage, after being digitized.



Objects in the Collection



Almost all of the photographic objects in this collection relate to artworks by Snow, either

as documentation of creation and installation of works, or as film stills, contact sheets, print tests, and rejected prints. The objects in this collection provide a great opportunity to learn more about each artwork and, in particular, about Snow's creative process; namely, how his ideas develop, are worked out in notes, articulated in sketches, and shaped by photographic tests and documentations.  Snow uses the photographic medium in unconventional ways in his photo-works. His

photo-works are self-reflexive and reveal how they were made (figure 9 in appendix A). Bearing this in mind, many of the objects in Snow's collection can also be considered as integral parts of his art works, because they are compositional elements included in the making of the final work and are therefore documents of that process. This is highlighted by Snow's work with instant photography, for example in both A Wooden Look (1969) and Red5 (1974), Polaroid instant film is used in the process of creating (and documenting) the final work, "additively accumulating the

"32

way a painting is built up from successive brush strokes."107 These objects provide not only supplementary understanding and insight into Snow's art and photo-works, but also into the artist's process. The materials in this collection are important because in revealing Snow's creative process, they also show how certain works relate to each other or have led to the creation of other pieces.



Recommendations and Future Prospects



Photo-works figure prominently in Snow's vast body of artistic output, and can be also

seen as coinciding with his progressive shift from visual art to cinema; both originating in the Walking Woman (1961-67) series (photo-works with Four to Five, films with New York Eye and Ear Control) and during his time in New York. Snow's work is included in collections at numerous institutions in Canada and abroad. Among others within Canada, many of his works have been collected by the Art Gallery of Ontario (AGO) and the National Gallery of Canada (NGC). Although the AGO's collection holds several of Snow's artworks, the majority of his materials it holds consists of notes and paper documents108; the NGC holds more of his artworks than his notes and documentation materials in its collection, in comparison with the AGO. From both research and preservation perspectives, keeping the artwork and related paper documents together at one institution, as opposed to dispersing them between several, is generally the best approach to take when considering institutions for a donation of an artist's collection. For example, conservation and on-going preservation concerns, monitoring the condition of working
107 108

Michael Snow, The Collected Writings of Michael Snow (Waterloo: Wilfred Laurier Univ. Press, 2010): 282.

The objects included in the Michael Snow Fonds were transferred directly to the E.P. Taylor Research Library & Archives at the Art Gallery of Ontario by the artist in two donations, 1992 and 1996, following The Michael Snow Project retrospective. For more on this fonds, see: Art Gallery of Ontario, E.P. Taylor Research Library & Archives, CA OTAG SC052, Description & Finding Aid.

"33

materials (state of paper documents and state of artworks) would be much simpler to do with one institution. Since the NGC already has a substantial number of Snow's works in its collection,109 his photographic collection, catalogued for this thesis would greatly enhance NGC's existing collection, both in terms of new research on Snow's photo-works and their future exhibitions, as it would provide further insight and contextual information. For example, in an exhibition, the contents of this collection (Snow's notes, sketches, photographic tests and working prints) could be put in dialogue with his final photo-works by being displayed with these works. Such a display has the potential to spur new ways of thinking about Snow's photo-works and lead to new research.  In recent years, materials from artist collections often appear in exhibitions alongside

artworks to which they relate, thus providing historical context for understanding the artist's professional practice and personal life.110 The variety and the quantity of materials found in artist's (personal) collections pose some burden to institutions, as they try to make these materials accessible to researchers. While an artist's collection contains primary sources that researchers want to access, archivists implicitly intervene through the process of selecting and arranging documents.111 Collaboration and cooperation between living artists and archivists makes it possible for artists to participate in the process of creating their historical record, by providing information that helps archivists determine which materials are of importance and which are not. Snow's photo-work collection provides a behind-the-scenes look at the creation of some of his best known works of art, and into Snow's process, whereby every aspect and detail of the work, from its conception to execution, is carefully considered. The details divulged by the
109 110

According to the National Gallery's website, they hold 76 works across media from Michael Snow. Melissa Gill, "Artist Archives at the Getty Research Institute," News From the Field (2016): 306, accessed March 29 2017, doi:10.1080/01973762 Ibid.

111

"34

materials in this collection reveal the artist's working method: how details are carefully preconceived and executed for the final piece. Therefore, Snow's photo-works collection will be an invaluable resource for art historians, scholars studying specific photo-works included in this collection, as well as those interested in Snow's process, and scholars studying issues in preservation of photographic media and intermedia works.  Lastly, ANARCHIVE has set a precedent for considering new ways to approach the

practice of archiving works by new media and multidisciplinary artists. By deploying digital media in its archiving projects, ANARCHIVE provides a platform for thinking about art works not as singular entities, but instead how they relate to each other and provide deeper understandings of the artist's philosophy. The materials in Snow's collection provide significant supplementary information on his photo-works and will be of tremendous interest and use to scholars, curators, and people interested in Snow, in general. This collection should, therefore, be made accessible to the public. By digitizing materials in collection, this collection could be made widely available, while keeping the physical materials safe from external damage, e.g. handling and environmental factors. Moreover, this collection in digital form would greatly complement the existing ANARCHIVE project, Digital Snow, which was an indispensable resource in this thesis project, and holds the potential to open new paths for future research on this important Canadian artist.

"35

Conclusion



The objective of this thesis project was to research, identify and implement the most

suitable and effective approach for cataloguing a photographic collection of a multidisciplinary artist, Michael Snow. The appended catalogue (appendix D) demonstrates that this objective was met. Once this collection is procured by a collecting institution, with the resources to appropriately store and preserve these materials for perpetuity, it will undergo somewhat of a transformation (physical, by being rehoused, and logistical, by adhering to the institution's cataloguing standards) as it assimilates to the practices and procedures already in place.  Michael Snow is an important and prolific Canadian artist, whose work continues to be

exhibited and critically acclaimed around the world. Snow's photo-works are inseparable from his work in other media, as his practice has consistently explored ideas through more than one avenue. Through investigating different ways that the camera manipulates or represents reality, and producing images in ways that are unconventional and depart from the tradition of framed photo on the gallery wall, Snow is an innovator in experimental post-modern photo practices. Therefore, Snow's photographic collection (with its invaluable materials) will be an indispensable resource for research, as it will provide curators, art historians, and scholars with a plethora of contextual information and informative details on the creation of many photo-works by Michael Snow. I am certain that these materials will be used in the future, whether for research, exhibition, or publication.

"36

Bibliography Arnaud, Jean and Stevens, Molly. "Touching to See." October 114 (2005): 5-16. Batchen, Geoffrey. "The Art of Archiving." In Deep Storage: Collecting, Storing and Archiving in Art. Edited by   Ingrid Schaffner and Matthias Winzen, 46-49. New York: Presetel-Verlag, 1998.

Belton, Robert J. Sights of resistance: approaches to Canadian Visual Culture. Calgary: University of Calgary   Press, 2001.

Canadian Committee on Archival Description. Rules for Archival Description: Canadian Archival Standard.    Ottawa: Bureau of Canadian Archivists, 2008 (revised). Accessed October 7, 2016. <http:// www.cdncouncilarchives.ca/archdesrules.html>

Cibola, Anne. "Old Works / New Works: When Contemporary Photographic Artworks Held by    Canadian Public Institutions Changes After Accession." Masters thesis, Ryerson Univeristy, 2014.

Conway, Paul. "Preservation in the Age of Google: Digitization, Digital Preservation, and Dilemmas."   Library Quarterly 80.1 (Illinois: University of Chicago): 61-79.

Dalmau, Michelle, Floyd, Randall, Jiao, Dazhi, and Riley, Jenn. "Integrating thesaurus relationships into   search and browse in an online photograph collection," Library Hi Tech 23 (2005): 425-452.

Dlugosz, Olga M. "Digital application solutions in collections management: the photographer's catalogue  database: case study: Sally Mann." Masters thesis, Ryerson University Image Arts, 2007.

Dompierre, Louise. "Embodied Vision: The Painting, Sculpture, Photo-Work, Sound Installation, Music,     Holographic Work, Films and Books of Michael Snow from 1970 to 1993," in The Michael Snow  Project: Visual Art 1951 - 1993. Edited by Dennis A. Reid, 388-520. Toronto: Alfred A. Knopf  Canada, 1994.

"37

Elder, Bruce R. "The Photographic Image in Avant-Garde Film," in Image and Identity: reflections on Canadian   film and culture, 263-295. Ontario: Wilfrid Laurier University Press in collaboration with the  Academy of Canadian Cinema & Television, 1989.

Farber, Richard. Alternative Photographic Processes. New York: Allworth Press, 1998. Fondation Langlois. "Michael Snow." Last modified 2011. Accessed November 21, 2016.  <http://www.fondation-langlois.org/html/e/page.php?NumPage=94>

Fulford, Robert. "Michael Snow." Canadian Art 18.1 (1961): 46­47. Fulford, Robert, and Snow, Michael. Michael Snow: A Survey. Ontario: Art Gallery of Ontario and Isaacs   Gallery, 1970.

Furness, Amy. "Towards a Definition of Visual Artists' Archives: Vera Frankel's Archives as a Case Study."  PhD thesis, University of Toronto Faculty of Information, 2012.

Gill, Melissa, "Artist Archives at the Getty Research Institute," News From the Field (2016): 306, accessed   March 29, 2017, doi:10.1080/01973762

Harvey, Jocelyn. "Arts, Heritage and Cultural Industries Funding." The Canadian Encyclopedia, last modified   December 16, 2013. Accessed May 8, 2017. <http://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.ca/en/ article/arts-heritage-and-cultural-industries-funding/>

Harvey, Jocelyn. "Canadian Council for the Arts." The Canadian Encyclopedia, last modified March 4, 2015.   Accessed August 18, 2017. < http://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.ca/en/article/canada- council-for-the-arts/>

Harvey, Ross, Mahard, Martha R. The Preservation Management Handbook: A 21st-Century Guide for Libraries,   Archives, and Museums. Washington D.C.: Rowman & Littlefield, 2014.

Higgins, Dick. "Intermedia," Leonardo vol. 34, no. 1 (2001): 49-54.

"38

International Standard Organization. "Imaging materials - Processed imaging materials - Photographic    activity test for enclosure materials." Last modified November 1, 2007. Accessed October 23,  2016. <211.67.52.20:8088/xitong/bz%5CISO-18916-2007.pdf>

Inventory of the Avrom Isaacs fonds, F0134. Clara Thomas Archives, York University, Toronto, Ontario,   Canada.

James, Christopher. The Book of Alternative Photographic Processes: 3rd edition. Ontario: Nelson Education,   2015.

Jenkins, Bruce, Snow, Michael, and Moure, Gloria. Michael Snow: Sequences: A History of His Art. Barcelona:   Ediciones Polígrafia, 2015.

Kaminer, Michael. "How Av Isaacs Shaped Toronto's Art Scene." September 17, 2016. Accessed April   24, 2017. <http://forward.com/culture/349789/how-av-isaacs-shaped-torontos-art-scene/>

Kellman, Tila. Figuring Redemption: Resighting My Self in the Art of Michael Snow. Ontario: Wilfrid Laurier   Press, 2002.

Klepac, Walter. "Photo-Philosophical Investigations: Photographic Works of Michael Snow 1962-1999"    in Michael Snow: Panoramique, Photographic Works & Films 1962-1999. Paris: Centre National de la  Photographie, 1999.

Langford, Martha. Michael Snow: Life & Work. Ontario: Art Canada Institute, 2014. Langford, Martha. "Strange Bedfellows: Appropriation of the Vernacular by Photographic Artists."   Photography and Culture 1 (2008): 73-93.

Lavédrine, Bertrand, Gandolfo, Jean Paul & Monod, Sibylle. A Guide to the Preventive Conservation of    Photograph Collections. California: Getty Publications, 2003. Lavédrine, Bertrand. Photographs of the Past: Process and Preservation. California: Getty Publications, 2009.

"39

Lessard, Bruno. "Between Creation and Preservation: The ANARCHIVE Project." Convergence: The   International Journal of New Media Technologies 15 (2009): 315-331.

Lombino, Mary-Kay. The Polaroid Years: Instant Photography and Experimentation. Munich: Vassar College and   Prestel Verlag, 2013.

McNally, Anna. "All that Stuff !" In All This Stuff: Archiving the Artist, edited by Judy Vaknin, Karyn Stuckey,  and Victoria Lane, 97-108. UK: Libri Publishing, 2013.

MacNeil, Heather. "Trusting Description: Authenticity, Accountability, and Archival Description    Standards." Journal of Archival Organization 7 (2009): 89-107.

McElhone, John P. "Michael Snow's Authorization: Materials and Preservation." National Gallery of   Canada Review 7. (2016): 89-96.

McLuhan, Marshall. Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man, 1964. Michael Snow Fonds, CA OTAG SC052. E.P. Taylor Research Library and Archives, Art Gallery of   Ontario, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Michener, Wendy. Interview with Michael Snow. Canadian Art 102, July, 1966. Morris, David. "The Idea of Snow." The Literary Review of Canada November 1994. National Information Standards Organization (NISO). Understanding Metadata. Bethesda, MD: 2004. National Gallery of Canada. "Planned Giving." Accessed November 9, 2016. <https://www.gallery.ca/  en/give/1557.php>

National Film Preservation Foundation. "Duplication" in The Film Preservation Guide, 41-58. California:   National Film Preservation Foundation, 2004.

"40

NorthEast Document Conservation Center. "NEDCC Preservation Leaflets." Last modified    leaflets/overview>



1999. Accessed November 12, 2016. <https://www.nedcc.org/free-resources/preservation-

Psaila, Denise. "Design and Materials for Photographic Housing." Masters thesis, Ryerson University,   2006.

Reilly, J.M. Storage Guide for Color Photographic Materials. New York: Image Permanence Institute, 1998. Rieger, Thomas. "Technical Guidelines for Digitizing Cultural Heritage Materials: Creation of Raster     Image Files." Federal Agencies Digitization Guidelines Initiative, last modified September 2016. Accessed December 11, 2016. <http://www.digitizationguidelines.gov/guidelines/ FADGI_Still_Image_Tech_Guidelines_2016.pdf>  

Riztenthaler, Mary Lynn, and Vogt-O'Connor, Diane. Photographs: Archival Care and Management.   Illinois: Society of American Archivists, 2006.



Rosenberg, Karen. "Multiple Exposures, Looking Both Ways: Michael Snow's Photographs and Other     Works in Philadelphia," New York Times, February 6, 2014. Accessed October 7, 2016. <http:// www.nytimes.com/2014/02/07/arts/design/michael-snows-photographs-and-other-works-in- philadelphia.html>

Sitney, Adams P. Visionary Film: The American Avant-Garde, 1943-2002 3rd e.d. New York: Oxford University  Press, 2002.

Snow, Michael. Cover to Cover. Halifax: Nova Scotia College of Art and Design, 1975. Snow, Michael. "Notes on the Whys and Hows of my Photographic Works," in Michael Snow: Panoramique,   Photographic Works & Films 1962-1999. Paris: Centre National de la Photographie, 1999.

Snow, Michael, and Dompierre, Louise. The Collected Writings of Michael Snow. Waterloo: Wilfred Laurier   University Press, 2010.

"41

Stroebel, Leslie, Compton, John, Current, Ira, and Zakia, Richard. Photographic Materials and Processes.   Boston: Focal Press, 1986.

Swain, Lynn. "Storage" in Museum Registration Methods 5th Edition, edited by Rebecca A. Buck and Jean   Allman Gilmore, 293-300. DC: AAM Press, 2010.

Taubin, Amy. "Doubled Visions." October 4 (1977): 33­42 Tweedie, Katherine and Cousineau, Penny. "Photography." The Canadian Encyclopedia. Last modified    March 4, 2015. Accessed May 8 2017. <http://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.ca/en/article/ photography/>

Vass, Michael. "Both Sides Now: Michael Snow in Philadelphia," Canadian Art, April 27, 2014. Accessed  October 7, 2016. <http://canadianart.ca/reviews/michael-snow/>

Vlas, Adelina, e.d. Michael Snow Photo-Centric. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2014. Wentzel, Larry. "Scanning for Digitization Projects: Making Good Scans Means Doing More Than Just     Pressing Buttons. If You Understand What Software to Choose, Which File Formats to Use, and  What the Specifications Really Mean, You Can Create Digital Images with Optimal Quality"  Computers in Libraries 27 (2007): 6-10.

Youngblood, Gene. "Icon and Idea in the World of Michael Snow." Artscanada 27.1 (1970): 2-14. Youngblood, Gene, and R., Buckminster. Expanded cinema. New York: Dutton, 1970.

"42

Appendix A: Michael Snow Photo-Works Collection: Reference Images

Fig. 1 The current state of Snow's photo collection. Photo taken by Ariel BaderShamai, used with permission of the artist.

"43

Fig. 2 Photo taken by Ariel BaderShamai, used with permission of the artist.

Fig. 3 Photo taken by Ariel BaderShamai, used with permission of the artist.

"44

Fig. 4 Photo taken by Ariel BaderShamai, used with permission of the artist.

Fig. 5 Photo taken by Ariel Bader-Shamai, used with permission of the artist.

"45

Fig. 6 Photo taken by Ariel Bader-Shamai, used with permission of the artist.

Fig. 7 Photo taken by Ariel Bader-Shamai, used with permission of the artist.

"46

Fig. 8 Photo taken by Ariel Bader-Shamai, used with permission of the artist.

Fig. 9 Photo taken by Ariel BaderShamai, used with permission of the artist.

"47

Appendix B: Michael Snow Photo-Works Collection: Cataloguing Guide Michael Snow Photo-Works Collection Dates of creation:  ca. 1940-2012 Extent: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. Gelatin silver prints: 1040 Chromogenic (colour) prints: 2713 35mm slides: 1085 Gelatin silver transparencies (35mm): 143 Gelatin silver transparencies (other sized): 143 Chromogenic transparencies (35mm): 624 Chromogenic transparencies (other sized): 275 Contact sheets (both gelatin silver and chromogenic): 244 Polaroid: 521 Instax prints: 11 16mm film (strips): 58 Inkjet prints: 66 Reversal: 62

Biographical Sketch: Michael Snow (1929 - ) is a Canadian artist working across media, including painting, sculpture, photography, film, video, holography, music, drawing, books, and more. He studied art (mainly painting, drawing and sculpture) and design at the Ontario College of Art. His first solo exhibition was held at the Isaacs Gallery in Toronto in 1956. In 1970, Snow was chosen to represent Canada at the Venice Biennale. Snow's work has been exhibited across North and South America, Europe, Asia, and Australia. Snow continues to make work Scope: Fonds consists of files contained within Michael Snow's collection of photo-works. This includes photographic materials (prints and transparencies), some printed email correspondence, preparatory sketches and drawings, exhibition documentation and announcements, CD-ROMs. This project focuses on the photographic material within this collection. Contains series: 1. Photo-works (includes preparatory work and prints, originals, final prints) 2. Artworks (non-photographic works, includes preparatory work and documentation) 3. Exhibition material A. Views and installation B. Other documents related to exhibitions 4. Musical documentation C. CCMC 5. Publications 6. Life (outside of art making)

"48

Custodial history: The fonds is currently in possession of the artist. Arrangement: The fonds has been arranged by the archivist following the original order of the creator. Provenance access point: Michael Snow (1928- )

"49

Element Title

Description

guidelines

Original title of the work, as given Record the title as it is listed by the creator either by ANARCHIVE, The Centre for Contemporary Canadian Art Database, or Unambiguous numerical or alphanumerical reference to the file. An entity primarily responsible for making the resource. Classification of material. Extent and formats of materials. Date of creation, publication, Use the ISO 8601 for date release, distribution, or copyright. Concise, objective, non-critical summary of the contents of the file. Dimensions of material. Inscriptions List photographic materials included in the file. Additional notes Additional notes Concise, objective, non-critical summary of visible deterioration present on units. Publisher information and date. Use RAD, "Graphic Materials" 4.5C, and the Getty Art and Architecture Thesaurus. Use metric measurements. Record inscriptions as they appear on the file or inscription. Use The Getty Art and Architecture Thesaurus. Use accepted authority files, including Getty ULAN and LOC Name Authority. Classes include

Series identifier

Creator

Class Scope Date Content description

Scale Inscriptions Photographic materials Notes (1) Notes (2) Physical condition

Publishing info

Guidelines based on Rules for Archival Description (RAD) for Graphic Material RAD defines graphic materials as documents in the form of pictures, photographs, drawings, watercolours, prints and other forms of two-dimensional pictorial representations.112 Sources (based on RAD 4.0B1)

Canadian Committee on Archival Description. "Chapter 4: Graphic Materials," Rules for Archival Description: Canadian Archival Standard (Ottawa: Bureau of Canadian Archivists, 2008): 4-3.
112

"50

Primary sources of information have been used for cataloguing the files and units. In the absence of these sources, reference material from ANARCHIVE and the Centre for Contemporary Canadian Art has been used. Punctuation & Capitalization (based on RAD 1.4A2) Punctuation has been used as it appears in the source. Proper nouns and place names have also be capitalized. Elements of description have been preceded by a full stop, space, semi-colon space; alternatively, a new paragraph for each element of description has been started. Introductory wording of an element of description are separated from the main content by a semi-colon followed by a space. When several entries are made in one element, each entry has been separated with a space and a semi-colon.  e.g.: Powers of Two ; Multiplication Table ; Sink Abbreviations (based on RAD 1.0C) Abbreviations have been transcribed as found. In descriptive elements, abbreviations are not used. Inaccuracies (based on RAD 1.0F1) Errors are transcribed as found, with either a correction or "sic" following in square brackets. Title (based on RAD 1.1A1) At least one title, identifying phrase, or name for the file has been recorded. If there are no identifying features, the title element has been recorded as [Untitled]. If title is based on content of the unit or inscriptions, square brackets have been used and made note of in the notes section. Creator The creator is an entity primarily responsible for making the resource. Personal names have been entered as lastname, firstname, title, year of birth-year of death. Accepted authority files such as LOC Name Authority and Getty ULAN have been used. e.g. Snow, Michael (Canadian painter, sculptor, and filmmaker, born 1929) If an entity does not appear in accepted authority files, the name element has been entered as lastname, firstname. Date Date(s) of creation for the unite being described have been recorded using ISO 8601, which prescribes that dates should be formatted hierarchically as Year-Month-Day, using this convention: YYYY-MM-DD. Where full dates are not known, the format follows Year-Month YYYY-MM or just Year YYYY. If multiple dates are present, a range starting with the earliest to latest dates have have been listed. When uncertain of particular date, ca. has been used to indicate a range either 5 years prior to or following. When absolutely no date available, listed as n.d.    e.g.: 1962 - 2002  1998-06  ca. 1986 (this would encompass 1981-1991)

"51

Extent (including specific material designation) (based on RAD 1.5B) The extent of the unit being described has been recorded by giving the number of physical units in arabic numerals and a specific material designation (terms based on the Getty Art and Architecture Thesaurus). If ascertainable, any physical details other than extent or dimensions that are considered important have been given. Other physical details are preceded by a colon. Dimensions are preceded by a semicolon. When three or more classes of material are included in one file, the physical extent and the specific material designation of the most predominant special class of material is recorded, followed by the phrase "and other graphic material, with a description of the remaining material in the notes section.  e.g. 178 photographs : col. ; 35mm and other graphic material

Notes (based on RAD 1.8) This area is used for descriptive information that cannot be fitted into other areas of description. Scope (based on RAD 1.7) For all levels of description, this area is used to present information about the context and content of the unit being described. On the file level, information has been given on the subject matter, the time period, and the geographical area to which it pertains. Scale (based on RAD 4.5B3) When a file contains more than three units of different sizes, information has been listed by the largest size, followed by `or smaller.' Measurements have been recorded using the metric system. Inscriptions (based on 4.8B7) Inscriptions on a unit have been recorded with indications as to where they appear. When more than three inscriptions appear on one unit, it has been noted that there are multiple inscriptions.   e.g. Inscribed on container recto : OLD JAZZ PHOTOS + INFO. Multiple interior inscriptions.

Series This numerical or alphanumerical reference connects the files to the series with which they belong. When more than one series is applicable to a file, both have been listed, separated by a comma and a space. The series are classified as follows: 1. Photo-works This series includes material by the artist, Michael Snow, that pertain to his photo-works. For this project, films by Snow are included in this series, based on the basic photographic materials of which they are made. Items include photographic material (including holograms), film stills, preparatory notes and drawings, printed emails, documentation, and so on. Photo-works in this collection include:
New York Ear and Eye Control (1966) Walk and Roll on the Beach [part of the Walking Woman (1961-67) series] (1966) <---> (a.k.a Back and Forth) (1967) Amplastic Inc. 359 Canal St. NYC (1967) Wavelength (1967) Atlantic (1967) Snow Storm, February 8, 1967 (1968) One Second in Montreal (1969)

"52

Authorization (1969) Tap (1969) A Wooden Look (1969) 8x10 (1969) Slidelength (1969-71) Morning in Holland (1969-74) A Casing Shelved (1970) Digest (1970) Crouch Leap Land (1970) Shore (1970) Venetian Blind (1970) Halifax Harbour (1970) Sink (1970) La Région Centrale (1971) Of a Ladder (1971) Stop the Spadina Expressway. Don't let the future kill you now. (1971) Brock University Photo Mural (1971-73) Glares (1973) Field (1973-74) Midnight Blue (1973-74) Light Blues (1973-74) Slide (1974) Red5 (1974) Rameau's Newphew by Diderot (Thanx to Dennis Young) by Wilma Schoen (1974) Imposition (1976) Traces (1977) Multiplication Table (1977) Wild Flower Bed (1977) Government of Canada Building (1978) Painting (1978) Waiting Room (1978) Flames (1979) Flight Stop (1979) X30 (1979) Rendezvous (1979) Iris-Iris (1979) Presents (1980-81) Ducks Drawn Back (1981) Still Living (9x4 Acts, Scene One) (1982) In the Woods (1982) Stereo (1982) So Is This (1982) Race (1984) Egg (1985) Still Life in 8 Calls (1985) Redifice (1986) See You Later / Au Revoir (1990) To Lavoisier, Who Died in the Reign of Terror (1991) Insect Shadow Drawing (1992) Conception of Light (1992) Over the Sofa (1992-96) Window (1996) D'abord Alcibiade et puis... (1996) Two Values/Deux Valeurs (1996) Adam and Eve [part of the Walking Woman series] (1996) The Walking Man [part of the photo-work, Adam and Eve (1996)] (1996) VUEEUV (1998) La Ferme du Buisson (1998) Paris de jugement Le and/or State of the Arts (1998) Immediate Delivery (1998) In Medias Res (1998) Manifestation (Autourisation of 8 faces) (1999) Prelude (2000) The Living Room (2000)

"53

*Corpus Calossum (2002) Solar Breath (2002) Flo-mo Camera (2002) Line Drawing with Synapse (2003) Sparkler (2003) Powers of Two (2003-04) Saw (2008)

2. Artworks This series includes material by the artist that pertain to his artworks in other media. Artworks in this collection include:
Secret Shout (1960) Morningside Heights (1965) Blind (1968) De La (1969-72) The Audience (1989) Derma (1990) Red, Orange and Green (1992) Place des Peaux (1998) That/Cela/Dat (2000) Intérieur (2001)

3. Exhibition material This series includes material by the artist that pertain to his exhibitions. This includes A) views and installation, and B) other documents related to exhibitions. This includes photographic material, announcements, preparatory notes and drawings, and printed emails. Exhibitions in this collection include:  Expo '67, Montreal, QC.
     Michael Snow: Walking Woman Retrospective 1963-65. Vancouver Art Gallery, January 5-29, 1967. Expo '86, Montreal, QC. Isaacs Gallery, Toronto, ON. 1993. Powers of Two. Jack Shainman Gallery, New York, NY. 2004. Videosphere: A New Generation. Albright Knox Gallery, Buffalo, NY. 2011.

4. Musical documentation This series includes material related to Snow's musical career. This includes, notably, the CCMC (Canadian Creative Music Collective), a free music band formed in 1974 in Toronto. 5. Publications This series indicates material used in a publication either about or by the artist. This includes publications accompanying exhibitions. This includes:
Canadian Art Magazine. Issue No. 102, July, 1966. Toronto, ON. Michael Snow : A Survey. (1970) Cover to Cover. (1975) The Michael Snow Project: Visual Art 1951-1993. (1994). Figuring Redemption: Resighting My Self in the Art of Michael Snow. (2002).

For full citations, see bibliography. 6. Life (outside of art making) This series includes photographic material that does not explicitly relate to Snow's artistic career or process. This includes photographs of Snow's early life.

"54

Appendix C: Michael Snow Photo-Works Collection: Object Counts
Appendix D: Object counts Prints

Prints
Black & White Prints 2.25x 4" (5.72x10.16 cm) 2.5 x 3.5" (6.35x8.89 cm) 3 x 5" (7.62x12.7 cm) 3.25 x 4.25" (8.26x10.8 cm) 3.5 x 2.25" (8.89x5.7 cm) 3.5 x 3.5" (8.89x8.89 cm) 3.5 x 4" (8.89x10.16 cm) 3.5 x 4.5" (8.89x11.43 cm) 3.5 x 5" (8.89x12.7 cm) 3.5 x 18" (8.89x45.72 cm) 4.25 x 3.25" (10.8x8.26 cm) 4.25 x 4" (10.8x10.16 cm) 4 x 5" (10.16x12.7 cm) 4 x 6" (10.16x15.24 cm) 4 x 8" (10.16x20.32 cm) 4 x 10" (10.16x25.4 cm) 4 x 17" (10.16x43.18 cm) 5 x 7" (12.7x17.78 cm) 5 x 8" (12.7x20.32 cm) 5 x 9" (12.7x22.86 cm) 5 x 10" (12.7x25.4 cm) 6 x 8" (15.24x20.32 cm) 6.25 x 9.5" (15.87x24.13 cm) 6.75 x 10" (17.15x25.4 cm) 6 x 7" (15.24x17.78 cm) 7 x 9" (17.79x22.86 cm) 7 x 9.5" (17.79x24.13 cm) 7 x 10" (17.79x25.4 cm) 7 x 10.5" (17.79x26.67 cm) 8 3 1 1 19 4 6 71 9 2 1 68 6 1 1 50 82 214 1970 18 104 1 3 1 1 1 4 51 16 13 17 Colour Prints

55

10

Prints continued
Black & White Prints 7.25 x 5" (18.41x12.7 cm) 8x10" (20.32x25.4 cm) 8x12" (20.32x30.48 cm) 8.75x 11.75" (22.23x29.85 cm) 8.5 x 11" (21.59x27.94 cm) 8.5x14" (21.59x35.56 cm) 9x18" (22.86x45.72 cm) 11x11" (27.94x27.94 cm) 10x10.5" (25.4x26.67 cm) 11x14" (27.94x35.56 cm) 11x17" (27.94x43.18 cm) 3 1 3 1 1 2 1 22 2 600 Colour Prints 43 171 1

Total..........

1040

2713

56
11

Negatives and reversals
Negatives & Reversals
B/w negatives Strips (35mm) Sheets (35mm) Indiv. (35mm) Slides (35mm) 120mm 4x5" (10.16x12.7 cm) 8x10" (20.32x25.4 cm) 2 x 2.75" (5.08x6.98 cm) 2.5 x 3.5" (6.35x8.89 cm) 2.5 x 2.5" (6.35x6.35 cm) 17 108 7 1085 79 163 2 10 1 16 2 3 6 7 7 19 6 1 587 11 Colour negatives 624 4 18 B/w reversals Colour reversal B/w copy neg Colour copy neg.

Total...............

730

899

9

53

6

1

57

Other
Other
Contact sheets b/ w Contact sheets colour Polaroid Instax 16mm Film (strips) Inkjet b/w Inkjet colour 111 133 521 11 58 15 51

Total.....

900

1 58

Appendix C: Michael Snow Photo-Works Collection: Catalogue
Scope This file contains photographs documenting the artwork, Ducks Drawn Back (Shaw Industries Limited). 1981 3 photographs: col. This file consists of images that document Snow's artwork exhibited at Expo '67 in Montreal, including Walking Woman, and images of Joyce Wieland. This file consists of photographic material relating to the artwork Flight Stop, a photo-sculptural installation at the Toronto Eaton Centre. 1979 1 sheet of negatives and other graphic 35mm and 20.32 x 25.4 material 1967 14 photographs and other material 20.32 x 25.4 cm or smaller Exterior container inscription: REPRINTS B/w one of each *Please check marks on the sleeve EXPO '67 Gelatin silver prints and negatives. Also includes 7 sheets of negatives (b&w ; 35mm), 9 contact sheets (b&w) Also includes 1 copy negative (b&w), 3 contact sheets Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. 10.16 x 15.24 cm Exterior container inscription : B&W 4x6 Prints. Gelatin silver prints. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Date Extent Scale Inscriptions Photographic materials Notes (1) Notes (2) Physical Condition Publishing info.

Appendix D: Michael Snow Photo-Works Collection:

Reference number

Series

Creator

Title

1

Ducks Drawn Back 2 Snow, Michael (Canadian painter, (Shaw Industries sculptor, and Limited) filmmaker, born 1929)

2

3 Snow, Michael

Expo '67

3

1 Snow, Michael

Flight Stop

Inscribed on container recto: Contacts + NEW NEGS - Flight Stop Construction Interior inscription on negative sheet: Bruce Mau Design

Gelatin silver prints and negatives.

4 4C This file consists of photographic material relating to the album cover for CCMC's "The Last LP," released in 1987. ca. 1987

Snow, Michael

CCMC

1 contact sheet : b&w 1 strip of negatives : b&w ; 35mm

35mm and 20.32 x 25.4

Multiple inscriptions on container recto: Nineteen Nights Contact + negs --> THE LAST LP Neg #10 ; Do not use. SW brought in her album cover. 1 B&W neg strip. 1 contact sheet. Multiple inscriptions on container recto: M Snow DIGEST ; 2 colour negs ; DIGEST extras/rejects info ; Notes 5 11x14 colour images ; NOTES 5 11x14 colour images ; 4 colour contacts ; Colour neg strips ; Notes
Chromogenic prints. Chromogenic prints and negatives. Also includes 5 photographs (col.), 4 contact sheets (col.), 11 sheets of paper

Gelatin silver prints and negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

5 This file consists of photographic material, notes and preparatory sketches relating to the photo-work Digest.

1 Snow, Michael

Digest

1970 19 strips of negatives: col. ; 35mm,

and other graphic material

27.94 x 35.56 or smaller

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

6

1 Snow, Michael 1998 2 photographs

VUEEUV

This file consists of photographic material, notes and preparatory sketches relating to the photo-work VUEEUV.

20 pieces of paper

12.7 x 17.78 cm and 21.59 x 27.94 cm

Multiple inscriptions on container recto: new work ; 4600-6310 ; Preparation materiel [sic] for "VUEEUV" <--- label it Multiple inscriptions on container recto : 8 x 10 ; '69 negs, contacts + NEW '99 EXTRA print ; original negs washed and new sleeves Dec 99 Michael Snow Multiple inscriptions on container recto: `Cover to Cover' 8x10s of the book Mar '99 ; Polaroids. 8x10 prints. 8x5 b&w photos. Negs.
Gelatin silver prints and negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

7 This file consists of photographic material (mainly test prints) relating to the photo-work 8x10 .

1 Snow, Michael

8x10

1969 40 photographs: b&w and other

graphic material

20.32 x 25.4 cm or smaller

Also includes 4 35mm negatives (b&w), 4 contact sheets (b&w), 1 sheet of paper

Some prints show visible signs of deterioration.

8 This file consists of photographic material relating to the book Cover to Cover.

5 Snow, Michael

Cover to Cover

1975 44 photographs and other graphic

material

20.32 x 25.4 cm or smaller

Gelatin silver prints and negatives, Polaroid.

Also includes 1 sheet of negatives (b&w ; 35mm), 25 Polaroids (b&w)

Some of the prints are taking on a purple hue, otheres display deterioration. Polaroids display evidence of sulphiding. Digitization and rehousing recommended for all objects.

Cover to Cover. [Halifax : Press of Nova Scotia College of Art & Design, 1975]

9

1 Snow, Michael 2003 17 negatives : col. ; 35mm, and other

Paris de jugement Le and/or State of the Arts

This file consists of photographic, preparatory material, and CD-ROM's relating to the photo-work, Paris de jugement Le and/or State of the Arts.

graphic material

21.59 x 27.94 cm or smaller

Chromogenic negatives, Polaroid, Instax.

Also includes 8 Polaroids (b&w), 11 Instax prints, 36 pieces of paper, 5 CD-ROM's

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

10 This file consists of photographic documentation of the sculpture, Red Orange and Green, a public installation in downtown Toronto commissioned by Confederation Life Insurance Company. 1992 124 photographs and other graphic

2 Snow, Michael

Red Orange and Green

1992 34 photographs : col.

10.16 x 15.24 cm

Inscribed on container recto: SNOW Inscribed on container interior: June 92 "Allweld" Michael Snow

Chromogenic prints.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

11 This file consists of photographic documentation of the sculpture, Red Orange and Green, a public installation in downtown Toronto commissioned by Confederation Life Insurance Company.

2 Snow, Michael

Red Orange and Green

material

20.32 x 25.4 cm or smaller

Inscribed on container recto: RED ORANGE AND GREEN ; Const instal photos + negs ; Recombinant ; Rotten Lemon ; 4x6 prints. Negs. 1 8x10 contact sheet Inscribed on interior: May '92. Red Orange and Green. Michael Snow (Allweld)

Chromogenic prints and negatives.

Also includes 130 strips of negatives (col. ; 35mm), 1 contact sheet (col.)

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

12

4 Snow, Michael

[Variations on] Darn it!

This file consists of photographic material relating to the song "Variations on Darn It" in collaboration with Paul Haines. This file consists of 120mm chromogenic negatives related to a performance with Jo Leslie at Pavlychenko Studios [Toronto] in 1986 [1986?]

[1987?]

5 strips of negatives : b&w ; 35mm 1 contact sheet : b&w
7 strips of negatives : col. ; 120mm

35mm and 20.32 x 25.4 cm

Inscribed on container recto: DARN IT! Negs Contacts ; contact sheet. b&w negs.
120mm

Gelatin silver prints and negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

13

4 Snow, Michael

Chromogenic Inscribed on container recto : MICHAEL SNOW dance piece at negatives. Pavlychenko studios with? when? ; transparency strips 1996 16 colour slides

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

14 2, 5

Snow, Michael

Window

This file consists of 35mm slides relating to the artwork Window, and photocopies from The Michael Snow Project [1994] and preparatory notes for Snow's installation of Window at S.I Simpson Gallery [Toronto] in 1996. This file contains photographic material and preparatory drawings for the photowork VUEEUV.

Approx. 15 photocopied sheets

35mm and 21.59 x 27.94 cm

Inscribed on container recto : Michael Snow Catalogues returned from Jay Garney Inscribed on container verso : Anthology WINDOW 1998 1 photograph and other graphic

Colour slides.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

The Michael Snow Project: Visual Art 1951-1993. Edited by Dennis A. Reid. Toronto: Alfred A. Knopf Canada, 1994.

15

1 Snow, Michael

VUEEUV

material

21.59 x 27.94 cm or smaller

Inscribed on container recto : MICHAEL SNOW TO ATLANTIC. CHIFFON `VUEEUV'. ; Notes. 4x5 transparencies

Chromogenic prints and negatives.

Also includes 6 negatives (col. ; 10.16 x 12.7 cm), 5 sheets of paper.

Includes preparatory drawings for VUEEUV.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

1

!59

Reference number This file contains photographic material taken at The Power Plant in Toronto, 1992. 1992 7 strips of negatives and other graphic 21.59 x 27.94 cm or smaller material

Series

Creator

Title

Scope

Date

Extent

Scale

Inscriptions

Photographic materials Chromogenic prints and negatives. Also includes1 contact Title is based on the sheet (col.), multiple content of the image. photocopies. Photocopied sheets are preparatory notes for Snow's installation of Window at S.I. Simpson Gallery in 1996. Also includes 3 Polaroids, 4 sheets of paper Also includes 19 negatives (col.), 1 postcard The postcard is an invitation to Snow's Powers of Two exhibition at the Jack Shainman Gallery (New York). Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

Notes (1)

Notes (2)

Physical Condition

Publishing info.

16

1 Snow, Michael

Power Plant Skaters, Feb 7 '92 note: title based on content of the image.

Inscribed on container recto : Power Plant Skaters taken Feb 7 '92 ; Negatives. 8x10 Contact

17 This file contains photographic material relating to the photo-work Multiplication Table. 1977 [date of work], 1993 reprints

1 Snow, Michael

Multiplication Table

4 photographs and other graphic material 5 photographs and other graphic material
10.16 x 12.7 cm and 20.32 x 25.4 cm

21.59 x 27.94 cm or smaller

Inscribed on container recto : MULTIPLICATION TABLE Inscribed on container recto : SEX I trans + 7 ____ negs + final selects "POWERS OF TWO"
Chromogenic prints and negatives.

Chromogenic prints and negatives, Polaroid.

18 This file contains photographic material relating to the photo-work Powers of Two. 2003-04

1 Snow, Michael

Powers of Two

19

1 Snow, Michael

Powers of Two

This file contains photographic material and textual documents related to the photo-work Powers of Two.

2003-04

2 photographic reversals : col. approx. 20 pages preparatory notes, drawings, printed emails related to "POWERS OF TWO" 3 Polaroids : col. and other graphic material. 4 test prints
20.32 x 25.4 cm 20.32 x 25.4 or smaller

20.32 x 25.4 cm

Inscribed on container recto : POWERS OF TWO

Colour reversal.

20 This file contains photographic material related to the photo-work Powers of Two. This file contains test prints for the photo-work Powers of Two. 2003-04 2003-04

1 Snow, Michael

Powers of Two

Inscribed on container recto : WW Chromogenic prints, Polaroid. DUPES POWERS OF TWO Inscribed on container verso : Michael Snow Powers of Two 2003 Inscribed on container recto : HOLOGRAPHY NEGS ; neg strips Inscribed on container recto : transparency of SPEED OF LIGHT ; 2 colour transparencies + 2 colour transparencies Inscribed on container recto : SINK ; 4x5 negs. Notes.
Inscribed on container recto : MASTER SLIDE SINK photo Jan 2012 [possible 2002] Chromogenic negatives. Chromogenic negatives. Chromogenic negatives. Title based on content of the file. Chromogenic test prints. Test prints for colour approval.

Also includes 1 photograph, 1 CDROM

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

21

1 Snow, Michael

Powers of Two

22

1 Snow, Michael

Holography tests note: title based on content of the file.

This file contains photographic material relating to works in holography.

[1995?]

11 strips of negatives : col. ; 35mm 2 colour slides
1999 4 negatives : col. ; 4x5 10.16 x 12.7 cm

35mm

23 This file contains photographic transparencies relating to the photowork Speed of Light.

1 Snow, Michael

Speed of Light

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

24

1 Snow, Michael

Sink

This file contains photographic material and preparatory notes for photo-work Sink.

1970 [date of work], 1998 reprints

5 negatives : col., 1 sheet of paper 1 photograph : col. ; 10x10.5" 1 colour slide 2 sheets of negatives : col. ; 35mm 30 colour slides
35mm 35mm and 25.4 x 26.67 cm

6.35 x 3.39 and 10.16 x 12.7 cm

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

25

1 Snow, Michael

Sink

The file contains photographic material relating to the photo-work Sink. This file contains photographic material for an uncompleted artwork.

[2002 or 2012]

Chromogenic prints and negatives. According to the artist, these were preparatory for an art work that was never executed. Chromogenic prints and negatives, Polaroid.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

26

1 Snow, Michael

Flag Vision

Inscribed on container recto : Flag Chromogenic negatives, slides. Vision

27 1, 3

Snow, Michael

This file contains photographic material relating to two art works: The artist's right hand writing; photo taken by his left hand [The Collected Writing's of Michael Snow, 1994] ; Panoramique installation photos.

1991 - 1999

2 negatives : col., 4x5 14 strips of negatives : col. ; 35mm

35mm and 10.16 x 12.7 cm

Inscribed on container recto : "MUSIC" and "WRITINGS" photos - June '92 NEGS Inscribed on interior containers : "Writing" - Polaroids Aug '91 ; "Panoramique" catalogue 1999 ; La Ferme installing photo negs for how crates work ; negs - photos of crates construction

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

28

1 Snow, Michael 2008 7 strips of negatives : col. ; 35mm

Saw

This file contains photographic material relating to the photo-work, Saw.

35mm and 10x15 cm

1 photograph : col.

Chromogenic prints Inscribed on container recto : and negatives. SNOW 14159 Neg + pic for "SAW" photo-edition for PREFIX Feb 2008 35mm and 10x15 cm

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

29 This file contains photographic materials relating to the photo-work, Saw.

1 Snow, Michael

Saw

2008 82 photographs : col.

2 sheets of negatives : col. ; 35mm
2003 8 Polaroids 5.3x8.6 cm and 21.59x27.94 cm

Inscribed on container recto : "SAW" failures Feb `08 Inscribed on container recto : Line Drawn with Synapse
8.89x12.7 cm and 35mm

Chromogenic prints and negatives. Polaroid.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

30

1 Snow, Michael

Line Drawing with Synapse

This file contains photographic and textual material relating to the photowork, Line Drawing with Synapse. 1967 7 photographs : b&w

approx. 10 sheets of printed emails and preparatory notes and drawings 1 sheet of negatives : b&w ; 35mm
1979 - 1983

31 This file contains photographic documentation of Snow's Walking Woman sculpture at Expo '67 in Montreal. This file contains photographic material related to three separate photo-works: Flight Stop, Insect Shadow Drawing, Meeting of Measures.

3 Snow, Michael

Walking Woman at Expo `67

Inscribed on container recto : EXPO '67 Construction
21.59x27.94 cm or smaller Inscribed on container recto : "Flight Stop" INSTALLATION 3 1/2x5 of each except 7

Chromogenic prints and negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

32

1 Snow, Michael

Flight Stop ; Insect Shadow Drawing ; Meeting of Measures

10 photographs and other graphic material

Gelatin silver prints and negatives, chromogenic prints. Inscribed on interior container verso : INSECT SHADOW DRAWING PHOTO ; "MEETING OF MEASURES" 2 B +W negs ; Installation

Also includes 6 strips of negatives (b&w ; 35mm), 2 contact sheets (b&w), 1 sheet of preparatory drawings

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

33

6 Snow, Michael

This file contains photographs from Snow's early life. This file contains contact sheets with images of a drum set practice pad.

ca. 1954

8 contact sheets : b&w

25.4x27.94 cm

Inscribed on container recto : Bob Hackborn [sic?] Contact sheets '54 92 Dec n.d. 1 contact sheet : b&w 21.59x27.94 cm Inscribed on container recto : MICHAEL SNOW 27 B+W .... [some information crossed out]. Contact Larry "Practice Pad" 1991 2 strips of negatives : col. ; 35mm 35mm

Gelatin silver prints.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Gelatin silver prints. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

34

4 Snow, Michael

35

1 Snow, Michael

Recombinant

This file contains photographic transparencies related to the photowork Recombinant.

Inscribed on container recto : Recombinant Stereo negs

Chromogenic negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

!60

2

Reference number This file contains photographic material related to the CCMC. ca. 1974 - present

Series

Creator

Title

Scope

Date

Extent

Scale 35mm

Inscriptions

Photographic materials Gelatin silver negatives. CCMC (Canadian Creative Music Collective) formed in 1974 in Toronto and continues to play today. This file has no indication of date. Also includes 12 strips of negatives (col. ; 35mm), 1 contact sheet (col.) Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

Notes (1)

Notes (2)

Physical Condition

Publishing info.

36 4C

Snow, Michael

CCMC

3 strips of negatives : b&w ; 35mm

Inscribed on container recto : CCMC

37 This file consists of photographic material relating to the sculpture, The Audience.

2 Snow, Michael

The Audience

1989 38 photographs and other graphic

material

20.32 x 25.4 cm or smaller

Inscribed on container recto : The Audience ; 5x7 B&W prints. 4x6 colour prints. 1 8x10 B&W print ; Inscribed on interior container recto : MICHAEL SNOW ARTWORKS LTD "THE AUDIENCE" NEGS AND CONTACTS SEPT '89 ; 1 b&w contact. Negs

Chromogenic prints and negatives, gelatin silver prints and negatives.

38 This file consists of photographic material relating to the installation, Flight Stop.

1 Snow, Michael

Flight Stop

1979 4 sheets of negatives : b&w ; 35mm

5 contact sheets : b&w
1970 [date of work]

35mm and 20.32 x 25.4 cm

Inscribed on container recto : Geese poster Inscribed on container recto : "SINK" PHOTO PART 2002 Inscribed on container recto : Nat. Gal. B+W NEGS Scope, Field, Plus Tard, Authorisation. 2002 tila Kelman book
Gelatin silver negatives. Some of these images were included in Kelman's publication. Chromogenic negatives.

Gelatin silver prints and negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Figuring Redemption: Resighting My Self in the Art of Michael Snow. Waterloo : [Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 2002] Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

39

1 Snow, Michael

Sink

This file consists of a single photographic transparency related to the photo-work, Sink.

1 negative : col. ; 35mm

35mm

40 1, 3A, 5 This file consists of photographic materials related to the photo-works, Authorization (1969) and Plus Tard (1977), including some installation views at the National Gallery of Canada. 1969 ; 1977 [date of work]

Snow, Michael

Authorization ; Plus Tard

10 negatives : b&w ; 10.16x12.7 cm

10.16 x 12.7 cm

41

6

This file contains snapshot photographs of Snow in the 1950s, and one handwritten letter.

2 photographs : b&w 3 sheets of paper
1992 - 1969

5 x 6 cm and 20.32 x 25.4 cm

Inscribed on container recto : Mike Snow 10 Roxborough Drive. Toronto Ontario Canada
Inscribed on container recto : "Transparancies" [sic] : "8x10" x 1, "Conception of Light" x2, Michael Snow Portrait x1 Chromogenic negatives.

Gelatin silver prints.

Postage stamp indicates Chicago, Dec 25, 1952

42

1 Snow, Michael

Conception of Light ; 8x10

This file contains photographic materials relating to two photo-works, Conception of Light (1992) and 8x10 (1969)

2 negatives : col. ; 120mm 2 reversal : col. ; 120mm
1969 2 negatives : col. ; 10.16x12.7 cm

120mm

43 This file contains photographic materials relating to the photo-work, Morning in Holland.

1 Snow, Michael

Morning in Holland

10.16 x 12.7 cm

Inscribed on container recto : B+W negs "MORNING IN HOLLAND" Inscribed on exterior of negative sleeve : D'abord Alcibiade et puis.... Michael Snow - 1996 Colour photo on canvas, painted wood frame. 145x109 cm Inscribed on container recto :  WAVELENGTH film strip Inscribed on container verso : "Autourization" transparencies rejected too bad they're good
Inscribed on container verso : "Sparkler" "Line Drawing with Synapse" Product 2003. 9 SHB EG PROCESS ANY ONE @ NORMAL, HOLD 7 Chromogenic negatives.

Chromogenic negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

44

1 Snow, Michael 1969 1 negative : col. ; 10.16 x 12.7 cm

D'abord Alcibiade et puis...

This file contains a single photographic transparency related to the photo-work, D'abord Alcibiade et puis...

10.16 x 12.7 cm

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

45 This file contains a single reversal transparency for the photo-work, Manifestation (Autourisation of 8 faces) 1999 1 reversal : col. ; 10.16x12.7 cm

1 Snow, Michael

Wavelength

This file contains filmstrips for Wavelength.

1969 30 filmstrips : col. ; 16mm

16mm

Chromogenic negatives. Colour reversal.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

46

1 Snow, Michael

Manifestation (Autourisation of 8 faces)

10.16 x 12.7 cm

47

1 Snow, Michael

This file contains photographic transparencies of what appear to be sparklers.

[ca. 2003?]

6 negatives : col. ; 10.16x12.7 cm

10.16 x 12.7 cm

Chromogenic negatives.

Images do not appear to be related to the artwork Line Drawing with Synapse, as indicated by the container inscription.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

48

1 Snow, Michael 2003 5 negatives : col. ; 10.16x12.7 cm

Line Drawing with Synapse

This file contains photographic materials related to the photo-work, Line Drawing with Synapse. This file contains photographic materials related to the photo-work, Line Drawing with Synapse. This file contains photographic materials related to the film, *Corpus Callosum. This file contains photographic materials related to the film, *Corpus Callosum. This file contains photographic materials related to the film, *Corpus Callosum. 2002 6 strips of negatives : col. ; 35mm 2003 5 negatives : col. ; 10.16x12.7 cm

10.16 x 12.7 cm

Inscribed on container recto : "LINE DRAWING WITH SYNAPSE" 2003 Inscribed on container recto : "Line Drawing with Synapse" 2003

Chromogenic negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

49

1 Snow, Michael

Line Drawing with Synapse

10.16 x 12.7 cm

Chromogenic negatives. Chromogenic prints and negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Negatives exhibit colour shifting.

50

1 Snow, Michael

*Corpus Callosum

17 photographs : col. ; 10.16 x 15.24 cm
2002 5 strips of negatives : col. ; 35mm

35mm and 10.16 x 15.24 cm 35mm and 10.16 x 15.24 cm 35mm and 10.16 x 15.24 cm 10.16 x 15.24 cm

Inscribed on container interior : "school" shoot w corpus call / SPRING 97

51

1 Snow, Michael

*Corpus Callosum

23 photographs : col. ; 10.16 x 15.24 cm
2002 43 photographs : col. ; 10.16 x 15.24

Chromogenic prints and negatives. Chromogenic prints and negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

52

1 Snow, Michael

*Corpus Callosum

cm 2 transparencies: col.
2002 53 photographs : col. ; 10.16 x 15.24

Inscribed on container recto : corpus stills

53

1 Snow, Michael

*Corpus Callosum

Chromogenic prints.

This file contains photographic materials related to the film, *Corpus Callosum. This file contains photographic materials related to the film, *Corpus Callosum. This file contains photographic materials related to the film, *Corpus Callosum. This file contains photographic materials related to the film, *Corpus Callosum. This file contains photographic materials related to the film, *Corpus Callosum.

cm
2002 7 strips of negatives : col. ; 35mm

Inscribed on container recto : Corpus NOV 97 shoot 35mm
Inscribed on container recto : Corpus off screen negs BULGES exercizing [sic] dwarf 2002 9 strips of negatives : col. ; 35mm

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Chromogenic negatives. Negatives exhibit colour shifting.

54

1 Snow, Michael

*Corpus Callosum

55

1 Snow, Michael

*Corpus Callosum

35mm

Inscribed on container recto : CORPUS off screen negs slab wob concerned
2002 5 strips of negatives : col. ; 35mm

Chromogenic negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

56

1 Snow, Michael

*Corpus Callosum

35mm

Inscribed on container verso : Babes, Fatwoman negs + extra prints
2002 2 photographs : col. ; 10.16 x 15.24

Chromogenic negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

57

1 Snow, Michael

*Corpus Callosum

cm 7 strips of negatives : col. ; 35mm

35mm and 10.16 x 15.24 cm

Inscribed on container recto : CORPUS EFFECTS offscreen 2nd

Chromogenic prints and negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

3

!61

Reference number This file contains photographic materials related to the film, *Corpus Callosum. 2002 7 strips of negatives : col. ; 35mm

Series

Creator

Title

Scope

Date

Extent

Scale

Inscriptions

Photographic materials Chromogenic negatives. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

Notes (1)

Notes (2)

Physical Condition

Publishing info.

58

1 Snow, Michael

*Corpus Callosum

35mm Inscribed on container interior : CORPUS oFF-SCREEN Hallway entrance, Erection, Bach becomes Bach, Front to Front, Black + white exchange, footsticks, zap fags

Inscribed on container recto : CORPUS Effects off-screen photo

59 This file contains photographic materials related to the film, *Corpus Callosum.

1 Snow, Michael

*Corpus Callosum

2002 161 photographs and other graphic

material

20.32 x 25.4 or smaller

Inscribed on container recto : STILLS

Chromogenic prints and negatives.

Also includes 7 transparencies (col. 35mm), 1 strip of negatives (col. ; 35mm) Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

60 This file contains photographic materials relating to the film, Solar Breath.

1 Snow, Michael

Solar Breath

2002 35 prints : col. ; inkjet

21.59 x 27.94 cm
Chromogenic print.

Inkjet print.

61

1 Snow, Michael 2002 1 print : col.

Solar Breath

This file contains photographic materials relating to the film, Solar Breath.

21.59 x 27.94 cm Inscribed on verso of the photograph : SPEED OF LIGHT - MICHAEL SNOW - 1992 PHOTOTRANSPARENCY IN ALTERED LIGHT BOX, 91.4x127x15.2 cm , EDITION OF 2 COLLECTIONS: 1. ARTISTS FOR KIDS TRUST, VANCOUVER 2. 2. JANET A. SCOTT, TORONTO

Inscribed on container recto : 4.08 Snow 1/4

62 This file contains photographic material to the 1991 International Festival of Authors in Toronto.

2 Snow, Michael

International Festival of Authors, Harbourfront, Toronto, 1991.

1991 1 reversal : col.

20.32 x 25.4 cm

Colour reversal.

Image is of an artwork made for the International Festival of Authors, October 18-26, 1991 at the Harbourfront, Toronto.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

63

1 Snow, Michael 1970 2 photographs : col.

Venetian Blind

This file contains photographic materials related to the photo-work, Venetian Blind.

10.16 x 15.24 cm

Inscribed on container recto : p.66 MICHAEL SNOW Venetian Blind photos

Chromogenic print.

Photographs are mounted on board and require proper removal.

64

3 Snow, Michael

This file contains photographic material used that may have been used for an exhibition announcement [see notes].

1 photograph : b&w

20.32 x 25.4 cm

Snow believes this image was used for an exhibition announcement. No other information provided.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

65 2, 5 This file contains objects relating to the Walking Woman series.

Snow, Michael

Walking Woman

1966 15 vinyl records

18.4 x 18.4 cm

Inscribed on container recto: Mike Snow Esq. Box 199, Church Street Station. New York City, NY. 10008, USA.

Walking Woman vinyls were included in the July 1966 issue of Canadian Art magazine. This recording features Michael Snow in conversation with Wendy Michener. Gelatin silver. Images depict documentation from an exhibition at the Vancouver Art Gallery, January 5-29, 1967.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

Canadian Art magazine, Issue No. 102, July, 1966, Toronto, ON.

66 2, 3 1967 2 photographs : b&w

Snow, Michael

Walking Woman

This file contains photographic materials relating to the Walking Woman series, and an exhibition at the Vancouver Art Gallery.

20.32 x 25.4 cm

Photographs are not currently in any housings and would benefit from archival housings.

67

3 Snow, Michael 1967 5 strips of negatives : col. ; 35mm

This file contains photographic materials of an exhibition announcement at the Vancouver Art Gallery.

1 contact sheet : col..
1967 - 1971

35mm and 22.86 x 30.48 cm

Inscribed on container recto : PHOTOS OF VANC WW announcement

Chromogenic prints and negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

68 1, 3 This file contains photographic materials relating to three films (Wavelength, Rameau's Nephew, La Région Centrale); photographic materials relating to the Montreal Film Festival (no date given).

Snow, Michael

Wavelength ; Rameau's Nephew by Diderot (Thanx to Dennis Young) by Wilma Schoen ; La Région Centrale

22 photographs : b&w 3 sheets of paper

21.59 x 27.94 cm or Inscribed on container recto : smaller FILM BOOK Inscribed on an interior container : WAVELENGTH 67 photos Inscribed on image verso : prints by Owen Carey

Gelatin silver prints.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

69 This file contains photographic documentation of a video installation presented at Videoformes in 2001. This file contains textual documents relating to the film, So Is This.

3 Snow, Michael

Walking Woman

This file contains an exhibition announcement for Walking Woman.

1 print : col. 2001 6 photographs : col.

12.7 x 40.64 cm 12.7 x 17.78 cm
Inkjet print.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Gelatin silver prints Inscribed on container recto : file under FILM STILLS "master" and negatives. xerox of SO IS THIS script + 3 copies" Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

70

1 Snow, Michael

71

1 Snow, Michael

So Is This

1982 3 copies of a film script

72 4C

Snow, Michael ; Ajzenstat, Sandor

CCMC; other

This file contains musical documentation from various musical performances.

ca. 1950 - 1994

164 photographs and other graphic material

12.7 x 17.78 cm or smaller

Inscribed on container recto : OLD JAZZ PHOTOS 50's also CCMC '93 Multiple interior inscriptions.

Gelatin silver prints and negatives, chromogenic prints and negatives.

Also includes 29 strips of negatives (col. ; 35mm),

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

6 transparencies : (col. and b&w)
ca. 1950

73

4 Snow, Michael

This file contains photographic materials relating to Snow and other jazz musicians.

15 photographs : col. and b&w

20.32 x 25.4 cm or smaller

Inscribed on container recto : OLD JAZZ PHOTOS + INFO Inscribed on interior : Me

Chromogenic prints, gelatin silver prints.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

74

6 Snow, Michael

This file contains textual and graphic materials from the 1950s.

ca. 1950

approx. 30 sheets of paper

21.59 x 27.94 cm or Inscribed on container recto : `50s jazz smaller

Concert fliers, notes, drawings

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

4

!62

Reference number This file contains photographic materials and textual documents related to the CCMC. [ca. 1990?]

Series

Creator

Title

Scope

Date

Extent

Scale

Inscriptions Gelatn silver prints, copy negative. Chromogenic prints. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Exhibited at Videosphere: A New Generation at the Alrbight Knox Gallery, Buffalo, NY, 2011. Image depicts Michael Snow and John Mars, March 1975. Colour shifting is apparent. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Also includes 1 copy negative (b&w), 8 sheets of paper Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

Photographic materials

Notes (1)

Notes (2)

Physical Condition

Publishing info.

75 4C

Snow, Michael

CCMC

4 photographs and other graphic material
1998 3 photographs : col.

21.59 x 27.94 cm or Inscribed on container recto :  smaller some ccmc flyers (8) 10.16 x 15.24 cm

76 This file contains photographic materials relating to the installation, Place des Peaux. This file contains photographic 2002 [date of work], documentation of Solar Breath shown at 2011 [exhibition] Videosphere: A New Generation at the Alrbight Knox Gallery, Buffalo, NY. 1 print : col. ; inkjet

1 Snow, Michael

Places des Peaux

77

1 Snow, Michael

Solar Breath

21.59 x 27.94 cm

Inkjet print.

78

6 Korn, Josh

[Untitled]

This file contains an inkjet print of Michael Snow and John Mars from March, 1975.

1975, 2011 [reprint]

1 print: b&w ; inkjet

21.59 x 27.94 cm

Inkjet print.

79 This file contains photographic materials related to the photo-work, La Ferme du Buisson.

1 Snow, Michael

La Ferme du Buisson

1997 18 colour slides

35mm

Chromogenic negatives. Inscribed on container recto : Picasso slides Chromogenic negatives. Slides depict reproductions of famous art works by Pablo Picasso.

80

1 Snow, Michael

[Picasso slides]

This file consists of re-photographic materials of art work by Pablo Picasso.

19 colour slides

35mm

Title is based on Materials require archival housing and content of the images. monitored environment.

81

6 Snow, Michael

[Untitled]

This file consists of photographic materials.

ca. 1950

1 photograph : b&w

8.89 x 6.35 cm 8.89 x 8.89 cm 35mm and 10.16 x 15.24 cm 21.59 x 27.94 cm 21.59 cm and 20.32 Inscribed on container recto : for : Michael Snow from : Barry Thomson x 25.4 cm
[includes address] Gelatin silver prints. Gelatin silver prints, inkjet prints. Inscription on verso credits Barry Thomson for this photograph. Snow is the subject of this photograph. Gelatin silver prints.

Gelatin silver prints.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Colour shifting apparent.

82 This file consists of photographic materials. This file consists of photographic materials. 1992 ca. 1950 1 photograph : b&w

6 Snow, Michael

[Untitled]

83

1 Snow, Michael

[Untitled]

Inscribed on container recto : Tradition of ...... Sept '92 Studio shots

Chromogenic prints and negatives.

84 This file consists of a photograph of Snow, credited to Barry Thomson. This file consists of photographic materials related to musical documentation. 1992 6 photographs : b&w 1996-97 4 photographs : col. and b&w

4 Thomson, Barry

[Untitled]

This file consists of photographic material, credited to Barry Thomson.

1998 1 photograph : col. ; inkjet

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

85

4 Thomson, Barry

[Untitled]

86

4 Bock, Hans

[Untitled]

20.32 x 25.4 cm Inscribed on container verso : Bob Wiseman + Me `93

Inscribed on container recto : MUSIC/SOUND INTRO ;

Photo credited to Hans Bock. These photographs document a musical performance by Michael Snow and Bob Wiseman at the Art Gallery of Ontario in 1992.

87

4 Unknown

[Untitled]

This file consists of an assortment of photographs of Snow playing music at different points in time.

ca. 1950

approx. 50 photographs : b&w

10.16 x 12.7 cm or smaller

Inscribed on container recto : Snow - small photos in glassine tissue ; OLD JAZZ PHOTOS
Inscribed on container recto : OLZ JAZZ PHOTOS

Gelatin silver prints.

Materials should be removed from glassine as soon as possible.

88 This file consists of photographic material. ca. 1940 approx. 70 photographs : b&w 2 photo albums

4 Unknown

[Untitled]

10.16 x 12.7 cm or smaller

Gelatin silver prints.

The photo albums are Tamblyn Tel-vision print books. Gelatin silver prints, chromogenic prints, copy negatives. Gelatin silver prints, chromogenic prints. Chromogenic prints, Polaroid. Chromogenic prints.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

89 4C 1983 21 photographs : col. and b&w

Snow, Michael

CCMC

This file consists of photographic materials related to the CCMC.

6 copy negatives : b&w
ca. 1983 5 photographs : col. and b&w

20.32 x 25.4 cm or smaller 10.16 x 12.7 cm and 20.32 x 25.4 cm 10.16 x 15.24 cm and 10.16 x 12.7 cm 10.16 x 12.7 cm

Inscribed on container recto : CCMC PHOTOS etc History!

90 4C This file consists of photographic materials related to the CCMC. This file consists of photographic materials related to the photo-work, Place des Peaux. This file consists of photographic materials related to the photo-work, Place des Peaux. 1998 4 photographs : col. This file consists of photographic materials related to the photo-work, Place des Peaux. This file consists of photographic materials related to the photo-work, Place des Peaux. This file contains photographic materials. 1 photograph : col. ; inkjet 1998 3 photographs : col. 1998 5 photographs : col. 1998 5 photographs : col. 2 Polaroids : col.

Snow, Michael

CCMC

91

1 Snow, Michael

Places des Peaux

92

1 Snow, Michael

Places des Peaux

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Chromogenic prints. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

93

1 Snow, Michael

Places des Peaux

10.16 x 12.7 cm

94

1 Snow, Michael

Places des Peaux

10.16 x 12.7 cm

Inscribed on container recto : Place des Peaux 21.59 x 27.94 Inscribed on object recto :
Snow 1 / 1 Épreuve d'artiste Inscribed on object verso : CNP. Paris. Jan 2000

Chromogenic prints.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Inkjet print. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

95

1 Snow, Michael

[Untitled]

96 This file consists of photographic materials related to the photo-work, Place des Peaux.

1 Snow, Michael

Places des Peaux

1998 5 photographs and other graphic

material

21.59 x 27.94 cm or smaller

Chromogenic prints, negatives.

Also includes 1 negative (col. ; 120mm), 2 sheets of paper

Sheets of paper have been printed from a computer, each have two images of documentation. 2000 2 scripts

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

97 This file consists of textual materials related to That/Cela/Dat. This file consists of photographic materials related to the artwork, So Is This ; some musical documentation. This file consists of photographic materials related to the photo-work, Place des Peaux. This file consists of photographic material related to the photo-work, Place des Peaux. 1982 - 1992

2 Snow, Michael

That/Cela/Dat

21.59 x 27.94 5 sheets of photocopies 2 photographs : b&w 17 strips of negatives : b&w
1998 25 photographs : col.

Inscribed on container recto : Original scripts "that/cela/dat" 25.13 x 27.94 cm
Inscribed on container recto : So is this + music stuff B+W Nov 92 Gelatin silver prints and negatives. Chromogenic prints, Polaroid.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

98 1, 4

Snow, Michael

So Is This

99

1 Snow, Michael

Places des Peaux

1 Polaroid : col.
1998 1 photograph : col.

10.16 x 15.24 cm and 10.16 x 12.7 cm 21.59 x 35.56 cm

100

1 Snow, Michael

Places des Peaux

Inscribed on container verso at the Inkjet print. bottom : "Place des Peaux" - Studio Version 1986/98 Michael Snow ; "34 cadres" chacque cadre 72 x 149 x 16.5 cm

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

5

!63

Reference number This file consists of photographic material related to the photo-work, Place des Peaux. 1998 4 photographs : col.

Series

Creator

Title

Scope

Date

Extent

Scale

Inscriptions Chromogenic prints. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

Photographic materials

Notes (1)

Notes (2)

Physical Condition

Publishing info.

101

1 Snow, Michael

Places des Peaux

8.89 x 12.7 cm

102 This file consists of photographic material related to the photo-work, Place des Peaux, and the film The Living Room. 1998 - 2000

1 Snow, Michael

Places des Peaux ; The Living Room

7 photographs : col. 2 sheets of paper
1991 4 photographs : col.

21.59 x 27.94 cm and 10.16 x 15.24 cm 10.16 x 15.24 cm
Chromogenic prints. Chromogenic prints. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Documentation of a media installation at Arsenal (Montreal)[?] Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Chromogenic prints. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

Inscribed on object recto at the bottom : "The Living Room" - Michael Snow 2000. 20min33sec.

Chromogenic prints, inkjet print.

103 This file contains photographic materials related to the photo-work, Recombinant. This file contains photographic materials related to VUEEUV. 1998 4 photographs : col.

1 Snow, Michael

Recombinant

104

1 Snow, Michael

VUEEUV

10.16 x 15.24 cm 10.16 x 15.24 cm

105 This file contains photographic materials related to the holographic work, In, up, out, door This file consists of photographic material related to the photo-work, Place des Peaux. 1998 6 photographs : col. 7 photographs : col.

1 Snow, Michael

In, up, out, door

106

1 Snow, Michael

Places des Peaux

10.16 x 15.24 cm
Inkjet prints.

Pencil drawing inscribed on container verso.

Chromogenic prints.

107 3A

Snow, Michael

This file contains photographic materials documenting a media installation.

3 photographs : col. ; inkjet

20.95 x 29.85 cm

108 1966 - 1997 2 photographs : col.

1 Snow, Michael

Walk and Roll on the This file contains photographic Beach ; Adam and materials related to multiple art works. Eve [both works relate to Walking Woman series]

10.16 x 15.24 cm

Inkjet prints.

109 1,2

Snow, Michael

Red, Orange, and This file contains photographic Green ; Immediate materials related to multiple art works. Delivery ; Walk and Roll on the Beach ; In Medias Res ; Solar breath ; VUEEUV ; Midnight Blue ; Adam and Eve

1966 - 2003

14 photographs : col.

10.16 x 15.24 cm

Inscribed on container recto : BRUX catalogue

Chromogenic prints.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

110 1, 2

Snow, Michael

Slidelength ; Amplast Inc. 359 Canal St. NYC

This file contains photographic materials related to multiple art works.

1967 - 1972

5 photographs : col.

10.16 x 15.24 cm

Chromogenic prints.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Colour shifting is apparent in negatives especially. Musical documentation of Snow playing at The Music Gallery (Toronto). Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

111 This file contains photographic materials related to multiple art works. 1979 - 1998

1 Snow, Michael

Conception of Light ; Place des Peaux ; IrisIris

10.16 x 15.24 cm or smaller
2008 8 photographs : col.

Chromogenic prints and negatives. Inscribed on container recto : For :Michael Snow From : Barry Thomson [phone number omitted]. ARTI, ALLAN, MICHAEL Chromogenic prints.

112

6 Thomson, Barry

This file consists of a photograph of Snow, credited to Barry Thomson.

10.16 x 15.24 cm

113

2 Snow, Michael

Snow Storm

This file contains photographic materials related to the art work, Snow Storm.

1967 1 photograph : b&w

20.32 x 25.4 cm

Inscribed on container verso : "Snow Storm" from 1967 at the National Gallery of Canada.
Inscription on object verso indicates this is documentation from work installed at the Musée des beaux-arts du Canada (Montreal), 27 jan-23 apr., 1995 Inscribed on container recto : Some 2003 Maman shots - "Power of Two" Production....... Blacks

Gelatin silver prints.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

114 This file contains photographic materials related to multiple art works. 1969 - 1974 1 photograph : b&w

1 Snow, Michael

Tap ; Red5

20.32 x 25.4 cm

Gelatin silver prints.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

115

1 Snow, Michael

Powers of Two

This file contains photographic materials.

2003 2 contact sheets : col.

25.13 x 30.48 cm

Chromogenic prints.

One contact sheet includes documentation of "Powers of Two" installed. The other includes images of the artist's mother.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

116 This file contains photographic materials related to the Walking Woman series. ca. 1965

2 Snow, Michael

Walking Woman

3 photographs : col.

20.32 x 25.4 cm

Inscribed on container recto : 4 Test focus field fig prints Inscribed on container spine : Snow Music - Images

Chromogenic prints.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Gelatin silver prints, chromogenic prints and copy negatives. According to the artist, the photographs in this file were compiled for a book. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

117 This file contains photographic materials related to Snow's career as a musician.

4 Snow, Michael

[Untitled]

102 photographs : col. and b&w 2 copy negatives : col. ; 10.16 x 12.7 cm
ca. 2003

20.32 x 25.4 cm or smaller

118

6 Unknown

[Untitled]

This file contains photographic materials.

61 photographs and other graphic material

21.59 x 27.94 cm or Inscribed on container recto : Photos of M.S. smaller
Interior inscription on CD-ROM recto : for TANIA RUIZ la SORBONNE 15 Mars 2004

Gelatin silver prints, chromogenic prints and negatives, inkjet prints.

Also includes 1 strip of negatives (col. ; 35mm), 1 Polaroid, 1 CD-ROM

Mostly photographs Materials require archival housing and of the artist, including monitored environment. the cover of TIME Magazine from December 2003.

119 3A This file contains photographic materials and documentation for an installation, The Windows Suite. 1962 - 1966

Snow, Michael

The Windows Suite

2006 4 photographs : col.

Chromogenic prints.

2 CD-ROMs 9 photographs : col. and b&w

20.32 x 25.4 cm and 14.2 x 12.5 cm

Inscribed on container recto : "Intérieur" Montreal + "The Windows Suite" Toronto 27.94 x 35.56 cm or Inscribed on container recto : smaller WW photos etc 36 photographs : col. and b&w 27.94 x 35.56 cm or Inscribed on container recto : smaller Music / sound photos

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Gelatin silver prints, chromogenic prints. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

120 1, 2

Snow, Michael

Walk and Roll on the This file contains photographic Beach ; Blood materials related to art works related to Relation ; Four to Five the Walking Woman series. ; Walking Woman This file contains photographic materials of musical documentation.

121

4 Unknown

Gelatin silver prints, chromogenic prints.

There is no indication as to dates or who took these photographs. 1979 8 photographs : b&w

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

122

1 Snow, Michael

Flight Stop

This file contains photographic materials related to the art work, Flight Stop. This file contains photographic material related to the artwork, Shore.

20.32 x 25.4 or smaller
1970 1 colour slide

Inscribed on container recto : Flight Stop 35mm Inscribed on container recto : "Shore" - 1970 slide of it original text card negative photo stat Mar 2010"

Gelatin silver prints.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Chromogenic negatives. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

123

2 Snow, Michael

Shore

6

!64

Reference number 1967 - 1999

Series

Creator

Title

Scope

Date

Extent

Scale

Inscriptions Inscribed on container recto : Miscelaneous [sic] PHOTO WORKS Chromogenic prints, gelatin silver prints, inkjet prints. Colour shifting is apparent in multiple prints.

Photographic materials

Notes (1)

Notes (2)

Physical Condition

Publishing info.

124

1 Snow, Michael

Tap ; Recombinant ; This file contains photographic VUEEUV ; Light materials related to multiple photoBlues ; Speed of Light works. ; Amplast Inc. 359 Canal St NYC ; Midnight Blue ; Adam and Eve ; Two Values/Deux Valeurs ; In Medias Res ; D'Abord Alcibiade et puis... ; La Ferme du Buisson ; Manifestation (Autourisation of 8 faces) ; Wild Flower Bed ; Of a Ladder ; Press ; Snow Storm, February 8, 1967 ; Iris-Iris ; Imposition ; Midnight Blue

74 photographs : col. and b&w

20.32 x 25.4 or smaller

125 This file contains photographic materials related to the art work, Secret Shout. 1960 [date of work] ; 2011 [reprints] 5 photographs : col. ; inkjet

2 Snow, Michael

Secret Shout

20.32 x 25.4 cm

Inscribed on container recto : Secret Shout
Inscribed on container recto : "Intérier" [sic] Montreal - 2001 Montreal Festival en Lumiere Gelatin silver prints, inkjet prints. Chromogenic and gelatin silver prints. Chromogenic prints.

Inkjet print.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

126 2, 3A This file contains photographic materials documenting an art installation.

Snow, Michael

Intérieur

2001 16 photographs : col.

10.16 x 12.7 cm

127 4C

Snow, Michael ; Thomson, Barry

CCMC

This file contains photographic documentation of musical performances.

33 photographs: col. and b&w

21.59 x 27.94 cm or Inscribed on container recto : smaller CCMC photos 20.32 x 25.4 or smaller 27.94 x 35.56 cm Inscribed on container recto : VENETIAN BLIND black +whites
Chromogenic and inkjet prints. Chromogenic and inkjet prints. Chromogenic prints Gelatin silver.

128 This file contains photographic material related to multiple art works, as well as musical documentation from Chicoutimi, QC. This file contains photographic material related to the photo-work, Venetian Blind. 1998 5 photographs : col. 1970 1 photograph : b&w 1973 - 2003 12 photographs : col. and b&w

4 Snow, Michael ; Other

8 x 10 ; In Medias Res ; Field/Champ

129

1 Snow, Michael

Venetian Blind

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Colour shifting is apparent in multiple prints.

130

1 Snow, Michael

VUEEUV ; La Ferme This file contains photographic material du Buisson related to two photo-works : VUEEUV and La Ferme du Buisson.

27.94 x 43.18 cm or smaller 22.86 x 45.72 cm or Inscribed on container recto : smaller Michael Snow photos La Ferme 21.59 x 27.94 cm or Inscribed on container recto : smaller Commission THE AUDIENCE ; good photos have been taken out Inscribed on interior : best AUDIENCE production photos Jan 88 to April 89

131 This file contains photographic material related to the photo-work, La Ferme du Buisson. This file contains photographic material related to the artwork, The Audience. 1988-89

1 Snow, Michael

La Ferme du Buisson

1998 3 photographs : col.

132

1 Snow, Michael

The Audience

99 photographs : col. and b&w

133

1 Snow, Michael

Sink ; In Medias Res ; This file contains photographic material iris - IRIS ; Four to related to multiple photo-works. Five ; Recombinant ; Immediate Delivery ; Smoke and Mirrors ; Venetian Blind ; A Casing Shelved ; Press ; Midnight Blue ; A Wooden Look ; D'Abord Alcibiade et puis... ; Plus Tard ; Authorization

1962 - 1998

approx. 80 photographs : col. and b&w

21.59 x 27.94 cm or Inscribed on container recto : smaller PHOTO WORKS

Gelatin silver, chromogenic, and inkjet prints.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

134 2, 3 This file contains photographic material related to an art work, as well as documentation of an exhibition.

Snow, Michael

Derma

1990 13 photographs : col.

10.16 x 15.24 cm and 21.59 x 27.94 cm 20.32 x 25.4 cm

Inscribed on container recto : new stuff `90s PAINTING Inscribed on container recto : Various installation photos
Inscribed on container recto : SCULPTURE

Chromogenic prints.

Derma is acrylic on canvas. Gelatin silver prints Installation photos from the National Gallery of Canada (Ottawa). Gelatin silver prints, Polaroid

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Sulphiding is visible on some prints, specifically from Authorization.

135

1 Snow, Michael

La Région Centrale ; Authorization ; Atlantic This file contains photographic material related to the sculpture, Blind. 1968 63 photographs : b&w

This file contains photographic material related to multiple art works.

1967 - 1974

5 photographs : b&w

136

2 Snow, Michael

Blind

Sulphiding is visible on Polaroids.

2 Polaroids : b&w
1989 64 photographs : b&w 1985 - 1986

10.16 x 12.7 cm and 10.16 x 15.24 cm 20.32 x 25.4 cm

137 This file contains photographic material related to the artwork, The Audience. This file contains photographic material related to works in holography. This file contains photographic material related to multiple artworks. This file contains photographic material related to multiple artworks. 1968 - 1972 1985 - 1986

2 Snow, Michael

The Audience

Inscribed on container recto : "AUDIENCE" B+W

Gelatin silver prints

Yellowing around the edges of multiple prints.

138

1 Snow, Michael

Redifice ; Planets Ape ; Egg

50 photographs : col. and b&w 1 colour slide 57 photographs : col. and b&w 35 Polaroids 89 photographs : col. and b&w 9 Polaroids 97 photographs : col. and b&w
1986 213 colour slides and other graphic

27.94 x 35.56 cm or Inscribed on container recto : smaller HOLOGRAMS 21.59 x 27.94 cm or Inscribed on container recto : smaller 59-60 27.94 x 35.56 cm or Inscribed on container recto : smaller R to Michael ; Hologs 20.32 x 25.4 cm or smaller

Chromogenic prints and negatives, gelatin silver prints. Chromogenic and gelatin silver prints, Polaroid. Gelatin silver, chromogenic prints, Polaroid Inscribed on container recto : Gelatin silver, exhibit installation views + installation chromogenic prints, Gelatin silver, chromogenic prints

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

139

2 Snow, Michael

[Untitled]

140

1 Snow, Michael

Egg ; Still Life in 8 Calls ; Redifice This file contains photographic material related to multiple artworks. This file contains photographic material related to Expo '86.

141 1, 2

Snow, Michael

Blind ; 8x10 ; Tap

142 3A

Snow, Michael

Expo '86

material

20.32 x 25.4 cm or smaller

Inscribed on container lid : Expo Photos Negs

Also includes 59 photographs (col.) 16 strips of negatives (col. and b&w ; 35mm), 17 contact sheets (b&w), 15 1979 137 photographs : col. ; 10.16 x 12.7 cm 2000 9 photographs : b&w ; 12.7 x 17.78 cm

143

1 Snow, Michael

Iris-Iris

This file contains multiple prints of the photo-work, Iris-Iris. This file contains photographic material and film stills from the film, To Lavoisier, Who Died in the Reign of Terror. This file contains photographic material related to the CCMC, as well as The Audience. 1989 - ca. 2000

10.16 x 12.7 cm 12.7 x 17.78 cm

Chromogenic prints Gelatin silver prints

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. 3 photographs : b&w ; 20.32 x 25.4 cm

144

1 Snow, Michael

To Lavoisier, Who Died in the Reign of Terror

145 2, 4C

Snow, Michael

CCMC ; The Audience

20.32 x 25.4 cm

Gelatin silver prints

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

7

!65

Reference number This file contains photographic material related to the Brock University Photo Mural. 1971-73 2 photographs : b&w ; 8.89 x 17.78 cm

Series

Creator

Title

Scope

Date

Extent

Scale

Inscriptions Gelatin silver prints Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Also includes 10 strips of negatives (col. ; 35mm), and 1 contact sheet (col.) Also includes 7 strips of negatives (col. ; 35mm), 1 contact sheet Also includes 6 strips of negatives (col. ; 35mm), and 1 contact sheet Title is based on inscription. Also includes 7 strips of negatives (col. ; 35mm), 1 contact sheet Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

Photographic materials

Notes (1)

Notes (2)

Physical Condition

Publishing info.

146

1 Snow, Michael

Brock University Photo Mural

8.89 x 17.78 cm

147 This file contains photographic material related to the Brock University Photo Mural. 1971-73 4 photographs : b&w ; 12.7 x 17.78 cm

1 Snow, Michael

Brock University Photo Mural

12.7 x 17.78 cm

Gelatin silver prints

148 This file contains photographic material related to the Brock University Photo Mural. 1971-73 3 photographs : col. ; 20.32 x 25.4 cm

1 Snow, Michael

Brock University Photo Mural

20.32 x 25.4 cm
Gelatin silver prints

Chromogenic prints

149

1 Snow, Michael

Brock University Photo Mural

This file contains photographic material related to the Brock University Photo Mural.

1971-73

2 photographs : b&w ; 20.32 x 25.4 cm

20.32 x 25.4 cm

150 This item is a print of the 1994 photowork, Smoke and Mirrors.

1 Snow, Michael

Smoke and Mirrors

1994 1 photograph : col. ; 20.32 x 25.4 cm

20.32 x 25.4 cm 10.16 x 15.24 cm 15.24 x 20.32 cm 35mm
Chromogenic negatives. Chromogenic prints Chromogenic prints

Chromogenic print

151 This file contains photographs that pertain to the artist's life and not work. This file contains portraits of the artist and his wife, Peggy Gale. This file contains photographic material related to the artwork, Flo-mo camera 2002 63 photographs : col. ; 10.16 x 15.24 ca. 1990-2000 [?] 20 colour slides ca. 2000 [?] 6 photographs : col. ; 15.24 x 20.32 cm

6 Snow, Michael

[Untitled]

This file contains photographs that pertain to the artist's life and not work.

ca. 2000 [?]

5 photographs : col. ; 10.16 x 15.24 cm

152

6 Snow, Michael

[Untitled]

153

6 Unknown

[Untitled]

154

2 Snow, Michael

Flo-mo camera

cm and other graphic material
2002 38 photographs : col. ; 10.16 x 15.24

20.32 x 25.4 cm or smaller

Inscribed on container recto : Flo-mo camera 2002

Chromogenic prints, negatives, contact sheet

155

2 Snow, Michael

Flo-mo camera

This file contains photographic material related to the artwork, Flo-mo camera

cm and other graphic material
2002 28 photographs : col. ; 10.16 x 15.24 cm and other graphic material

20.32 x 25.4 cm or smaller 20.32 x 25.4 cm or smaller 35mm 20.32 x 25.4 cm or smaller 20.32 x 25.4 cm or smaller
sheet Chromogenic prints, Inscribed on container verso : #1 "Intérieur" Montreal Feb 2001 negatives, contact Inscribed on container recto : SNOW mixture Chromogenic negatives Chromogenic prints, negatives, contact sheet

Inscribed on container recto : Flo-mo camera 2002 Inscribed on container recto : Flo-mo camera 2002
Chromogenic prints, negatives, contact sheet

Chromogenic prints, negatives, contact sheet

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

156 This file contains photographic material related to the artwork, Flo-mo camera

2 Snow, Michael

Flo-mo camera

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

157 This file contains photographic material documenting an art installation. 2001 18 photographs : col. ; 10.16 x 15.24 cm and other graphic material

1 Snow, Michael

Snow mixture

This file contains photographic transparencies.

April 13, 1973 6 negatives : col. ; 35mm

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

158 3A

Snow, Michael

Intérieur

Inscribed on container verso : 2 "Intérieur" Montreal Feb 2001

159 3A This file contains photographic material documenting an art installation.

Snow, Michael

Intérieur

2001 24 photographs : col. ; 10.16 x 15.24 cm and other graphic material

Also includes 8 strips of negatives (col. ; 35mm), 1 contact sheet Title is based on inscription.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

160

1 Snow, Michael 1999 21 photographs : col. ; 10.16 x 15.24

Snow storm Jan `99

This file contains photographic material.

cm 5 strips of negatives : col. ; 35mm
This file contains photographic material documenting an art installation. 2001 3 photographs : col. ; 10.16 x 15.24

35mm and 10.16 x 15.24 cm 35mm and 10.16 x 15.24 cm 10.16 x 15.24 cm
8.89 x 12.7 cm 8.89 x 12.7 cm 8.89 x 12.7 cm Inscribed on container recto : à l'attention de Michael Snow INTÉRIEUR Feb 2001

Inscribed on container recto : Snow storm Jan `99

Chromogenic prints, negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

161 2, 3A

Snow, Michael

Intérieur

cm 1 strip of negatives : col. ; 35mm
2001 32 photographs : col. ; 10.16 x 15.24 cm

Chromogenic prints, negatives. Chromogenic prints

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Chromogenic prints Chromogenic prints Chromogenic prints Albums are not made of archival materials, prints should be rehoused. Albums are not made of archival materials, prints should be rehoused.

162 2, 3A This file contains photographic material documenting an art installation. This file contains photographic documentation of the Halifax harbour. This file contains photographic documentation of the Halifax harbour. This file contains photographic documentation of the Halifax harbour. 1970 1 photo album : 18 photographs : b&w ; 8.89 x 12.7 cm 1970 1 photo album : 13 photographs : b&w ; 8.89 x 12.7 cm 1970 1 photo album : 16 photographs : b&w ; 8.89 x 12.7 cm

Snow, Michael

Intérieur

163

1 Snow, Michael

Halifax Harbour

Inscribed on album cover : Halifax Harbour - Book 1 Inscribed on album cover : Halifax Harbour - Book 3 Inscribed on album cover : Halifax Harbour - Book 2
Inscribed on container verso : Original slides Multiple interior inscriptions : LA FERME ORIGINALS ; '99 ORIGINALS ; "Digest" colour corrected originals + Maura seated originals ; Dupes A Photoworks ; OR ; ORIGINALS drawing + Dawna [?]

164

1 Snow, Michael

Halifax Harbour

165

1 Snow, Michael

Halifax Harbour

Albums are not made of archival materials, prints should be rehoused. Chromogenic negatives. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

166

1 Snow, Michael

Immediate Delivery ; This file contains photographic 1962 - 1998 VUEEUV ; La Ferme transparencies related to multiple photodu Buisson ; Meeting works. of Measures ; Morningside Heights ; Sleeve ; IrisIris ; Times ; Light Blues ; Authorization ; Glares ; Of a Ladder ; Morning in Holland ; Digest ; In Medias Res ; Blind ; Dela

83 colour slides

35mm

167 This file contains colour slides related to artwork. n.d. 5 colour slides 1995 21 colour slides

2 Snow, Michael

1992 12 colour slides

35mm

Inscribed on container lid : TOO PINK Jan '92 should reshoot 35mm 35mm Inscribed on container lid : ORIGINAL Inscribed on container lid : "Midnight Blue" Originals June 9 `95

Chromogenic negatives. Chromogenic negatives. Chromogenic negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

168 This file contains colour slides related to artwork. This file contains colour slides related to the photo-work, Midnight Blue.

2 Snow, Michael

169

1 Snow, Michael

Midnight Blue

170 This file contains colour slides related to multiple artworks.

2 Snow, Michael

Blind ; Press ; Four to Five

1962-1969

10 colour slides

35mm

Inscribed on container lid : ORIGINALS from '92 too pink use dupes for copies ; had colour-corrected dupes made from these
1971-1974 6 colour slides

Chromogenic negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

171

1 Snow, Michael

Rameau's Nephew by Diderot (Thanx to Dennis Young) by Wilma Schoen ; La Région Centrale

This file contains colour slides of film stills.

35mm

Inscriptions on container lid have been crossed out.

Chromogenic negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

172

2 Snow, Michael

[Waves 82]

This file contains colour slides related to artwork.

1982 31 colour slides

35mm

Inscribed on container lid : WAVES 82

Chromogenic negatives.

Title is based on inscription.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

8

!66

Reference number This file contains colour slides related to the artwork, Red Orange and Green.. 1992 36 colour slides

Series

Creator

Title

Scope

Date

Extent

Scale

Inscriptions

Photographic materials Chromogenic negatives. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

Notes (1)

Notes (2)

Physical Condition

Publishing info.

173

2 Snow, Michael

Red Orange and Green

35mm

Inscribed on container lid : RED ORANGE and GREEN June 29 92 ORIG
Inscribed on container lid : Chromogenic CHILDRENS [sic] PARADE original negatives. Title is based on inscription. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

174 This file contains colour slides. n.d. 10 colour slides

6 Snow, Michael

[Children's Parade]

35mm 35mm Inscribed on container lid : NEW NOV 2009 "SINK" SLIDES REJECTED FROM NOV.2000 COMPOSITION Inscribed on container lid : ORIGINALS THE AUDIENCE SEPT 89 Inscribed on container lid : Govt of Canada bldg X-RAY WORK Inscribed on container lid : "untitled", a slide piece '71 outs Interior inscriptions : Race in Progress Dupe ; NO PHOTO... before finish Interior inscription : REJECT but good STAD Sept 90 Inscribed on container lid :  Still Life in 8 Calls ; Origs Inscribed on container lid :  Still Life in 8 Calls ; Origs Inscribed on container lid : 5 ORIGINAL 1971 "SLIDELENGTH" SLIDES TAKEN OUT OF DEC. 2000 VERSION + 2 copies of old rejected #23 Inscribed on container lid : Reject original Berlin 88 slides Inscribed on container lid : RAMEAU'S HOTEL + 1
Chromogenic negatives. Chromogenic negatives. Chromogenic negatives. Chromogenic negatives. Chromogenic negatives. Chromogenic negatives. Chromogenic negatives. Chromogenic negatives. Title is based on inscription Chromogenic negatives. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Chromogenic negatives. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Chromogenic negatives.

175 This file contains colour slides related to the photo-work, Sink.

1 Snow, Michael

Sink

2000 18 colour slides

176

2 Snow, Michael

The Audience

This file contains colour slides documenting The Audience.

1989 33 colour slides

35mm

177 This file contains colour slides related to the Government of Canada Building artwork.

1 Snow, Michael

Government of Canada Building

1978 19 colour slides

35mm

178

1 Snow, Michael

[Untitled slide piece]

This file contains colour slides.

1979 17 colour slides

35mm 35mm

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

179

1 Snow, Michael

D'abord Alcibiade et puis... ; Race

This file contains colour slides related to multiple artworks.

1984 - 1998

5 colour slides

180 This file contains colour slides documenting The Audience.

2 Snow, Michael

The Audience

1989 19 colour slides

35mm 35mm

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

181

1 Snow, Michael

Still Life in 8 Calls

This file contains colour slides photographic transparencies related to the artwork, Still Life in 8 Calls. This file contains colour slides related to multiple artworks. 1984 - 1989 15 colour slides

1985 [date of work] ; 1986 [noted on one slide]

10 colour slides

182 1, 2

Snow, Michael

Race ; The Audience

35mm

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

183 This file contains colour slides related to the artwork, Slidelength.

1 Snow, Michael

Slidelength

1971 7 colour slides

35mm

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

184

6 Snow, Michael

This file contains colour slides.

1988 colour slides

35mm 35mm

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

185

1 Snow, Michael

Rameau's Nephew by Diderot (Thanx to Dennis Young) by Wilma Schoen ; La Région Centrale This file contains colour slides related to the film Rameau's Nephew... 1972-74 23 colour slides

This file contains colour slides related to the film Rameau's Nephew...

1972-74

8 colour slides

186

1 Snow, Michael

Rameau's Nephew by Diderot (Thanx to Dennis Young) by Wilma Schoen ; La Région Centrale

35mm

Inscribed on container lid : Rameau's Nephew Quilt Slides

Chromogenic negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

187

1 Collyer, Robin  (Canadian sculptor, photographer, and printmaker, born 1949)

Presents

This file contains colour slides related to the film Presents.

1980 20 colour slides

35mm

Inscribed on container lid : Chromogenic "PRESENTS" photos of set by Robin negatives. Collyer '81 Interior inscription : ORIGINALS

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

188 This file contains colour slides related to the film La Région Centrale. 1971 [date of work] ; 1964-64 [date on object] 31 colour slides

1 Wieland, Joyce (Canadian painter and filmmaker, 1931-1998)

La Région Centrale

35mm

Inscribed on container lid : La Région Centrale ; last SNOW day..... ; photos by JOYCE WIELAND ; good stuff

Chromogenic negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

189 This file contains colour slides related to the film La Région Centrale. 1971 [date of work] 27 colour slides

1 Wieland, Joyce (Canadian painter and filmmaker, 1931-1998)

La Région Centrale

35mm

Inscribed on container lid : La Région Centrale ; all taken last Snow day by Joyce Wieland Inscribed on container lid : Film slides

Chromogenic negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

190 This file contains colour slides related to the film *Corpus Callosum. 1970 5 colour slides 2002 7 colour slides

2 Snow, Michael

Over the Sofa ; Guarded Painting

This file contains colour slides related to multiple artworks.

1991 2 colour slides

35mm 35mm

Chromogenic negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

191

1 Snow, Michael

*Corpus Callosum

Inscribed on container lid : ORIGINALS Installations + Stills from "Corpus" 35mm Inscribed on container lid : A CASING SHELVED SLIDES ORIGINALS 35mm Inscribed on container lid : Flowers 35mm Inscribed on container lid : FILM SLIDES Wavelength Rameaus

Chromogenic negatives. Chromogenic negatives. Chromogenic negatives. Title is based on inscription.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

192 This file contains colour slides related to the artwork, A Casing Shelved. This file contains colour slides. n.d. 28 colour slides

1 Snow, Michael

A Casing Shelved

193

1 Snow, Michael

Wild Flower Bed

194 This file contains colour slides related to multiple films. 1967 - 1974

1 Snow, Michael

Wavelength ; Rameau's Nephew by Diderot (Thanx to Dennis Young) by Wilma Schoen ; La Région Centrale This file contains colour slides . ca. 1962

4 colour slides

Chromogenic negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

195 1, 2

Snow, Michael

Red Orange Green ; Wild Flower Bed ; other This file contains colour slides related to the film La Région Centrale. This file contains colour slides related to the film La Région Centrale. This file contains colour slides related to the artwork, A Casing Shelved.

20 colour slides

35mm
1971 23 colour slides 1971 4 colour slides 1970 3 colour slides

Chromogenic negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

196

1 Snow, Michael

La Région Centrale

35mm 35mm 35mm

Inscribed on container lid : LRC

Chromogenic negatives. Chromogenic negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

197

1 Snow, Michael

La Région Centrale

198

1 Snow, Michael

A Casing Shelved

Inscribed on container lid : A CASING SHELVED new dupe shot

Chromogenic negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

9

!67

Reference number This file contains colour slides. n.d. 3 colour slides

Series

Creator

Title

Scope

Date

Extent

Scale

Inscriptions

Photographic materials Chromogenic negatives. Chromogenic negatives. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

Notes (1)

Notes (2)

Physical Condition

Publishing info.

199

6 Snow, Michael

[Berlin]

35mm 35mm Inscribed on container recto : IMPOSITION Rameaus N

Inscribed on container lid : 3 ORIGINAL Berlin slides #720

200 This file contains colour slides related to the film Rameau's Nephew... 1972-74 3 colour slides

1 Snow, Michael

Rameau's Nephew by Diderot (Thanx to Dennis Young) by Wilma Schoen ; La Région Centrale This file contains colour slides related to the artwork, Flight Stop. 1979 9 colour slides

201

1 Snow, Michael

Flight Stop

35mm 20.32 x 25.4 cm
Gelatin silver and chromogenic prints. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

Inscribed on container recto : extra originals geese slide

Chromogenic negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

202

1 Snow, Michael

Rameau's Nephew by Diderot (Thanx to Dennis Young) by Wilma Schoen ; La Région Centrale This file contains colour slides related to the artwork, Redifice. 1986 3 colour slides

This file contains photographic material related to the film Rameau's Nephew...

1972-74

21 photographs : col. and b&w

203

1 Snow, Michael

Redifice

35mm 35mm 35mm Inscribed on container recto : RAMEAU'S MASTERS FILM STILLS Inscribed on verso : RAMEAU'S SINK OFFICE HOTEL (TABLE) TABLE SMASH
Chromogenic negatives.

Inscribed on container recto : Redifice originals Inscribed on container recto : L.R.C originals
Chromogenic negatives.

Chromogenic negatives.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

204 1967 - 1974 6 colour slides

1 Snow, Michael

La Région Centrale

This file contains colour slides related to the film La Région Centrale.

1971 4 colour slides

205

1 Snow, Michael

La Région Centrale ; This file contains colour slides related to Rameau's Nephew.... multiple films. ; Wavelength

206 This file contains photographic material related to the film, Rameau's Nephew... 1972-74 51 photographs : col. and b&w 3 negatives : col. ; 10.16 x 12.7 cm

1 Snow, Michael

Rameau's Nephew by Diderot (Thanx to Dennis Young) by Wilma Schoen ; La Région Centrale

20.32 x 25.4 or smaller

Inscribed on container lid : Rameau's ; Rameau's Stills Inscribed on container lid : ALL FILM STILLS except "RAMEAUS"
Chromogenic and gelatin silver prints, Polaroid.

Chromogenic prints and negatives, gelatin silver prints

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

207

1 Snow, Michael

Prelude ; La Région This file contains photographic material Centrale ; Presents ; related to multiple films. See You Later / Au Revoir ; New York Eye and Ear Control ; <--->

1966 - 1990

147 photographs : col. and b&w 4 Polaroids : col.

20.32 x 25.4 or smaller

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

208

1 Snow, Michael

Wavelength

This file contains photographic material related to the film, Wavelength.

1967 45 photographs : col. and b&w

20.32 x 25.4 cm 10.16 x 12.7 cm and 20.32 x 25.4 cm 21.59 x 27.94 cm or Inscribed on container lid : smaller *CORPUS 35mm 21.59 x 27.94 cm or Multiple interior inscriptions smaller Inscribed on container lid : Paintings Inscribed on container lid : PRESENTS
Chromogenic and gelatin silver prints. Chromogenic prints and reversals Chromogenic negatives.

Inscribed on container lid : WAVELENGTH

Chromogenic and gelatin silver prints.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Title is based on inscription. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

209 This file contains photographic material related to the film, Presents. This file contains photographic material related to the film, *Corpus Callosum. This file contains colour slides documenting various paintings by Snow. 1963 - 1998 170 strips of negatives : col. and b&w ; 35mm ; 120mm and other graphic material n.d. 80 colour slides 2002 76 photographs : col. 7 reversals : col. ; 20.32 x 25.4 cm

1 Snow, Michael

Presents

1980 32 photographs : col. and b&w

210

1 Snow, Michael

*Corpus Callosum

211

2 Snow, Michael

[Paintings]

212 1, 2

Snow, Michael

Blind ; Conception of This file contains photographic material Light ; Gone ; Crouch related to multiple artworks. Leap Land ; Stereo ; Insect Shadow Drawing ; Still-Living (9x4 Acts, Scene One) ; Meeting of Measures ; Rot Herren ; Slide ; La Ferme du Buisson ; Imposition ; Field ; Rameau's Nephew... 1967 - 2002 231 strips of negatives : col. and b&w ; 35mm and other graphic material

Chromogenic prints and negatives, gelatin silver prints and negatives, Polaroid, reversals.

Also includes 30 contact sheets (col. and b&w), 9 reversals (col. ; 10.16 x 12.7 cm), 87 negatives (col. and b&w ; 35mm ; 10.16 x 12.7 cm), 160 Polaroids, 5 rolls of film (col. ; 35mm).

Many negatives are housed in glassine and should be removed as soon as possible. Staples should also be removed from some objects. Colour shifting is apparent in many materials, both prints and transparencies.

213 1, 5

Snow, Michael

21.59 x 27.94 cm or Inscribed on container lid : smaller ART WORK photos contacts negs. Multiple interior inscriptions.

Adam + Eve ; Walk This file contains photographic material and Roll on the Beach related to multiple artworks. ; Blood Relation ; Crouch Leap Land ; Insect Shadow Drawing ; Flight Stop ; Immediate Delivery ; Over the Sofa ; Seascapes ; Speed of Light ; LitBox ; Authorization ; Of a Ladder ; Cover to Cover ; A Survey ; Still Life in 8 Calls ; TAP ; Recombinant ; ca. 1956 - 1992 12 strips of negatives : col. and b&w ; 35mm and other graphic material

Chromogenic prints and negatives, gelatin silver prints and negatives, Polaroid, reversals.

Also includes 43 contact sheets (col. and b&w), 252 prints (col. and b&w), 28 negatives (col. 120mm and 10.16x12.7 cm), 4 colour slides, 10 colour reversals, 106 Polaroids.

This file also contains photographic materials that do not pertain to artworks.

Many materials exhibit various degrees of deterioration.

Cover to Cover. [Halifax : Press of Nova Scotia College of Art & Design, 1975]

214

1 Snow, Michael

21.59 x 27.94 cm or Inscribed on container recto : smaller ART WORK photos, contacts negs. Multiple interior inscriptions.

Midnight Blue ; This file contains photographic material Morning in Holland ; related to multiple artworks. Red5 ; Waiting Room ; Flames ; In Medias Res ; Halifax Harbour ; In the Woods ; Authorization ; Sink ; Of a Ladder ; Field ; Still-Living (9x4 Acts, Scene One) ; Rot Herren ; Traces ; X30 ; Speed of Light 1966 - 2002

Chromogenic prints and negatives, gelatin silver prints and negatives, Polaroid, reversals.

Also includes 11 negatives (b&w ; 35mm, 10.16x12.7 cm), 6 rolls of film, 123 Polaroids, 40 colour slides, 70 photographs (col. and b&w)

This file also contains photographic materials that do not pertain to artworks.

Many materials exhibit various degrees of deterioration.

215

1 Snow, Michael

139 strips of negatives : col. and b&w ; 16mm and 35mm and other graphic material

21.59 x 27.94 cm or Inscribed on container recto : smaller ALL FILM STILL NEGS ; LRC location slides.

La Région Centrale ; This file contains photographic material New York Eye and related to multiple artworks. Ear Control ; Wavelength ; One Second in Montreal ; <----> (a.k.a Back and Forth) ; *Corpus Callosum ; Prelude ; Presents ; See You Later ; Rameau's Nephew... ; To Lavoisier, Who Died in the Reign of Terror

Chromogenic prints and negatives, gelatin silver prints and negatives, Polaroid, reversals.

Also includes 136 negatives (col. and b&w ; 35mm and 10.16x12.7 cm), 8 contact sheets, 32 prints (col. and b&w), 12 colour reversals, 1 Polaroid, 52 test strips.

Many materials exhibit various degrees of deterioration.

10

!68

Reference number This file contains photographic material related to the artwork, The Audience. 1988-89 769 photographs : col. and b&w and other graphic material

Series

Creator

Title

Scope

Date

Extent

Scale

Inscriptions

Photographic materials Chromogenic and gelatin silver prints and negatives. Also includes 156 strips of negatives (col. and b&w ; 35mm), 3 contact sheets Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Many materials exhibit various degrees of deterioration including colour shifting and silver mirroring.

Notes (1)

Notes (2)

Physical Condition

Publishing info.

216

2 Snow, Michael

The Audience

20.32 x 25.4 cm or smaller

Multiple interior inscriptions.

217 This file contains photographic material related to the artwork, Rendezvous.

1 Snow, Michael

Rendezvous

1979 1 photograph : col. ; 10.16 x 12.7 cm

10.16 x 12.7 cm

Inscribed on container recto : Size-as copy of postcard + tiny painting used for "Rendezvous" 1979 (in CC. Art Bank coll) Inscribed on container recto : Possible Art negs snaps Inscribed on container recto : Top of head photos
Polaroid, reversal Chromogenic prints Title is based on inscription. Images of are of the top of the artist's head. Chromogenic prints and negatives, Polaroid. Also includes 5 strips of negatives (col. ; 35mm), 12 Polaroids.

Chromogenic print

218 This file contains photographic material related to various artworks.

1 Snow, Michael

D'abord Alcibiade et puis...

1998 53 photographs : col. ; 10.16 x 12.7

cm and other graphic material
6 Polaroids : col.

10.16 x 12.7 cm or smaller 15.86 x 8.25 cm

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

219

6 Snow, Michael

[Top of head photos]

This file contains photographic material. n.d.

220 This file contains photographic material.

2 Snow, Michael

Quintet

1984 5 Polaroids : col.

1 reversal : col. ; 7.62 x 6.35 cm
This file contains photographic material. 1998 1 photograph : col. ; 20.32 x 25.4 cm

7.62 x 6.35 cm and 10.16 x 12.7 cm 20.32 x 25.4 cm 35mm 10.16 x 15.24 cm and 20.32 x 25.4 cm 10.16 x 15.24 cm Inscribed on container recto : "X30" photos + negs
Chromogenic prints and negatives Chromogenic print

Inscribed on interior : Michael Snow new works ; Quintet (1984) Inscribed on container recto : Portrait d'un Musee Inscribed on container recto : June 98 New stad negs
Chromogenic and gelatin silver negatives Chromogenic print

221 This file contains photographic material. 1998 [date indicated by inscription] This file contains photographic material. n.d. 4 photographs : col. 15 strips of negatives : col. and b&w ; 35mm

1 Snow, Michael

D'abord Alcibiade et puis...

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Materials require archival housing and monitored environment. Many materials exhibit various degrees of deterioration including colour shifting.

222

1 Snow, Michael

[Untitled]

223

1 Snow, Michael

[Untitled]

224

1 Snow, Michael

X30 ; 8x10 ; D'abord Alcibiade et puis...

This file contains photographic material related to multiple artworks.

1979 - 1996

7 photographs : col. ; 10.16x15.24 cm and other graphic material

Also includes 2 colour reversals, 1 negative (10.15x12.7 cm), 3 strips of negatives (col. ; 35mm). Images from the last Michael Snow exhibition at The Isaacs Gallery, 1993. Title is based on inscription.

225

3 Snow, Michael

[Last show at Isaacs Gallery]

This file contains photographic material related to an exhibition.

ca. 1993

2 contact sheets : b&w ; 20.32 x 25.4 cm

20.32 x 25.4 cm

Inscribed on container recto : Michael Snow Contacts & Photos installation of M.S. last show at The Isaacs Gallery, John St. 1993(?)" Multiple interior inscriptions.

Gelatin silver prints.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

226 This file contains photographic material related to multiple artworks. ca. 1950 - 2003 76 strips of negatives : col. ; 35mm and 120mm and other graphic material

1 Snow, Michael

Sink ; Venetian Blind ; Paris de jugement Le and/or State of the Arts ; Speed of Light ; Meeting of Measures ; Conception of Light ; Manifestation (Autourisation of 8 faces) ; La Ferme du Buisson ; The Walking Man ; A Casing Shelved ; In the Woods ; Race.

20.32 x 25.4 cm or smaller

Chromogenic prints and negatives, Polaroid, colour reversals,

Also includes 3 Polaroids, 27 negatives, 1 roll of film (35mm), 156 photographs, 3 colour reversals.

Many materials exhibit various degrees of deterioration including colour shifting and silver mirroring.

227

1 Snow, Michael

Government of Canada Building.

This file contains photographic material related to the artwork, Government of Canada Building.

1978 198 strips of negatives : col. and b&w ; 35mm and other graphic material

20.32 x 25.4 cm or smaller

Multiple interior inscriptions.

Chromogenic prints and negatives, gelatin silver prints and negatives, colour reversals.

Also includes 60 photographs, 30 contact sheets, 17 colour reversals, 1 colour slide.

Many materials exhibit various degrees of deterioration including colour shifting and silver mirroring.

228

1 Snow, Michael

Flight Stop

This file contains photographic material related to the artwork, Flight Stop.

1979 52 strips of negatives : col. and b&w ; 35mm and 120mm and other graphic material

76.2 x 101.6 cm or smaller

Inscribed on container recto : FLIGHT STOP NEGS etc Multiple interior inscriptions.

Chromogenic prints and negatives, gelatin silver prints and negatives.

Also includes 14 prints, 8 negatives, 3 contact prints.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

229 This file contains photographic material related to the Brock University Photo Mural. 1971-73

1 Snow, Michael

Brock University Photo Mural

226 photographs : b&w ; 8.89 x 12.7 cm

8.89 x 12.7 cm

Inscribed on container lid : BROCK PHOTOS Multiple interior inscriptions.

Gelatin silver prints

All photographs are badly curled and damaged.

230

1 Snow, Michael

Sink ; Halifax Harbour ; La Région Centrale This file contains photographic material related to the book, Cover to Cover.

This file contains colour slides related to multiple artworks.

1970 - 1971

307 colour slides

35mm

Colour slides

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

231

5 Snow, Michael

Cover to Cover

1975 12 photographs : b&w ; 20.32 x 25.4

20.32 x 25.4 cm

cm 28 contact prints : b&w ; 20.32 x 25.4 cm
1982 32 Polaroids : col.

Inscribed on container lid : ORIGINAL SINK NOT USED IN FINAL VERSION Multiple interior inscriptions.

Gelatin silver prints.

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

Cover to Cover. [Halifax : Press of Nova Scotia College of Art & Design, 1975]

232 This file contains photographic material related to the photo-work, Still Living (9x4 Acts, Scene One)

1 Snow, Michael

Still-Living (9x4 Acts, Scene One)

10.16 x 12.7 cm

Inscribed on container lid : STILL LIVING 4 ACTS SCENE 1 ORIGINAL POLAROIDS

Polaroid

Materials require archival housing and monitored environment.

!69

