(Why Aren't We) Solving Common Library Problems with Common Systems?
May Yan and MJ Suhonos Ryerson University

ERM = Problem Solving
     Book is listed in our catalogue but we've lost access on book platform Journal thresholds are differently listed between our catalogue, the link resolver, and the publisher platform - which is correct? When did we cancel Teaching Professor and why? We need to weed the print copies of periodicals in Chemical Engineering to make space, which ones do we have perpetual rights to online? Can you post a PDF of this SUPO book we have from Ebook Central on ARES?

Clues - ERM Records
Records might be:       License Agreements Invoices Titles Lists Kbart files Emails Meeting Agendas

For our own use but also evidence in our interactions with outside parties (vendors, publishers, suppliers) and legal obligation (legal discovery).

Need Records Management

Step 1: Developed a Records Retention Schedule [Records Retention Schedule: Define what to keep, for how long, and when and how to dispose of it/archive it.] Step 2: Implement the Schedule

Management Records with System
    University Records Management processes handles paper records No University wide electronic Records Management system Need electronic solution - don't want to wait Priority: need to preserve records that document evidence of legal rights to perpetual access resources (Archives where we have right to retain access on vendor platform, dark archives or manage a copy in case of cancellation or ceased publication, operation of business etc.) We have very limited resources - need low effort solutions



Functional Requirements
Must integrate with current ERM workflow; easy to use; restrict users into system Metadata: Publisher, Resource, File type, File Name, Duration, File Status, Date acquired, etc. Search: By metadata; Full text searchable (PDF, excel, word, etc); Accession/Preservation/Destruction based on file type, status and schedule with focus on Preservation and scheduled destruction.

AtoM - A Library System
      Existing experience in Archives & Special Collections Low-cost, easy to deploy Compatible data model (File, Record, Actor) Customizable (UI, taxonomies) Full-text indexing, faceted search Verdict: workable but development required

Strategic Systems Requirements Review
Strategic Analysis to define requirements of Library's Collections Systems. In Scope: ILS, ERM systems, IR, Discovery, Reserves, ILL etc. Not in Scope: Research Guides, Reference, Instruction etc.

Methodology used: Task Descriptions (Lauesen, 2003) This approach allows us to define our problems and then search for technology solutions.

Subset of Strategic Recommendations
1. Software as a service (SaaS) model 2. Choose the best of breed product for our needs and swap out for better technology solutions as often as possible.

4. use open source technologies for our needs when appropriate. 5. Where there is no significant advantage to a library service provider solution, use products outside of the library technology

Strategic Goals
· · · · · ·

Modularity to maximize flexibility Consistency across applications Control feature/requirements scope Abstract implementation from service Reduce maintenance & security risks Commodity solutions when possible

Common Problems
Single Sign-On Consolidated Identity Personalized Context

Data Modelling

Metadata Querying

Metadata Repository

Hot File Storage

Durable Fixed Storage

Digital Preservation

Single Sign-On

Consolidated Identity

Personalized Context

Data Modelling

Metadata Querying

Metadata Repository

Hot File Storage

Durable Fixed Storage

Digital Preservation

Wordpress - A Common System
· · · · · · Open source, well-established CMS Existing general familiarity among all staff Flexibility for future development and customization Knowledge becomes a common part of the Library Facilitates working with research partners Mature SaaS options and plug-ins available

All Good
Freedom to do this       Scope Low risk application (internal) Planning required to execute Internal culture Okay to fail Can develop and operate outside of University IT oversight

Potential Applications
      Institutional repository Archival collections system Catalogue / OPAC Departmental intranet Faculty research projects ...

Contact Us may.yan@ryerson.ca @mayyan mjsuhonos@ryerson.ca

Discussion
Questions?


