Taking Risks The Safe Way
Risk Management and Insurance Practices of Ontario's Voluntary Sector

 CONTENTS 
   

1.   ABOUT THIS RESOURCE......................................................................... 2 
 

2.   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......................................................................... 4 
 

3.   LITERATURE REVIEW ............................................................................. 9 
 

Provincial initiatives............................................................................................................................10  The meaning of risk and risk management ........................................................................................12   The practice of risk management.......................................................................................................13   Insurance as a risk management tool.................................................................................................20   Discussion ...........................................................................................................................................25 
 

4.   QUANTITATIVE RESEARCH .................................................................. 26 
 

Sample characteristics........................................................................................................................26  Sample representativeness ................................................................................................................32  Insured versus uninsured organizations.............................................................................................33   Description of uninsured organizations .............................................................................................36   Insurance profile of insured organizations.........................................................................................36   Insurance profile by organizational characteristics............................................................................42  Risk management ...............................................................................................................................45  Path model .........................................................................................................................................48  Discussion ...........................................................................................................................................52 
 

5.   QUALITATIVE RESEARCH ..................................................................... 54 
 

Concerns about insurance coverage ..................................................................................................54  Repercussions of inadequate or no insurance coverage....................................................................55   The role of insurance brokers.............................................................................................................56   Risk management ...............................................................................................................................56  Risks that are not related to insurance ..............................................................................................58   Perception of Insurance and risk management..................................................................................59   Comments about insurance companies .............................................................................................59   Comments about government ...........................................................................................................60   Participant suggestions and recommendations .................................................................................61   Discussion ...........................................................................................................................................62 
 

6.   CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS......................................... 63 
 

7.   APPENDICES AND REFERENCES ........................................................... 65 
 

Appendix A: Other Canadian Insurance, Risk and Liability Studies ....................................................66  Appendix B: Subcategories of Organizational Mandates ...................................................................71  Appendices C to L: Statistical Tables ..................................................................................................72   Appendix M: Organizations Participating in Focus Groups ..............................................................113  Appendix N: Interview Protocol for Focus Groups ...........................................................................115  Appendix O: Research Methodology................................................................................................116   References........................................................................................................................................120    Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                1 

1. ABOUT THIS RESOURCE
 
 

 

Who it is for 
 

Taking Risks the Safe Way was developed as a knowledgebuilding tool and research reference for  nonprofit organizations across Ontario. The contents of this document will also guide the work of  government in supporting capacitybuilding among voluntary and community organizations, and provide a  valuable resource for the insurance industry in serving the nonprofit sector. 
 

How it was developed 
 

This resource is the result of a yearlong, threephase investigation of insurance and risk management  practices in Ontario's nonprofit and voluntary sector, commissioned by the Voluntary Sector Relations  Unit of the Ministry of Citizenship and Immigration. It is based on research carried out by the Centre for  Voluntary Sector Studies, Ted Rogers School of Management, Ryerson University. Research was conducted  by Centre Director Agnes G. Meinhard, PhD, and the research team of Phaedra Livingstone, PhD, Farhat  Faridi, PhD, Gail Mathews, PhD, Jacqueline Medalye, PhD Candidate, Derek Nawrot, Ronak Patel and  Maame Barima. 
 

What it contains 
 

Taking Risks the Safe Way presents the results of three distinct phases of research carried out by the  Centre for Voluntary Sector Studies, Ryerson University.    Literature review: an overview of accumulated theoretical, empirical and practicebased knowledge  about risk, risk management and insurance, especially as it relates to the nonprofit and voluntary  sector in Canada.     Quantitative research: the results of a quantitative online survey investigating insurance and risk  management practices. Close to 1300 organizations randomly sampled from across the province  responded to the survey. The resulting analysis was based on 1184 valid questionnaires.    Qualitative research: the observations and insurance concerns of the voluntary sector as expressed by  fortythree participants in seven focus groups that were conducted throughout the province in Fall  2007 and Winter 2008. 
 

Why it was created 
  Ontario depends on community organizations and their volunteers to deliver vital services and build  strong, vibrant and socially cohesive communities. A vibrant nonprofit sector engages citizens and  strengthens Ontario's communities by building social capital, a vital component in economic development.   
 

As the Ontario Government's Corporate Lead for Volunteerism and the Nonprofit Sector, the Ministry of  Citizenship and Immigration (MCI) works with the Voluntary /Nonprofit Sector to encourage and promote  volunteerism, to support the sector and strengthen the capacity of organizations serving communities.   
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                2 

The Voluntary Sector Relations Unit (VSRU), Citizenship Branch (MCI) leads several strategies of  engagement with Ontario's Voluntary Sector including new initiatives such as the Ontario Volunteer  Partnership (OVP) Initiative addressing insurance and risk management in the Voluntary Sector. In  addition to services provided through the Insurance and Liability Resource Centre, the OVP commissioned  this research that examines current risk management practices in Ontario's Voluntary Sector.    Taking Risks the Safe Way provides a solid foundation upon which we can continue to strengthen the  Voluntary Sector's capacity to manage risks and to encourage volunteer engagement across Ontario.    

Acknowledgements 
  This resource would not have been possible without the work of the Centre for Voluntary Sector Studies,  Ryerson University, and the cooperation of more than 1300 representatives of nonprofit and voluntary  organizations who took the time to fill out surveys and/or participate in one of seven focus groups  conducted throughout the province.  The Ryerson research team gratefully acknowledges the  contributions of the sector, and members of the Ontario Volunteer Partnership Steering Committee,  including the Ministry of Citizenship and Immigration, Imagine Canada, the Insurance Bureau of Canada,  the Insurance Brokers Association of Ontario, the Ministry of Government Services and the Ministry of  Health Promotion, to this work.   

Where to learn more 
  Visit these websites for further information:    Ministry of Citizenship and Immigration  www.citizenship.gov.on.ca    Insurance & Liability Resource Centre for Nonprofits  www.riskmanagement.imaginecanada.ca    Centre for Voluntary Sector Studies, Ryerson University  www.ryerson.ca/cvss   
H H H

 

Disclaimer 
 

This report reflects the findings and conclusions of the research team, led by Agnes G. Meinhard, PhD,  of the Centre for Voluntary Sector Studies, Ted Rogers School of Management, Ryerson University.  As such, the analysis and recommendations are solely those of the research team. 

 

 

 Queen's Printer for Ontario, 2009     This document may be reproduced for noncommercial purposes.    ISBN   978-1-4249-9542-4

 
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                3 

2. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
 

 

  By virtue of their mission to help vulnerable populations, many nonprofit organizations engage in  programs and services that inevitably involve some unavoidable risks. Operating their programs under the  assumption that `doing good' by providing important public services gives them some form of immunity 1 ,  taking protective action against liability risks was and is not a high priority activity among most nonprofit  organizations.    However, some high profile lawsuits, increasing numbers of claims brought against voluntary  organizations and steep increases in insurance rates during `hard' cycles, have raised the sector's  awareness of the need "to develop appropriate risk management systems and procedures" (Gaskin, 2006,  p. 7). A growing body of literature from the US, Great Britain, Australia and Canada now offers voluntary  sector organizations information and advice about managing risks and obtaining the appropriate  insurance. However, prior to this research study, there has been no focused investigation of insurance and  risk management practices in Ontario's nonprofit sector. Following are brief summaries of the research  findings.   
F F

Literature review 
  The literature review indicates that interest in risk and liability as it pertains to the voluntary sector has  been growing steadily in the last five to ten years. Stimulated by sometimes precipitous increases in  insurance premiums and some high profile lawsuits, many in the voluntary sector have begun to recognize  a need to develop risk management procedures.    All three levels of Canadian government, as well as the insurance industry in Canada, have been partnering  with the voluntary sector to find solutions. A growing body of literature from the US, Great Britain,  Australia and Canada now offers voluntary organizations information and advice about managing risks and  obtaining the appropriate insurance. In Canada, both national and provincial surveys have been conducted  to investigate the parameters and depth of insurance and liability concerns.    In brief, the surveys indicate concern among nonprofits with respect to premium rates and the availability  of insurance. Programs have been dropped, and certain operations curtailed because of unavailable or  unaffordable insurance. The surveys also indicate that a majority of organizations do not have formal risk  management policies and procedures in place. Furthermore, many organizations believe that they are in a  lowrisk category.    By virtue of their mission to help vulnerable populations, many nonprofit organizations engage in  programs and services that involve some unavoidable risks. Therefore, focusing on risk as something  negative to be avoided, can be counterproductive in the voluntary sector. The approach taken in this  research recognizes that some risks are worth taking because their benefits to the organization and their  clients outweigh the threats, and a definition of risk management reflecting this reality is offered.   
For centuries, Canadian charities functioned under the protection of the doctrine of charitable immunity. A Supreme Court of Canada ruling in 2005 rendered the doctrine as no longer a valid protection against vicarious liability (Alexander, Holburn, Beaudin & Lang. LLP, "Supreme court confirms there is no doctrine of charitable immunity", Corporate/Commercial Practice e-News, February, 2006. www.ahbl.ca/files/publications/ commercial_litigation/Corporate_Commercial_ENews_Feb_2.pdf, Accessed July 9, 2007.)   Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                4 
H H

1

Organizations face both insurable and uninsurable risks as they go about their activities. These are  presented in a unified framework in Model 1 of this resource. The literature focuses on risks as defined in  insurance policies and suggest ways in which they can be contained through specific risk management  practices. However, uninsurable risks, such as losing funding sources or alienating volunteers, either of  which may jeopardize a nonprofit's survival, are prevalent in organizations. These risks are best mitigated  through good management practices.    The conclusion drawn from the analysis of the literature is that risk management and good management  are inextricably related. The challenge for nonprofit organizations is to embed awareness of risk and safe  practices into every level of the organization and every aspect of organizational activity. Safe practices  should not only be discussed and encouraged, they should be rewarded in order to ingrain the behaviour  in organizational members until they become part of the organization's culture.    Acquiring the right insurance for an organization is a very important tool in a nonprofit organization's risk  management toolkit. From the perspective of risk management, insurance is an `afterthefact' method of  damage control. But both Canadian and foreign literature confirm how difficult it is for nonprofit  organizations to get appropriate insurance. In Canada there are few insurers that cater to the needs of the  voluntary sector, and when they do provide insurance, it is often very expensive.      Over the years, the variety of insurance products has grown. As part of a sound risk management policy,  organizations have to decide what types of insurance they need to protect their enterprise. Thus, they  have to weigh the probability of a particular risk occurring to the cost of the protection against that risk. In  the nonprofit world this is particularly difficult given sometimes high risks but limited financial resources  to protect against them, leaving many Canadian voluntary organizations insufficiently covered. The  literature review provides strong evidence that nonprofits are struggling to get appropriate insurance at a  reasonable price. This is exacerbated during `hard' insurance cycles.   

Quantitative research 
  Analysis of results of the online survey extends the findings in the literature. The first large scale study of  insurance practices in Ontario's voluntary sector, it is also the first in Canada to examine risk management  in nonprofit organizations in such depth. The study provides a detailed profile of the insurance and risk  management practices of nonprofit organizations in Ontario.     While ninety percent of organizations in the sample are insured, 112 organizations in the sample operate  without insurance. These organizations tend to be small, with few if any paid employees, annual budgets  of less than $15,000, and unlikely to be getting funding from any level of government. They are also less  likely to be registered charities and less likely to serve people directly or be in the social service sector.  Although half of the uninsured organizations rate their risks as low, a number of organizations  acknowledge the high risks they are taking and the dire consequences that could follow. The most  frequently mentioned repercussion of not having insurance is difficulty recruiting volunteers.     The ninety percent of insured organizations in the sample hold an average of six types of insurance  policies. The most subscribed to policies are: General Property, General Liability, Directors' and Officers'  Liability and Accident and Injury. More than two thirds of the organizations obtained insurance from  commercial agents. The average (median) cost for insurance premiums is $7,500 and almost half the  organizations report that their premiums had increased an average of 10% over the previous two years,  however, for one quarter of the respondents the rate increase was 15% or more. Close to forty percent of  organizations attributed their increased rates to internal reasons which included broadening coverage and 
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                5 

claims history. Fortyfive percent attributed the rise in costs to various external reasons, including  inflation, 9/11 and other disasters.      Despite the fact that almost half of the organizations in the sample believe their organizational risk is low,  two thirds of the sample practice risk management in some detail. On average, organizations engage in  nine risk management activities. Most frequently practiced procedures are: signing authority protocols,  privacy and confidentiality protocols and independent audits. Insured organizations are more likely to  have risk management policies and procedures in place and to implement risk management practices.         When asked to define the meaning of risk management in their own words, respondents most frequently  mentioned that risk management was being aware of risks, identifying risks and then minimizing them.  But almost one third of respondents did not answer this question and another nine percent either  answered that they do not know or gave answers that indicated they had an incorrect concept of risk  management.    Insurance costs are related to a number of variables. The most expensive premiums are in Toronto and  Northern Ontario, at a rate almost double those in Eastern Ontario. Organizations serving more than 100  people a month pay roughly twice as much in insurance premiums as organizations serving less than 100  people. The larger the organization, the more likely they are to have submitted claims and the higher their  premiums cost.    Although an organization's perceived level of risk is related to the cost of insurance, risk management  policies and practices are not directly related. All the variables that individually contributed significantly  towards understanding the relationship between insurance, risk management and organizational  characteristics were modeled together in a stepwise regression analysis. This section concludes with the  presentation of a Path Analysis Model to illustrate the relationship of all organizational, risk and insurance  variables in explaining the reasons for the cost of insurance. The measured variables in the survey explain  55% of the variance in insurance rates; in other words, the survey captured 55% of the reasons  determining the cost of insurance. This high rate of explained variance attests to the validity of the survey  questions.   

Qualitative research 
  The qualitative research provides contextual support for the quantitative findings. The regional focus  groups provided organizations the opportunity to voice their opinions about insurance and risk  management and make suggestions about how the government and insurance companies might better  assist the sector in coping with rising insurance rates.    Many participants felt that it would be beneficial if they were provided smallgroup tutorial sessions on  better risk management. The leader of this tutorial would ideally come from a neutral party and have a  background in risk management with experience in the voluntary sector. Another suggestion was a  template of proper risk management practices that could act as a `checklist' for organizations to follow.  Further to this would be a comparative report card on the types of insurance provided by the major  companies that easily put their coverage details and rates into perspective. Finally, many participants  expressed their frustrations at being unable to obtain and keep volunteers. Outside of personal  satisfaction, some felt that there was little benefit for those providing their time and felt that the sector  would be more attractive for potential volunteers if there was taxreduction assistance.      

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                6 

Discussion 
  Evidence from the literature review, the survey and the focus group discussions paint a picture of a sector  that is becoming more aware of a wide range of risks that nonprofit organizations are facing. `Doing good'  no longer confers immunity to nonprofit and charitable organizations. Suddenly confronted with new  realities which include a greater focus on human rights and a more litigious society, coupled with  dwindling resources and higher insurance rates, these organizations are looking for solutions to protect  themselves and manage their risks. They are seeking assistance from government, from the insurance  industry and through their own networks.      The research team notes the following actions currently being undertaken by the Ontario government:    The Ontario Volunteer Partnership (OVP) has been established to provide nonprofit organizations with  support in this quest. At the initiative of the Ministry of Citizenship and Immigration (MCI), a committee  has been struck which includes representatives from government, the voluntary sector, the insurance  sector and academia. Its mandate is to develop strategies to help the sector address risk management and  improve insurance availability.    As part of the OVP, the Ministry of Citizenship and Immigration commissioned the study that is the subject  of this resource. It is the first public comprehensive study on insurance and risk management practices in  Ontario. As the province with the largest voluntary sector, it informs not only the Ontario nonprofit and  insurance sectors, but other Canadian ones as well.  Its scope is larger than any study conducted on this  topic thus far, with a sample of close to 1300 nonprofit organizations. The online survey was augmented  by indepth qualitative interviews. This twopronged approach not only provides valuable information  with respect to the insurance and risk management practices of the voluntary sector, but it also  illuminates the needs and concerns of the sector.    As demonstrated in the literature, there is often a lack of awareness in nonprofit organizations about the  risks they face. The OVP initiative provided the impetus for the creation of the Insurance & Liability  Resource Centre for Nonprofits at http://riskmanagement.imaginecanada.ca. The centre currently  provides a range of services, including educational workshops, across the province.    This kind of partnership is exemplary of a new trend in intersectoral collaboration designed to solve social  problems that have an impact on the viability of a truly civil society. Nonprofit organizations have to  continue to take risks in order to serve the most vulnerable of society's citizens. The importance of their  work has to be recognized and their activities have to be facilitated, not impeded, by the public and  private sectors. By inviting representatives from all three sectors to work on these issues together and find  solutions that will allow the voluntary sector to continue its important work, the OVP is providing  important leadership to resolve a growing concern.   
H H

 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                7 

Key recommendations are presented as follows:  

  Insurance Industry 
   The insurance industry should be more aware of the importance of this sector, which accounts  for 6.8% of the GDP and employs 20% of Canada's labour force.   Insurance companies should be more aware of the particular needs of nonprofit organizations,  especially regarding volunteer liabilities.   The insurance industry should assist in exploring group insurance alternatives.  

Government 
   Government should support the development and delivery of educational opportunities and resources  related to insurance and risk management.   Government should explore options to assist the sector and increase volunteer participation.   Government should make the results of research accessible to the sector. 

  Voluntary Sector 
   Given the varying risk levels of subsectors, subsector specific organizations should use their  existing networks to share information about insurance and risk management.   Nonprofits should practise effective risk management, and ensure effective implementation  through the following practices:    - Clearly define the concept of risk management and identify areas of risk for their employees at all  levels and through all organizational processes  - Encourage their employees/volunteers to participate in information sessions/workshops on risk  management  - Promote sustained risk management awareness among board members, employees and  volunteers by organizing yearly orientation/ refresher programs about risk management and  insurance related issues  - Practice overall good governance, as an essential aspect of risk management  - Redefine management practices to incorporate risk management into organizational activities  - Monitor risk management practices in their organizations and offer attractive rewards for  employees who follow the risk management policies. 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                8 

3. LITERATURE REVIEW

 

  The past two decades have been characterized by many challenges for Ontario's approximately 48,000  nonprofit and voluntary organizations. Changes in government funding policies, devolution of programs  and steep budget cuts have plunged the voluntary sector into a state of semipermanent crisis (Eakin,  2006; Meinhard & Foster, 2003; Rice & Prince, 2000; Scott,  1992). More recently this crisis has been exacerbated by rising  Research Methodology  insurance costs fuelled, in part, by the 9/11 terrorist attacks,  The   selected  research methodology  the bursting of the dot.com stockmarket bubble, a series of  included a review of 400plus  natural disasters afflicting the global community and the  sources,  including both domestic  cyclical shift from a resource abundance or "soft" insurance  and international jurisdictions. See  market to a resource scarcity or "hard" one.  Appendix  O for a detailed discussion    of   the  methodology used in  Ironically, it was at the very time that these huge changes  conducting the literature review.  were taking place that more attention was directed to the  voluntary sector by governments and researchers. Statistical  studies measuring the size and contribution of the Canadian  voluntary sector revealed for the first time how significant a player the voluntary sector was in the  Canadian economy.    The approximately 161,000 nonprofit organizations comprise nine percent of Canada's employers and  employ 20% of the nation's labour force (McMullen & Schellenberg, 2002, p. 201). This translates into  more than two million jobs (NSNVO, 2005) and accounts for 6.8% of the nation's GDP (Statistics Canada,  2004, Figure 2, p. 6). In addition to this, six and a half million Canadians volunteer in nonprofit  organizations (Hall et al, 2001), contributing more than one billion hours of labour to Canada's economy.     Along with this recognition came the realization that many voluntary organizations, operating on  shoestring budgets, were facing growing problems as a consequence of devolution and funding changes.  Both the federal government and its provincial counterparts were organizing conferences, seminars, think tanks and round tables to determine how to help the sector cope with the changing realities. The most  ambitious of these programs was the federal government's Voluntary Sector Initiative (VSI), established in  1998 to examine issues of concern to the sector. The VSI finished its mandate in 2003. During this period,  "the viability of the voluntary sector [was] threatened by skyrocketing insurance premiums, an increasing  inability to obtain coverage, and a climate of fear of serving in an increasing litigious and risk adverse  climate" (Bustard, 2004, p. 5).    "Concerned about the impact of the high cost and limited accessibility of liability insurance" the Voluntary  Sector Forum (VSF), one of the VSI's offspring, "identified insurance as a national issue for the voluntary  sector" (Voluntary Sector Forum, 2004, p. iii). In 2004 they conducted a survey of 330 nonprofit  organizations from across Canada to better understand the insurance practices of the sector and how it  was coping with the rising premiums (Voluntary Sector Forum, 2004). Another survey by Easter Seals and  Ryerson University tapped a larger panCanadian sample for essentially the same purposes (Meinhard,  2005). These and a number of provincial surveys (mentioned below) indicate that nonprofits are  concerned about the availability and affordability of insurance and their impact on their ability to continue  providing services, but only a small minority of organizations engage in formal risk management practices.  For a summary and synthesis of these and the other surveys cited below, please see Appendix A.   
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                9 

Provincial initiatives 
  During the same period independent investigations into the insurance situation were undertaken in  several provinces. Many of these initiatives were either instigated by provincial governments or supported  by them, indicating recognition on the part of provincial governments of the seriousness of this concern in  the voluntary sector. The earliest was a survey in British Columbia designed in response to a growing  concern on the part of BC's voluntary sector regarding risk management, liability and anecdotal evidence  of difficulty recruiting Board members because of liability concerns (Goldberg, 2002). This study involved  support from two government branches:  the Ministry of Community, Aboriginal and Women's Services,  and the Corporate and Personal Property Registries.    Voluntary organizations in Alberta were also contending with of lack of information about appropriate  insurance coverage. This led to the "establishment of the Alberta Voluntary Sector Insurance Council  (AVSIC), comprised of the insurance industry, voluntary sector and Alberta government representatives''  (Alberta Superintendent of Insurance, 2007: p. 1). In addition to preparing an insurance toolkit for the  voluntary sector, AVSIC also conducted a survey of insurance companies to identify the types of insurance  they offered to the voluntary sector. In 2004 the Edmonton Chamber of Voluntary Organizations  partnered with the City of Edmonton to conduct a survey of 47 nonprofit organizations to discern  insurance practices and problems.     Although we were unable to find published surveys from other provinces, insurance concerns are evident  there too. In Saskatchewan, programs such as the Premier's Voluntary Sector Initiative (PVSI) and agencies  such as Volunteer Regina and Volunteer Saskatoon have been instrumental in raising the profile of the  voluntary sector and its concerns, including risk management and liability coverage. The Law Reform  Commission of Saskatchewan published a series of reports on liability issues faced by the voluntary sector:  Liabilities of Volunteers and Organizations in the Notforprofit Sector ( 1999); Liability of Board Members  in the Notforprofit Sector (2001); and Report on the Liability of Directors and Officers of Notfor Profit  Organizations (2003). These reports, based on the Law Reform Commission's consultation with the  nonprofit sector, concluded that liability was an issue of grave concern among the nonprofits.    Manitoba is the only province to have followed the lead of the National Voluntary Sector Accord, by  signing a Declaration of Support wherein the provincial and municipal governments of Manitoba pledged  to support Manitoba's voluntary sector (Voluntary and Nonprofit Sector Organization of Manitoba, 2005).  However, there has been no specific attention placed on risk and risk management issues.    Quebec supports a Directors' and Officers' liability program for provincial sports and recreational  organizations that is administered by the Regroupment Loisir Quebec. The main focus of this program is to  provide liability against thirdparty claims directed at administrators of those nonprofit and sports  organizations that fall under provincial jurisdiction. It covers prejudicial acts charged against the  administrators or board members.    In Atlantic Canada, a task force was created by the Insurance Bureau of Canada (IBC), Atlantic Region, to  deal with the issues of insurance availability and affordability (Uebel, Wolfgang & BizNext, 2005). In  Newfoundland and Labrador, the Minister of Government Services participated in an Ad Hoc committee  that reviewed insurance issues in the province. The Ministry of Government services partnered with the  IBC Atlantic Region and the Community Services Council Newfoundland and Labrador (CSC) to conduct a  study investigating liability insurance issues. The Nova Scotia Insurance Review Board, enacted under Bill  No. 1 by the Government of Nova Scotia, issued a separate report, Rates and Availability of Insurance in  Nova Scotia, in November 2004 regarding affordability and availability of insurance in the province. In 
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                10 

2002, the Nova Scotia General Assembly passed the Volunteer Protection Act to Limit the Liability of  Volunteers Serving Nonprofit Organizations. Thus far, it is the only provincial legislature to have done so.    

Ontario 
  In 1997 the Government of Ontario commissioned a report on the nonprofit sector. On its  recommendation, the government convened the Ontario Voluntary Forum in 1998 to "support the  voluntary sector in establishing a means for voluntary organizations to address their common challenges"  (Ontario Voluntary Forum, 1998). Another recommendation of the report was that charities be allowed to  purchase liability insurance for Board members (Eakin, 2004).     Insurance issues came to the forefront of concern in Ontario's voluntary sector when rising insurance  rates threatened the existence of groups such as the Ontario Federation of Snowmobile Clubs (OFSC),  which rely on volunteers to deliver their programs. "Any organization in Ontario that relies on volunteers  to deliver its programs has a real serious liability issue ... because there wasn't any law in Ontario to shield  a volunteer from unreasonable lawsuits when the volunteer hasn't been negligent or deliberately  malicious  just out there doing the best they can" (Craig Nicholson, quoted in CharityVillage, Oct. 24,  2005). They created a coalition of Ontario community service groups called "Protect Our Volunteers" in  January 2005, to urge the Province of Ontario to "pass appropriate volunteer liability legislation ... to  adequately shield community volunteers from exposure to unreasonable claims of liability" (Protect our  Volunteers, 2005).    The critical importance of risk management for the nonprofit sector is further demonstrated by the  creation of the Ontario Volunteer Partnership launched by the Ministry of Citizenship and Immigration in  November 2006. The partnership involves representatives from the nonprofit and voluntary sector, the  insurance industry, various Government of Ontario ministries involved with nonprofit organizations and  academia. This fiveyear, one million dollar initiative will explore ways in which to help nonprofit  organizations manage and reduce their liability risks and get the right insurance coverage.   

Summary 
    This brief overview demonstrates the growing concern across Canada over adequate risk management  and insurance coverage in the voluntary sector. All three levels of Canadian government, as well as the  insurance industry in Canada, have been partnering with the voluntary sector to find solutions. Both  national and provincial surveys have been conducted to investigate the parameters and depth of  insurance and liability concerns. In brief, the surveys indicate concern among nonprofits with respect to  premium rates and the availability of insurance. Programs have been dropped, and certain operations  curtailed because of unavailable or unaffordable insurance. The surveys also indicate that a majority of  organizations do not have formal risk management policies and procedures in place. (Please see Appendix  A for a detailed review and synthesis of the various studies.)    Volunteer centres and chambers in all provinces and territories are now providing information about risk  management on their websites. From our literature review it appears that attention focused on this issue  is a recent phenomenon, reflecting an increasing awareness on the part of nonprofit organizations that  risk management is an important protective measure in an increasingly litigious world, recently shocked  by many highly publicized scandals. The following sections describe current perspectives on risk and  liability, risk management and insurance.    
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                11 

The meaning of risk and risk management 
  Most definitions of risk and risk management come from the insurance industry and tend to have a  negative connotation: Risk is a threat, something to be avoided, and if it is not possible to avoid, then it  must be mitigated through risk management practices, which includes insurance policies.    Although in its origin risk is a neutral term, a measurement of probability for good as well as for bad, in  current usage "there seem to be no more good risks; all risks appear bad" (Landry, 2005, p. 5). For  example, the Insurance Bureau of Canada (2007) considers risk as the possibility of incurring undesirable  outcomes or harm with respect to employees, clients, volunteers, board members, property or reputation  of an organization.    Any eventuality that might detract from a nonprofit's ability to carry out its mission and mandate is  considered a risk (Alliance for Nonprofit Management, 2007; Alberta Voluntary Sector Insurance Council,  2006). It is therefore not surprising that Internet sites offer a full array of risks threatening organizations.     According to the Charity Commission of the United Kingdom (2007), risks can be sorted into five  categories:       Risks incurred by lax governance: e.g. compromised fiduciary oversight because of unskilled  directors, rubberstamp boards, conflict of interest, poor information flow etc.      Operational risks: include (but are not limited to) risks to property (including intellectual property),  staff (employment regulations, health and safety), volunteers, clients, and organizational reputation,  that are incurred by inadequate or faulty operational procedures.      Financial risks: incurred by poor budgetary control and financial reporting, insufficient reserves  policy, poor investments and loans, fraud or error.      Risks originating from the external environmental: poor public perception, adverse publicity,  deteriorating relationships with stakeholders, demographic changes and changes in government  policy.       Compliance risk: ignorance of, or lack of compliance with, laws and regulatory requirements,  including tax laws, human rights laws, etc.     This focus on risk as something negative to be avoided can be counterproductive in the nonprofit sector. A  significant number of nonprofit organizations engage in risky missions to begin with, given the nature of  the services they offer and the vulnerable populations they serve. Trying to eliminate risk altogether  would not only constrain their activities and make them less attractive to volunteers, it would undermine  their mission and ultimately, the reason for their existence.    Sometimes risks are needed to achieve desired goals. New initiatives and programs are often more prone  to risk, but avoiding such experimentation could lead to stagnation, in itself a risk to organizational  longevity (Herman, Head, Fogarty & Jackson, 2004). Herman and her associates (2004, p. 7), offer a more  neutral definition of risk as "the measure of the possibility that the future may be surprisingly different  from what we expect. Risk therefore, is something for which there is a greater than zero but less than  100% chance of happening." Depicting risk in this manner allows for the possibility that taking a risk on a  new program for instance, may yield unexpected positive results as well. 
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                12 

  The challenge for voluntary organizations is to determine which risks are worth taking, and then work  towards reducing uncertainty around the new program or activity by planning and structuring it as well as  possible (Graff, 2003). In this context, conventional definitions (e.g. Alliance for Nonprofit Management,  2007; Bertrand & Brown, 2005; Insurance Bureau of Canada, 2007) that view risk management basically as  a procedure for minimizing threats and reducing exposure to liability, can be seen as unnecessarily  constraining nonprofit organizations from important missionbuilding activities (Herman, et al, 2004).    

Defining risk management 
  In this spirit, the following definition of risk management is offered:    Risk management is a disciplined process that helps an organization first, to determine  the viability of each of its activities by identifying and weighing their benefits and  threats to the mission and future wellbeing of the organization, and then, to confront  and mitigate the threats through good management practices and the implementation  of strategic safeguards to prevent losses or reduce their impact.    This definition not only recognizes that some risks are worth taking because their benefits to the  organization and their clients outweigh the threats, but it also emphasizes the importance of good  management practices in general as well as strategic safeguards against risk. This theme will be discussed  in greater detail in the section following.    

The practice of risk management 
  For this report we reviewed more than 400 articles, reports, toolkits, and websites that mentioned risk  and risk management in nonprofit and voluntary organizations. Most commonly, articles prepared by and  for the nonprofit sector focus on risks to clients, employees and volunteers, in other words, risks that are  related to carrying out their mission; however, their approach is piecemeal, and for the most part  anecdotal, giving advice on how to minimize particular risks in their own areas of operation. Conversely,  articles, reports and advice sheets prepared by the insurance industry tend to focus on risks that are  covered by various types of insurance options.    The Alliance for Nonprofit Management (2004) identified the following as the most common risks faced by  voluntary organizations (in descending order of frequency): injuries to clients, employees, volunteers and  the public; damage to property; employment practices; fraud; and noncompliance with legal  requirements.    The articles spell out how to minimize risk, focusing on individual risks and the necessary tactics to control  them. Only a small handful of articles present risk management in a holistic manner to be incorporated as  part of an organization's overall management strategy (Landry, 2005; Herman et al, 2004; Gaskin, 2005;  Volunteer Australia, 2003). And yet, research indicates that the greatest risk an organization ever faces is  what is known as the "liability of newness"  the tendency of new organizations to die within the first five  years of their existence (Stinchcombe, 1965; Hannan & Freeman, 1977; Aldrich & Ruef, 2006). Only twenty  percent of newly formed organizations of any kind survive past their fifth year (Aldrich, 1979). Liability of  newness is the result of a combination of fierce external pressures on the organization coupled with  inexperienced management lacking the core competencies necessary to withstand pressure. The early  establishment of good management practices helps mitigate the liability of newness.   
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                13 

In this paper we argue, in accordance with our definition and research evidence, that good management  practices constitute the foundation of risk mitigation and that specific risk management safeguards should  be embedded in an organization's strategy, governance structure and everyday managerial practices. With  the exception of external risks, it is clear that all risks are related to poor management. Risk management  is inextricably linked with good overall management practices.    For most nonprofit organizations the primary objective of risk management is to protect their  organization's core assets  property, income, staff, volunteers and reputation  from harm, loss or  erosion. Losses, damage or harm in any one of these areas can be very costly to an organization, and may  ultimately result in the demise of the organization. Protection of these assets, primarily through insurance  policies, constitutes the mainstay of risk management strategies. Some procedural safeguards to prevent  losses and damage may also be in place. With few exceptions (see Herman, et al, 2004), most books,  articles, toolkits and manuals refer to this aspect of risk and risk management almost exclusively.     However, there are other ways to control an organization's risk, ways that are not usually considered as  strategies for risk management. These are: mission fidelity, sound human resource management, public  accountability and high standards of moral and ethical behaviour.     Mission fidelity. Staying true to its mission is an important goal for a nonprofit organization  a goal  which is easy to lose sight of in efforts to quell crises, raise funds and/or embark on new ventures  (Meinhard et al, 2005). Often referred to as mission drift, straying from one's mission has a negative  impact on stakeholders which can affect the organization's ultimate survival, through loss of  clientele, donors, staff and volunteers, who continue to believe in the mission. The likelihood of  engaging in behaviour that alienates stakeholders is much lower in organizations that are true to  their mission.    Sound human resource management. Nonprofit organizations face several challenges with respect  to HR management. Only large organizations can afford to hire a manager of human resources and  only the largest have human resources departments (McMullen & Schellenberg, 2003). In the  remainder of the organizations, HR management is left to their executive directors, few of whom  are trained in HR. Available guidelines to help them do not reflect the reality of smaller nonprofits  (Meinhard, 2006). Training in HR management with respect to recruitment, hiring and interpersonal  management skills, combined with the institution of specific policies with respect to discrimination,  harassment, dismissal, and workplace safety, would make the organization a better place in which  to work and also decrease the risk of claims brought against the organization with respect to  employment practices.     Public accountability. Perhaps there is no one word that better describes the current reality of  nonprofit organizations than "accountability". Government and other funders are now demanding it  as a requisite for providing funds (Meinhard et al, 2003). The public, aware of accountability fiascos  such as the American Red Cross's misappropriation of dollars meant for the 9/11 victims, the  sponsorship scandal here in Canada, and other headline cases involving misuse of funds, are  demanding greater transparency from nonprofit organizations. Organizations with clearly defined  accounting procedures that "follow the money" automatically become more accountable. But  money management is not the only way to be accountable. Ongoing program and performance  evaluation demonstrating the effective use of the organization's resources is important to the  organization's stakeholders. The greater the accountability and transparency, the more attractive  the organization is to donors, volunteers and competent staff and the less likelihood of losses,  claims and court cases.   
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                14 

High standards of moral and ethical behaviour. Ensuring high moral and ethical standards is ever  more important in these litigious times when corporate governance is under the highest scrutiny.  This is generally taken for granted in nonprofit organizations as part of the aura of "dedicated  people doing good things". However, recent exposs of unethical behaviour and vicarious liability  rulings have focused more attention on this in the nonprofit world 2 . Transparent fiduciary oversight  and clear expectation of moral and ethical behaviour at all levels will mitigate risks to the  organization's reputation.  
F F

  Good management practices go a long way towards mitigating risks, but in organizations without ideal  management, instituting risk management practices is essential. Even in well managed organizations,  specific risk reduction strategies are often necessary. A beneficial side effect of incorporating risk  management practices may be better management in general which in turn will result in other benefits  such as improved efficiency, performance and managementstaff relations.   

Incorporating risk management practices 
  According to Graff (2003), the aims of risk management are threefold: 1) prevention  keep things from  going wrong, 2) minimization of harm  usually through acquiring insurance, and 3) liability reduction   documenting risk management practices to "reduce the likelihood of successful legal action".  Responsibility for risk management can be delegated to a fulltime professional risk manager, it can be  part of the senior manager's job description, or it can be assigned to a committee composed of staff and  volunteers (Herman, et al, 2004). In the case of the latter two options, the advice of outside experts would  most likely be needed.     The articles, websites, toolkits and models we reviewed present steps and guidelines to achieve these  aims. Some are more elaborate than others, tailored to different needs, depending on the size, activities  and structure of the organization. The steps and practices suggested by the various articles fall into the  following general categories of activities:      Identifying and assessing risks   Determining what actions need to be taken, in other words, establishing a risk policy this is the main  focus of the majority of the articles and websites   Putting the risk controls in place  this is another important focus in the literature   Monitoring and reevaluating risk management practices as needed.     Each of these risk management categories subsumes many specific activities so that it is easy to lose sight  of the strategic whole, or to use a well known metaphor, to focus on the trees rather than the forest.  However, risk management should never just be a series of activities carried out simply to address some  specific risks. Wellpracticed, it is a holistic strategy involving the entire organization starting at the board  level, down through senior and junior management, to staff members and volunteers (Landry, 2003;  Volunteering Australia, 2003; Herman et al, 2004).    The role of the board in setting the tone for risk management is crucial (Siegel, 2006), yet barely 40% of  Canadian nonprofit boards have risk management policies (Bugg & Dallhoff, 2006). Starting with board  members, each person in the organization should be trained to recognize the risks inherent in carrying out  their activities, whether it involves the general public, clients, peers, or subordinates, and to follow 
2

Examples include the 1995 case against United Way of America's former president for defrauding his organization and the 1999 vicarious liability court case against Children's Foundation for immoral and unethical actions by its employees.   Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                15 

stipulated procedures in order to avoid or minimize the risk. Constantly encouraged and rewarded, these  behaviours become ingrained in the individual and embedded in the organization. In time, such practices  become part of the organization's culture (Purdue, 2007; Wiegman, von Thadden & Gibbons, 2007).     When addressing risk management, all of the reviewed articles begin from an assumption that  organizations and their members are aware of their risks and the need for risk management. The articles  then identify organizational activities necessary for risk management. However, as the findings from  various Canadian surveys indicate (see Appendix A), "many nonprofit organizations either are not aware of  or have not implemented such policies or practices in their organizations..." (Goldberg, 2002, p. 16).     Some organizations are aware of risks, but do not think they are relevant to their organization, to the  extent that they do not even have insurance (Meinhard, 2005). Extant literature does not address how to  raise the awareness of organizations to the risks they face and the consequent importance of risk  management.     Awareness of risk sometimes comes as a result of a highly publicized lawsuit, such as Bazley v. Children's  Foundation and Jacobi v. Boys' and Girls' Club of Vernon. At other times, awareness comes when  volunteers refuse to associate with an organization because of inadequate liability coverage (Goldberg,  2002; Meinhard, 2005). Sometimes, awareness of an important issue only comes about through the  efforts of interested parties to raise awareness.    The Canadian voluntary sector, with the help of the Insurance Bureau of Canada and its provincial  counterparts, has responded to the challenge by creating websites that discuss insurance and risk  management. In Ontario, the Ontario Volunteer Partnership is organizing a series of workshops across the  province to raise awareness about risk and help organizations develop risk management policies and  practices.     The lack of formal risk management in Canadian voluntary organizations     Both anecdotal and survey evidence indicate that a majority of Canadian nonprofit organizations do not  have formal risk management policies or procedures in place. Most of the surveys are small in terms of  their sample size, but all come to the same conclusion: very few organizations have formal risk  management programs in place.     Averaging across the various studies reviewed in Appendix A, only about 40% of Canadian nonprofit  organizations engage in risk reduction activities. In a large study of nonprofit governance, with a sample  size exceeding 1300 organizations from across Canada only 40% of organizations reported having any kind  of risk management as part of the Board's governance strategy (Bugg & Dallhoff, 2006). Clearly the  majority of nonprofit organizations do not have formal risk management policies or practices. Some of the  reasons that nonprofits often do not practice risk management include the following:     Many nonprofits believe that their risks are low (Meinhard, 2005).   Limited budgets and small staff contingents leave little time for dealing with risk management in the  face of everyday operational duties (Meinhard, 2005; Herman et al, 2004).    The current practice by governments of funding projects, rather than full programs, decreases  operational overheads even more, making obtaining appropriate insurance coverage more difficult  (MacLeod, 2005).   The role of governance lies in the hands of volunteer board members, who often lack experience and  knowledge in risk management (Hunter, 2003; Volunteer Canada, 2002). 
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                16 

 The belief that "doing good" cannot result in harm. This stems from the Doctrine of Charitable  Immunity, which is no longer an acceptable excuse as it was struck down at law, but the myth remains  (Alexander et al, 2006; Oshinsky & Diaz, 2002; Public Entity Risk Institute, 2007).    And yet, nonprofit organizations face some unique risks:     They serve vulnerable populations where the risk of abuse and/or unintentional harm is greater  (Herman et al, 2004; MacLeod, 2005).    They undertake a wide range of activities, for many of which, insurance is not available (Herman, 2002)  and where control is more difficult to establish (Herman & Jackson, 2004).   Their funding is unstable and inadequate creating overworked staff members who are more prone to  mistakes (Meinhard, 2006).   The demands of donors may threaten an organization's ability to carry out its mission Meinhard &  Foster, 2003).   Nonprofit organizations are particularly prone to volunteerrelated risks (Gaskin, 2005). These include  misuse of authority, performance abuse, defiance of confidentiality, and misrepresentation of  organization (Graff, 2003).    An organization could face disastrous consequences because of errors made by the volunteers and could  loose the confidence and trust of the public, which is its priceless asset (Griffith et al, 2005.   

Summary 
  Organizations face both insurable and uninsurable risks as they go about their activities. Much of the  literature focuses on risks defined in insurance policies and how they can be contained through specific  risk management practices. However, uninsurable risks, such as losing funding sources or alienating  volunteers, both of which may jeopardize a nonprofit's survival, are prevalent in organizations. These risks  are best mitigated through good management practices.    The conclusion drawn from this analysis of the literature is that risk management and good management  are inextricably related. Sound management practices not only ensure that an organization will be true to  its mission, treat its employees well, be accountable to its stakeholders and maintain a reputation for  moral and ethical behaviour, it also reduces both insurable and uninsurable risks. Well managed  organizations can easily incorporate specific risk management measures. Conversely, the introduction of  risk management practices into organizations that are not well managed can be the basis for improved  general management practices which will benefit organizations in dealing with their uninsurable risks as  well.     Although risk management practices and strategies are often presented in piecemeal fashion, the  challenge for nonprofit organizations is to embed awareness of risk and safe practices into every level of  the organization and every aspect of organizational activity. Safe practices should not only be discussed  and encouraged, they should be rewarded in order to ingrain the behaviour in organizational members  until they become part of the organization's culture.     We conclude this discussion of risk management by presenting a unified framework of risks faced by  nonprofit organizations based on the Open Systems Model of Organization. This model depicts  organizations as cybernetic systems importing resources from the environment, transforming these  resources, and exporting the outcomes of this transformation process back into the environment. As  Model 1 suggests, risks can occur in any one of these three phases. They can occur in the input phase,  which relates to acquiring resources and accommodating the demands of the environment; in the 
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                17 

transformation phase, during which organizational inputs are processed to provide the services or  products of the organization; and in the output phase, in which the end product is exported back into the  environment, reflecting the mission and goals of the organization.     In the input phase, risks can be categorized as: a) direct risks, relating to the critical resources needed by  the organization to complete its mission, for example: funding cutbacks; and b) risks incurred because of  general environmental instability, for example poor economic conditions, changes in government  regulations, natural disasters and the like.    It is in the transformation phase that the potential for risks is greatest. As an organization carries out its  mission and goals it can incur risks related to its human, financial and material assets. These could include  abuse and injury to employees, volunteers or clients, fraud and financial mismanagement and property  damage. See Model 1 on the following page for a more detailed listing.     In the output phase the risks are related to costs and impediments to achieving goals such as fines and  lawsuits. Inability to realize organizational goals and fulfill the organization's mission can ultimately lead to  the demise of the organization.     In summary, this section focused on the identification, assessment and prevention of risks from a holistic  crossorganizational perspective. However, a significant part of risk management is containment or  minimization of harm once damage occurs. This is the role of insurance, the subject of the next section.    

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                18 

     

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                19 

Insurance as a risk management tool 
From the perspective of risk management, insurance is an `afterthefact' method of damage control. It is  compensation for losses already incurred and is a very important plank in a nonprofit organization's risk  management arsenal.    

Definition of insurance 
  Insurance is a promise of compensation for specific potential future losses in exchange for a periodic  payment. Designed to protect the financial wellbeing of an individual, company or other entity in the case  of unexpected loss (http://www.investorwords.com/2510/insurance.html), it is a system that "shares the  losses of the few among the many .... providing financial peace of mind in a world filled with risk"  (Insurance Brokers Association of Canada, 2005). "It allows [organizations] to engage in many ventures  without having to set aside reserves to meet the financial requirements that may arise from certain types  of losses" (Ibid).    A brief history of insurance  3      Written records of insurance date back to the ancient world. The first recorded evidence of insurance was  documented in China, in 3000 BC. Chinese merchants, in an effort to minimize their risk of loss, would  spread their cargo among many ships as well as partner with insurers who would compensate for losses  incurred. "Premiums" were only collected after insurers paid the claims. This was in the form of  indentured labour until all costs were repaid the insurer.     Insurance in ancient Babylon was more reasonable and resembled our system more closely. As recorded  in the Hammurabi Code in 2100 BC, money suppliers agreed to cancel loan repayments in case of losses  incurred by the traders. For this protection, the money suppliers demanded a premium on their regular  interest for the loans. Premiums from many absorbed the losses incurred by a few. Other ancient peoples,  Jews, Egyptians, Greeks, Phoenicians, and Romans, also have records of insurance, similar to the  Babylonians.    Although most of the insurance in these times was related to trade hazards and was transacted between  individuals, other forms of insurance developed. The Babylonians began extended insurance to cover  provisions for a family in case of loss of life  a precursor to life insurance. The Romans had burial societies  relieve surviving family members of the burden of paying funeral expenses. Fire insurance was introduced  after the great fire of London in 1666. However, it wasn't until 1688 that the first insurance company was  formed  Lloyd's of London, named after the coffee house in which the early insurance transactions took  place between merchants, shipowners and underwriters.    The first insurance companies operating in Canada were based in Britain and involved marine and fire  insurance. Canada's first insurance company, founded in 1804, was Montreal's Phoenix Assurance. Today  there are more than 150 insurance companies operating in Canada providing a wide range of insurance  coverage (Canadian Insurance, 2007). A selection of these is presented in the section "Types of insurance".   
H H F

3

This short discussion is not meant to be an exhaustive scholarly treatise of the history of insurance. It is presented merely to offer an appreciation of the ancient roots of risk management. The information presented was cobbled together from various websites and makes no claims for accuracy.   Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                20 

Insurance in the nonprofit sector 
  It is not clear when nonprofit and voluntary organizations first began to use the services of insurance  agents. Until rendered invalid in a number of court cases in the latter decades of the twentieth century,  there was a general acceptance of the doctrine of charitable immunity across North America (Siegel,  2006). This lulled many charities and nonprofits into thinking that they did not need liability insurance.     Today, an estimated 70%90% of Canada's voluntary organizations have some kind of insurance  coverage 4 , however, "there is limited understanding of what protection the insurance contract provides"  (MacLeod, 2005, p. 15). With only a few insurance agencies specializing in insurance for the voluntary  sector, an estimated 45,000 nonprofit organizations have been having difficulty finding the appropriate  coverage at affordable rates (MacLeod, 2005). This has been one of the catalysts for the flurry of activity  surrounding insurance and risk management.    Some of the more risk prone subsectors have been actively examining alternatives and seeking solutions,  in many instances along with their agents. For example, a broker in Southern Ontario has been trying to  alert politicians and the public to the desperation of sports and recreational groups because insurance  companies are reluctant to continue insuring them (Algie & Adams, 2005).    Domestic insurers have ceased providing insurance for recreational activities; and while a handful of  foreign companies are willing to insure these activities, they do so only at high premium rates (Olney,  2004; MacLeod, 2005). Rising insurance rates, combined with rising energy costs have driven up operating  overheads, which in turn have led to a substantial increase in user fees (Ontario Recreation Facilities  Association, 2003). Premium increases and insurance availability has affected other higherrisk fields as  well, such as services for special needs adults and youth (Olney, 2004). "Obtaining affordable coverage for  the vast majority of voluntary sector organizations that provide services or products to vulnerable  populations has been extremely difficult" (MacLeod, 2005, p. 20).    The insurance industry's reluctance to provide liability insurance to nonprofit organizations stems  primarily from the vulnerability of the clients they serve (Macleod, 2005). Added to this is a belief that  nonprofit organizations are riskier to insure because, lacking business skills, their standards of operation  are lower (Macleod, 2005).     With a growing number of lawsuits, people have stopped volunteering in sports and recreational activities  (Ontario Recreation Facilities Association, 2003). This is a major cause of concern for those organizations  that function, to a large extent, on the strength of their volunteers. They are concerned about decreasing  numbers of volunteers as well as worried about the liabilities their volunteers may be facing.    In 1997 the US Congress passed the Volunteer Protection Act to reassure volunteers and encourage  volunteering. A 2005 court case in Wisconsin demonstrated that this act may protect the volunteer, but  not the organization, which was sued for an accident caused by the volunteer while acting for the  organization in question (Charity Governance Blogs, 2005). There is an initiative underway in Ontario to  pressure government to pass a volunteer protection act as was passed in Nova Scotia. A similar proposal in  New Brunswick was ultimately defeated upon second reading.    
F F U U

4

This estimate is derived from various studies conducted in Canada (reviewed in Appendix A), some of which place the rate as high as 90% and others as low as 70%.

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                21 

Understanding insurance rates 
  The cost of insuring individual entities (people or organizations) is borne only in part by the premiums paid  for liability or casualty protection. Money from premiums is invested, and earnings from these  investments are used to supplement premiums to cover the actual cost of the insurance. Thus, insurance  premiums fluctuate not only according to the magnitude of underwriting losses, but also in tandem with  the performance of investments.     In times of booming markets, insurance companies are in search of more capital to enable them to invest  and take advantage of rapidly rising market returns. Fierce competition for new clients, and a willingness  to take greater risks, as return on investments outweigh underwriting losses, drive down the price of  premiums. This is called a "soft" market. The opposite occurs when investment income declines.  Companies are unwilling to take risks as reserves are diminished. With insurance hard to get, premiums  rise. This is referred to as a "hard" market (Hodgson & Brakel, 2004).     The last hard market in Canada was affected by a number of factors that all came together: 1) a low return  on investment, 2) a sharp increase in the costs of injury claims, even though the number of claims have  remained steady, 3) increase in fraudulent claims, 4) global catastrophes and 5) a substantial increase in  reinsurance rates  insurance that insurance companies buy to protect themselves against large,  unexpected claims (Insurance Brokers Association of Canada, 2007).    The cycle of fluctuation from hard to soft markets is about ten years. Chart 1 below illustrates the cyclical  fluctuations in return on equity. Note the steep decline in 2001 and 2002, the lowest return on equity  recorded in the last three decades. When the return on equity goes down, the market turns `hard' and the  cost of premiums rises to compensate.   

   

 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                22 

In Canada, "the insurance industry is closely monitored and regulated by both federal and provincial  governments to ensure that insurance companies can meet their financial obligations to policyholders. In  addition, provincial governments have jurisdiction over market conduct and consumer issues such as rate setting, sales practices and the conduct of brokers" (Insurance Bureau of Canada, 2005).    Newest figures by the Insurance Bureau of Canada indicate that the steep premium hikes experienced in  the aftermath of 9/11 have stabilized and are even declining, especially in the property and casualty areas.  Premiums for Directors and Officers Liability and especially General Liability insurance, the ones most  important to nonprofit organizations, are not declining at the same rate ( Uebel, Wolfgang, and Biz Next,  2005: 85).   

Types of insurance 
  Not all nonprofit organizations have the same insurance needs, but there is a general consensus with  respect to basic coverage. The most common claims filed against nonprofit organizations are: 1) claims  and lawsuits filed against a nonprofit organization, 2) claims for injuries to staff and volunteers, and 3)  claims to repair or replace property a nonprofit owns or controls (Alliance for Nonprofit Management,  2007).    
H

Claims and lawsuits filed against nonprofit organizations 
This is what is generally referred to as Third Party Liability. Such claims are covered by various different  types of insurance:  Commercial general liability insurance: CGL protects the organization against claims made by third  parties with respect to property damage or bodily harm caused by the organization's products, or  the activities of its members, including volunteers, or occurring on its premises.  Directors' and officers' liability: D & O protects the officers of an organization with respect to  employment related claims such as wrongful dismissal or discrimination, mismanagement of funds,  or failure to carry out fiduciary duties that result in nonbodily harm to an individual.  Professional liability: This policy covers liability claims against licensed experts delivering services  for an organization. This type of insurance is mandatory if the organization's services are provided  by licensed professional practitioners. Also referred to as professional errors and omissions liability.   Umbrella coverage: An addition that provides extra protection when primary coverage is exhausted.  Automobile insurance: This pertains to organizations whose staff or volunteers drive to carry out  the organization's mission. It typically provides separate coverage, with separate premiums, for  liability for injuries to others, for damage to the car, and for the risk that another motorist may be  uninsured or under insured.  Other, less common policies include: employment practices liability (EPLI); employee benefits  liability; and improper sexual conduct/sexual abuse liability.   

Claims filed against nonprofit organizations for injuries to staff and volunteers 
Such claims are covered by:   Workers compensation: Compensation provided by the government for injuries suffered while  carrying out jobrelated duties during the convalescence period, or permanently if an employee  cannot return to work.  Employers' liability: This policy protects the organizations from claims made by employees or  volunteers who get injured while performing jobrelated duties. This is often part of CGL.  Accident and injury coverage for volunteers: Covers costs of harm or injury incurred by volunteers  while performing their volunteer duties.    
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                23 

Claims for damage to property a nonprofit owns or controls 
Such coverage includes:   General property coverage: This insurance covers damage to the organization's property, including  damage caused by the organization to the property of others.   Crime coverage: This coverage provides financial protection against the potential dishonest acts of  employees, and a "3D" policy or destruction, disappearance and dishonesty policy which covers  theft and similar crime losses inside and outside the premises.  Fidelity bond: A policy that protects an organization from loss in case of financial misconduct by  officers or employees. If a bonded person takes money, the bonding company will pay the  organization the missing amount. All officers and employees with financial duties should be bonded.   Boiler and machinery coverage: This insurance covers the costs of repairing or replacing heating, air  conditioning, and ventilating equipment.  Computer equipment and software coverage: This insurance covers the costs incurred as a result of  computer failure.   

Alternatives to commercial insurance 
  Gail MacLeod, in her report prepared for the Muttart Foundation in March 2005, identified various  options to commercial insurance:   Mutual trusts and cooperatives: where the members provide mutual protection.  Nonprofit insurance company: as established in California by a group of large grant makers "to  provide reasonably priced insurance to nonprofits domiciled in California" (MacLeod, 2005, p. 33).  Self insurance: preparation for the eventuality of a loss by allocating money on a regular basis to  build up a reserve fund.  Reciprocal insurance exchange: provides mutual protection to subscribers whose premiums may  differ, depending on the size and nature of their organization, but whose coverage is exactly the  same as all others.    

Summary 
    From ancient times, provisions have been sought for compensation of losses or damages incurred through  accidental or wilful means. Premiums paid by many, augmented by investment growth, pay for the losses  incurred by the few. The insured buys protection, not against the risk of loss, but for compensation of  losses, should they occur. Protection can be bought not only against losses or damage to the insured, but  also damage and harm the insured may cause others.    Over the years, the variety of insurance products has grown to cover virtually any risk.  As part of a sound  risk management policy, organizations have to decide what types of insurance they need to protect their  enterprise. Thus, they have to weigh the probability of a particular risk occurring to the cost of the  protection against that risk. In the nonprofit world this is particularly difficult given sometimes high risks  but limited financial resources to protect against them.    With the invalidation of the doctrine of charitable immunity, and a growing reluctance of volunteers to  serve in risky ventures without proper insurance, nonprofit organizations are seeking better insurance  coverage. However, with few insurance companies specializing in insurance for the nonprofit sector, the  unavailability of some types of insurance, and the generally high cost of insurance, many Canadian  voluntary organizations are not sufficiently covered.    

 
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                24 

Discussion 
  This review, based on more than 400 sources including academic publications, newspaper articles, reports,  surveys, toolkits, and websites, has attempted to give a comprehensive overview of the latest information  on risk management and insurance in the nonprofit sector, focusing mainly, but not exclusively, on the  Canadian experience. Its purpose is to provide the reader with a better understanding of the issues and  problems relating to risk and liability, risk management, and insurance in the voluntary sector.    Not intended to be a "how to" manual for risk management, this review nevertheless provides valuable  insights into the essence of risk management: vigilant governance at the Board level, good management  practices across the entire organization that permeate the organization's culture, and when needed,  specific risk management activities. This report provides a framework for understanding the holistic scope  of risk and its management.     There are some glaring gaps in the literature. We were unable to identify the magnitude of risk exposure  in the sector as a whole. While there are a number of anecdotal examples of risks incurred in the  voluntary sector, there is no study that measures the frequency of lawsuits and claims, nor the financial  costs of these losses. Conversely, some sources claim that overall risk in the sector is low, however these  claims are not backed by empirical evidence. Moreover, we specifically looked for evidence to determine  whether engaging in risk management practices confers the organization accessibility to more favourable  insurance rates. Claims that proper risk management leads to reduced premiums are theoretical, not  empirically based. There has been no empirical examination of this relationship and even anecdotal  evidence is lacking. Some qualitative interviews (e.g. Voluntary Sector Forum, 2004) seem to indicate that  risk management practices have no bearing on insurance premiums.     While most discussions of risk and risk management emphasize the negative aspects of risks, especially in  reference to the vulnerable populations served by the voluntary sector, we accentuate that some risks are  worth taking in furthering the fulfilment of a nonprofit's mission; otherwise the survival of the  organization may be threatened as its services are not fulfilling client needs and it ceases to be attractive  to is donors and volunteers. So, we conclude that risks can be positive and even essential, but they must  be taken with the proper safeguards; safeguards embedded in all aspects of organizational activity and at  all levels of organizational governance.    Trying to prevent risk from occurring, through good organizational management practices, is just one  aspect of dealing with risk. Another is arranging for protection against losses incurred by claims against  the organization or its staff from third parties, claims against the organization relating to employees' and  volunteers' physical and mental wellbeing, and claims for damage to property. Most commonly, this kind  of protection is provided by commercial insurance agents, although there are alternatives to commercial  insurance.    The literature review provides strong evidence that nonprofits are struggling to get appropriate insurance  at a reasonable price. This is exacerbated during "hard" insurance cycles, but even in favourable market  conditions there are relatively few insurers providing service to the nonprofit sector.    

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                25 

4. QUANTITATIVE RESEARCH 
From October 2007 through February 2008,  approximately 8000 of Ontario's nonprofit  organizations were invited to participate in an online  survey about insurance and risk management  practices. This section presents the findings and  conclusions gleaned from the survey and provides an  analysis of the insurance profile and risk management  practices of Ontario's nonprofit organizations.  
 
 

Research methodology 
Research design focused on an online survey  for Ontario's voluntary sector. The sampling  strategy was designed to offer a  representative sample of Ontario's nonprofit  and registered charitable organizations and  allow examination of a number of key  dimensions. See Appendix O for a discussion  of the methodology used in conducting this  research. 

Sample characteristics 
 

As described in Appendix O, the sampling strategy was designed to offer a representative sample of  Ontario's nonprofit organizations, stratified according to region. The sections below describe the sample  in terms of organizational mandate, size, budget, location and whether or not the organization was a  registered charity. The sample characteristics are then compared with those published by the National  Survey of Nonprofit and Voluntary Organizations (NSNVO) in 2003.   

  Organizational mandate 
7B

Table 1 presents the sample distribution according to their organizational mandate. Definitions of these  organizational types can be found in Appendix B. 
     

Table 1. Organizational Mandate   
Arts and Culture  Prof. Assoc., Union  Development & Housing  Education & Research  Environment 

Frequency  Percent 
147  58  41  86  36  12.4  4.9  3.5  7.3  3.0  2.0  19.3  1.7  1.9  1.4  25.6  13.1  2.7  98.7  1.3  100.0 

Valid Percent 
12.6  5.0  3.5  7.4  3.1  2.1  19.5  1.7  2.0  1.4  25.9  13.3  2.7  100.0     

Grantmaking, Volunteer promotion  24  Health  International  Advocacy  Religious  Social Services  Sports & Recreation  Other  Total  228  20  23  16  303  155  32  1169  15  1184 

Missing    Total 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                26 

  Figure 1 represents the distribution of organizational types in descending order of frequencies.  Organizational types comprising less than 3% of the total sample were combined into the "other"  category.  Social service organizations comprise one quarter of the sample, followed by agencies providing  health and wellness services (19.3%), sports and recreational organizations (13.1%) and arts and cultural  organizations (12.4%).     

    Ninetytwo percent of sampled organizations provide services to people directly.  Two fifths of these  organizations serve the general public. Just over one fifth provide services to children (10.8%), youth  (6.2%) and students (4.4%). Eighteen percent serve vulnerable populations which include seniors (10.6%)  and others in need of care (7.5%). Organizations created to provide venues for people to partake in special  interests such as hobbies, music sports, comprise eight percent of the sample.    Figure 2 lists the beneficiaries of the organizations' services and their frequencies in descending order of  frequency. Almost two thirds (64%) of the sampled organizations serve more than 100 people a month,  the remaining organizations are evenly split between those that serve fewer than 50 people a month and  those that serve between 50  100. 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                27 

 

Organizational status and location 
8B

  While ninety percent (90%) of organizations in the sample are legally incorporated entities, seventy eight  percent are registered charities. The organizations range in age from less than 1 year old to 182 years old.   The mean age is 33 years and the median age is 25 years.  Eightyfive percent of the organizations are less  than 50 years old.      As Figure 3 indicates, two thirds of the organizations in the sample are standalone organizations, twenty  three percent are head offices and twelve percent are branch offices. Their geographic location is  presented in Figure 4.   

 
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                28 

  With the exception of the northern region, the sample is quite evenly distributed among the regions.  They  serve mostly cities, towns and rural municipalities (49%), however 21% serve larger regions of a province,  while nine percent (9%) have provincewide jurisdictions and ten percent service nationally (see Figure 5).   

 

Organizational size 
9B

Three different measures can be used to determine the size of a nonprofit organization: number of paid  employees, number of volunteers and size of budget. Figures 6 and 7 present the distribution of paid  employees and volunteers in our sample. More than 20% of the sampled organizations have no paid staff  at all, and another 11% have only parttime or up to one fulltime position. Altogether, almost half of the  organizations operate with fewer than 5 employees. A very small percentage of organizations employ in 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                29 

excess of 500 employees, with the largest reporting 10,000. The mean number of employees is 51, but the  median is only 5. 5   
F

 

  In contrast to paid employment, all organizations have at least one volunteer. The mean number of  volunteers is 70 and the median is 45.  6  There is a significant linear relationship between the number of 
F F

 

This is a typical finding in the nonprofit sector, where a small number of organizations employ the vast majority of workers. 6 The means and medians quoted for both employees and volunteers are from the raw data sets.   Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                30 

5

volunteers in an organization and the number of paid staff (Eta 7  = .34, p<.000), thus the greater the  number of employees, the greater the number of volunteers as well. This is demonstrated in Table 2.      Table 2. Mean number of volunteers in by number of employees      Number of Employees (grouped from  Mean number of    raw data)  volunteers  N    No paid staff  43.21  208    1 employee    60.76  113    2  4 employees  65.52  178    5  9 employees  66.68  129      10  19 employees  71.68  92    20  39 employees  70.71  118      40  99 employees  71.63  83    100  494 employees  94.10  106    500  10000 Employees  156.64  25      Total  67.39  1052   
F F

Organizational budget 
10B

Financial measures such as revenues and budget are commonly used to describe the size of an  organization. Figure 8 presents the distribution of organizations in the sample according to the size of their  annual budgets. 
 

 
Eta is a measure of the strength of a relationship (similar to a linear correlation coefficient) when the independent variable is expressed in categories and the dependent variable is a continuous scale.   Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                31 
7

  As it happens, the distribution among the various budget categories between the largest and the smallest  is quite similar. The sample is skewed towards the larger organizations. The implications of this will be  discussed in the next section. The relationship between budget and size of workforce is strongly related  (Eta = .413, p< .001) and although not as strong, there is a significant relationship between budget and the  size of the volunteer contingent of an organization (Eta = .278, p< .01). (Please refer to Tables 3 and 4).      Table 3. Budget by staff size  Table 4. Budget by numbers of volunteers          Annual Budget  Mean number  N  Annual Budget  Mean number  N    (grouped)  of employees  Total  (grouped)  of volunteers  Total    $0  $49,999  0.45  209    $0  $49,999  40.06  186    $50,000  $50,000  2.29  120    52.57  111  $99,999   $99,999    $100,000   $100,000    3.96  157    68.62  145  $249,999  $249,999    $250,000     $250,000   23.56  134  71.46  123  $499,999     $499,999  $500,000     $500,000    22.82  127  66.83  117  $999,999    $999,999    More than  More than  189.84  305    $1,000,000  86.53  288  $1,000,000        61.73   1052   Total   Total  66.77  970    

Sample representativeness 
1B

  In 2006 the National Survey of Nonprofit and Voluntary Organizations published the first ever mapping of  Ontario's nonprofit and voluntary sector (Scott, Tsoukalas, Roberts & Lasby, 2006). The sample attained  for the present study deviates from the NSNVO Ontario report in some significant ways.    First, for the purposes of this study, institutions of religious worship, hospitals and universities were  deliberately omitted. Of the remaining nonprofit subsectors, the current sample is overrepresented in the  Health (19.5% vs .3%) and Social Services (26% vs. 11%) subsectors, and underrepresented in the Grant making (2% vs. 12%) and Development and Housing (3.5% vs. 9%) subsectors.    The low sample numbers in Development and Housing and high numbers in the Health and Social Services  can be partly explained by the fact that many organizations have multiple mandates and respondents may  choose Health or Social Services when providing sheltered housing, for example. The NSNVO data was  collected by means of personal interviews, where the interviewer could help pinpoint the mandate. This  study relied wholly on selfidentification. Many respondents selected a category but subsequently wrote  comments about their difficulty to select only one category, while listing other things they do. This may  account for some of the variation. However, a more likely explanation for the deviations in the sample is  that this is a purposive sample; organizations chose to respond or not to our letters of invitation to fill out  the survey. It may be that health and social service agencies are more concerned with issues of insurance  and risk management than are grantmaking organizations, for example.     
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                32 

Second, the current sample is skewed towards larger organizations even though special outreach efforts  were made to capture the smaller organizations. Twentynine percent of the sample is made up of  organizations with budgets in excess of $1,000,000, as compared to only ten percent reported in the  NSNVO. Conversely, only 30% of organizations in the current sample have budgets of less than $100,000  as compared to 50% reported in the NSNVO. This may have implications with respect to the estimate of  how many of Ontario's nonprofit organizations are uninsured. These will be discussed in the appropriate  sections.    With respect to geographical reach, the present sample is almost identical to the NSNVO results. In this  study a neighbourhood category was added. Combining neighbourhood with the municipal category  would make the distributions even more closely aligned. Similarly with population served; although the  categories in this study are defined slightly differently, the main categories  General Public, Children and  Youth, Seniors, Vulnerable Populations (Special Needs in the NSNVO), have almost equivalent  distributions.     Although in areas of mandate and size, the current sample deviates from the findings in the NSNVO, there  is sufficient representation in all categories to provide valuable information about insurance concerns and  risk management practices in all of Ontario's nonprofit subsectors.    

Insured versus uninsured organizations 
  As Figure 9 indicates, just over ten percent of organizations in the sample are uninsured (N=120).  Because  the sample is overrepresented by large organizations and underrepresented by small ones, this estimate  of uninsured organizations is most likely too conservative. 

Correcting for this difference in distributions by weighting the current sample according to the NSNVO  distributions increased the estimate uninsured organizations to almost 17%.    Analysis of organizational characteristics reveals that there are some significant differences between  insured and uninsured organizations.    
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                33 

 

  Not unexpectedly, there is a very strong linear relationship between organizational budget and whether or  not an organization is insured (Eta = .537, p<.000); higher ratios of organizations without insurance are to  be found in the lower budget categories than in the higher ones.    Fiftyfour percent (54%) of organizations with budgets of less than $15,000 are uninsured, and 24% of  organizations with budgets between $15,000 and $50,000 are uninsured, but once the budget is between  $50,000 and $100,000, the rate drops to seven percent, and over $100,000 it is down to four percent.  Only two organizations out of 438 with budgets greater than $500,000 are without insurance (see shaded  row of Table 5).    Table 5. Insurance status by annual budget      Annual Budget 
$0   $14,999  Yes  No  Total  N  N  N  43  52  95  More  $15,000  $30,000   $50,000   $100,000   $250,000   $500,000   $1,000,000   than $10  $29,999  $49,999  $99,999  $249,999  $499,999  $999,999  $9,999,999  million  Total  55  77.5%  16  22.5%  71  33  75.0%  11  25.0%  44  114  92.7%  9  7.3%  123  100.0%  152  96.2%  6  3.8%  158  100.0%  131  96.3%  5  3.7%  136  100.0%  128  100.0%  0  .0%  128  100.0%  235  99.2%  2  .8%  237  100.0%  73  100.0%  0  .0%  73  100.0%  964  90.5%  101  9.5%  1065  100.0% Insured   

%   45.3%  %   54.7%  %   100.0% 

100.0%  100.0% 

  Cross tabulations with the variable `Insurance Status' (whether or not an organization has insurance) were  performed for all measured organizational characteristics. Neither an organization's age nor whether the  organizational unit is a head office, branch office or standalone unit is related to whether or not the  organization holds insurance.     However, thirteen other organizational variables are significantly related to whether or not the  organization holds insurance. Column 1 of Table 6 lists these variables. These thirteen variables  differentiate various organizational characteristics and types. For example the variable "organizational  mandate" differentiates among arts and cultural organizations, social service organizations, advocacy  organizations and the like. If these characteristics did not determine whether or not an organization has  insurance, then it would be expected that the distribution of insured versus noninsured organizations in  each category would be the same as for the overall sample:  10% of all organizational types would not  have insurance and 90% of all organizational types would have insurance. This is not the case for the  thirteen variables listed in Table 6.    For each of the variables measured, Column 2 displays the organizational types that are more likely to be  insured (exceed 90% of the distribution), and Column 3 lists the types of organizations that are more likely  to be uninsured (exceed 10%). Thus for the variable `Mandate', 19% of Arts and Cultural organizations are  uninsured, far exceeding the expected 10%, whereas 96% of Social Service organizations have insurance  exceeding the expected 90%.  Only those variables with significant chi squares at p<.01 are included in the  table.  Blank cells indicate that there are no organizational types exceeding the 90% distribution.     Organizations more likely to be insured are: social service and sports organizations, serving children,  youth, seniors and other vulnerable populations, with a clientele of more than 100 people a month,  served by more than two paid staff members, in a unionized environment, with a budget of more than 
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                34 

$500,000 and receiving more than 50% of their funding from government. Organizations from Western  Ontario are also more likely to be insured.       Table 6. Comparative profiles of insured and uninsured organizations 
    

Variable    Organizational mandate 

More likely to be insured  Social Service (96.4%)  Sports and Recreation (94.2%) 

More likely to be uninsured  Arts and Cultural (19%)  Environment (16.7%)  International (25%)  Advocacy (21.7%)  No direct service to people  (28.4%)  Special interests (13.5%)  Students (21.2%) 

Type of service provision  Beneficiaries of service 

  Youth (100%)  Children and Youth (100%)  Seniors (94%)  Vulnerable populations (95%)  More than 100 (94%)      Anything above 2 employees  (96100%)  Unionized (98.1%)      More than $500,000 (99.9%)  More than 50% from  government (97.5%)    Western Ontario (94.6%) 

Number of people served  Charitable registration  Incorporation  Paid staff  Unionized staff  Area served  Annual budget  Government funding  Number of volunteers  Region of Ontario 

Fewer than 100 (13%)    Nonregistered (18.9%)    Nonincorporated (22.7%)    No paid staff (35%)    International (30.3%)    $15,000$50,000 (24%)  Less than $15,000 (54.7%)  No government funding (21.8%) Fewer than 20 volunteers  (19.3%)  Eastern Ontario (15.7%)   

Uninsured organizations are more likely to be found among arts and cultural, environmental, international  and advocacy organizations. These organizations generally do not provide direct service to people and if  so, then they serve fewer than 100 people a month, mostly students and special interest groups. They are  more likely to be operating without paid staff and with fewer than 20 volunteers, on an annual budget of  less than $50,000, receiving no government funding. They are more likely to be unincorporated and  without charitable registration and more likely to come from the Eastern Ontario region. 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                35 

Description of uninsured organizations 
0B

  The majority of uninsured organizations had never had insurance (82%). Subsequently, they had been  uninsured for more than ten years (54%). Only one fifth of the organizations indicated that they were  thinking of acquiring insurance within the next two years.  

  Reasons for not having insurance 
 

The main reasons given for not getting insurance are (in order of frequency): the risk for the organization  is low (59.6%), the organization cannot afford insurance (51.7%), the organization prefers to spend their  money in other ways (41.6%) and the organization does not need insurance (33.7%). Only twelve percent  (12%) of organizations claimed that they were uninsured because they were unable to acquire insurance.  Some other reasons given (2 organizations) for being uninsured were that the insurance really did not  cover what they needed it for most, so they decided to drop insurance altogether. Another stated that  insurance rose so much that they decided to drop the insurance and focus on risk reduction.  

Repercussions 
12B

 

Three quarters of the uninsured organizations claimed, when asked about repercussions experienced from  not having insurance, that their organizations suffered no repercussions from failing to have insurance. A  small percentage (9%) felt that not having insurance had an impact on their ability to recruit volunteers  and get people to take up leadership roles.  Four organizations said there was certain programming they  were unable to carry out because they had no insurance, and two others spoke of the risk of lawsuits and  how "devastating" that would be. 

Insurance profile of insured organizations 
1B

 

The vast majority of organizations in the sample are insured. Tables 7ac list the different types of policies,  their frequencies and the percentage of organizations that carry each type of insurance. The four most  commonly held policies are: General Property (98%), General Liability (92.5%), Directors' and Officers'  (81.2%) and Accident and Injury (78.2). On average, organizations carry approximately 6 different policies:  3 general liability policies (Table 7a), 1 employeerelated policy (Table 7b) and 2 damage protection  policies (Table 7c).   

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                36 

 

Table 7 ac. Insurance policies by frequencies of subscription      Table 7a. General Policies    N  General Liability  Directors' & Officers'  Professional Liability  Umbrella Coverage  Auto Third Party  Event Insurance  Other Types of Insurance  Total  Employer's  liability  Accident and injury  Protect against employee  claims  Other employeerelated  policies  Total  General Property  Crime Coverage  Fidelity Bond  Boiler and Machinery  Computer Equipment  Other Damage protection  Total 
 

Percent of all  Percent of insured organizations holding  policies  these policies*  30.3%  26.6%  10.6%  6.5%  10.6%  13.4%  2.0%  100.0%  37.0%  40.7%  21.3%  1.0%  100.0%  41.4%  18.3%  11.7%  12.2%  16.0%  .4%  100.0%  92.5%  81.2%  32.3%  19.9%  32.5%  40.8%  6.1%  305.5%  71.0%  78.2%  41.0%  2.0%  192.2%  98.0%  43.4%  27.8%  28.8%  37.9%  .9%  236.8% 

882  774  308  190  310  389  58  2911  463  510  267  13  1253  797  353  226  234  308  7  1925 

Table 7. b Employee related Policies 

Table 7c. Protection against Damage 

* Percentages do not add up to 100% because of valid multiple responses 

Insurance rates 
13B

The cost of insurance for nonprofit organizations ranges from less than $2,500 to more than $50,000. The  median cost of insurance premiums is $7,500. Almost half (45.7%) of those who responded, reported that  their insurance premiums had increased during the past two years. On average (median), their rates  increased by 10%, but one quarter of the respondents whose rates increased reported an increase of  more than 15%. Almost ten percent of respondents reported that their insurance premiums had 
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                37 

decreased during the previous two years. On average (median) they paid 20% less than paid previously.  Eight percent of organizations reported both increases and decreases. (See Figure 10.) 

  Respondents were asked, in an openended question, to speculate as to why their premiums increased or  decreased.  Their responses were analyzed and sorted into seven categories.    Figure 11 displays these categories and the response rate for each. The most commonly cited reason for  rate increases was that the organizations raised their coverage or increased the number of insured  programs. But twelve percent of respondents reported that their rates increased because of the claims  they had. The second most common explanations for the rate increases were vague statements about  tendencies for rates to increase, industry trends etc. 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                38 

  Figure 12 displays the categories grouped into internal (increased coverage and claims history) and  external (remaining categories) reasons for the rate increase. Slightly more respondents blame external  causes for their rate increases than they do internal causes.     

                              The reasons given for rate increases were compared with the actual percentage increases to determine  whether there was a relationship between the perceived causes for the increases and the rise in  premiums. Comparing internal versus external causes, there was only a slight difference in mean increases  (16.6% internal vs. 12.9% external) between those giving internal reasons and those giving external ones.  However, looking at the disaggregated data, there are some interesting differences.  Organizations with  the highest increases tended to blame disasters and lawsuits for the increases.     Asked how their organization responded to the increases, ninety percent of respondents said their  organizations paid the increase. Among the remaining ten percent, more than half increased their  deductible to lower the cost of their premium; the rest reduced their coverage or switched insurance  providers. Only one organization cancelled its coverage.     Most of the 336 respondents who reported increases in their premiums did not believe their organizations  were adversely affected by the increases; nevertheless, seventeen percent did report that the increases  had an impact on their operations. Eightythree respondents took the time to elaborate how their  organizations were affected. Content analysis revealed that almost two thirds (60.2%) said that they had  to either increase user fees or reduce services, staffing or programming; almost one third (31.3%) reduced  coverage and/or adjusted the budget; the remaining seven organizations (8.4%) tried to smooth out the  increase through fundraising.         

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                39 

  Table 8. Mean increases in insurance premiums by perceived cause  Causes  Increased coverage/programming  Claims history  General increase  Inflation/cost of living  Disasters/increase in lawsuits  Greed/pursuit of profits  Don't know  Total  Mean  18.57  13.00  12.67  7.03  26.07  15.94  9.19  13.66  N  64  35  59  38  14  17  43  270                             

Claims history 
14B

  One hundred and seventysix organizations, almost 17% of insured organizations, had experienced  damages, losses, injuries or legal challenges that resulted in a claim to their insurance agent. The majority  of these claims (46%) were for damage to property (see Figure 13 for detailed breakdown).

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                40 

 

Difficulties acquiring insurance 
15B

  The organizations in this sample generally did not have difficulty in obtaining insurance. This  notwithstanding, there were fifty organizations, comprising just over 5% of the insured organizations, that  claimed to have difficulty.  Forty respondents took the time to explain their difficulties. The most  commonly mentioned difficulty (48%) was finding an agent who is specialized in what they need. Others  (17.5%) mentioned the difficulty in even getting companies to offer quotes; yet others (17.7%) were  refused many times because their organization or the activity that they wanted insured was too risky.  Some (12%) mentioned the difficulties they had because of the expense of the insurance coupled with the  lack of competitive quoting. Ten percent of the respondents gave reasons that were idiosyncratic to their  organization. 

Obtaining insurance 
16B

  As Table 9 below indicates, a majority of organizations obtain insurance from a commercial agent,  however, more than a quarter are covered through an umbrella association and fifteen percent have  group insurance.  Fifteen percent of organizations obtain their insurance by more than one means.     
 

Table 9. Types of insurance providers in decreasing order of frequency        Commercial agent  Through umbrella  association  Group insurance  Mutual Trust, Coop  Self insurance  Coinsurance  Other Arrangements  Total    N  609  247  136  36  13  12  16  1069  Percent  57.0%  23.1%  12.7%  3.4%  1.2%  1.1%  1.5%  100.0%  Percent of Cases  68.0%  27.6%  15.2%  4.0%  1.5%  1.3%  1.8%  119.3% 

                 

* Percentages do not add up to 100% because of valid multiple responses  When the time comes for renewal, a plurality of organizations (38%) just renew automatically; others  obtain quotes from other agents and/or negotiate with their own. (See Figure 14 for details.) For those  who chose the "other" category, the most common response was that they were insured through another  organization. One quarter of organizations changed agents in the past five years. A count of openended  responses revealed that 55% of those who switched (12% of the entire sample), did so only once. The  main reasons for most were: better price, better service and better coverage.    

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                41 

 

 

Insurance profile by organizational characteristics 
2B

  The organizations in this sample vary over a number of organizational characteristics: mandate including  population served and numbers of people served, status, location, sources of funding and organizational  size, as measured by budget, number of employees, and volunteer contingent.  This section explores  whether there is a relationship between organizational characteristics and organizations' insurance  practices and concerns.     The insurance variables investigated are: total number of policies held, insurance rates, changes in  insurance rates, percentage increase, reasons for increases, claims history, difficulty in getting insurance,  and type and number of providers.    Two types of statistical analyses were performed, depending on the nature of the variables compared:  analysis of variance was performed if the dependent variable was measured as an interval scale, and the  independent variable was defined by discrete categories; Chi squared analysis was used when both the  dependent and independent variables were defined by discrete categories. For example, to determine  whether there is a difference in insurance costs (scaled variable) among the various subsectors of the  nonprofit sector (organizational mandate), analysis of variance was performed; however, to determine  whether an organization's mandate would influence whether or not the organization had difficulty  obtaining insurance (categorical variable),  a chi squared analysis was used.  Only results where there is  less than a 1 in 100 probability (p<.01) that the difference is due to chance are reported.  

Organizational mandate 
17B

  Organizations providing health and social services, or involved in housing and development, paid more for  their insurance than organizations in other subsectors. The higher rates are likely a result of the fact that  these three subsectors held more insurance policies than organizations in other subsectors, and were also  more likely to have submitted insurance claims in the previous five years.  However, when it came to 
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                42 

percentage increase in rates over the two previous years, it was Arts and Cultural organizations that  reported the highest increases. For statistical details, please refer to Appendix C.      As noted earlier, ninetytwo percent of the respondents in the sample of organizations serve people  directly. On average, these organizations hold six types of insurance policies as opposed to four by  organizations not providing direct service. They pay $5,000 more for their insurance and were more likely  to have had a claim in the previous 5 years. (Please refer to Appendix D.)  The number of people an  organization serves monthly also has an impact on insurance costs: organizations serving more than 100  people a month pay roughly twice as much in insurance premiums as organizations serving fewer than 100  people. They also tend to have more than 1 agent, and are more likely to have made a claim in the  previous five years. In addition to this, they are also more likely to have had increases in rates. (Please  refer to Appendix E.)    Organizations serving seniors, vulnerable populations and women and children subscribe to more policies  than organizations serving other populations. Surprisingly, who the clients of these organizations are has  no bearing on the cost of their insurance. (Please refer to Appendix F.) 

Organizational status and location 
18B

  Registered charities pay about $3,000 more in insurance premiums than organizations without charitable  registration. Otherwise there are no differences between registered charities and organizations without  charitable registration.  (Please see Appendix G.)    An organization's age, on the other hand, seems to be related to almost all of the insurance variables. The  older an organization, the greater the number of policies they have and the greatest number of agents  used. Older organizations are also more likely to have submitted claims in the previous 5 years. These  three variables probably account for the higher premiums older organizations pay. On the other hand,  organizations in existence for less than ten years had the most difficulty getting insurance. For some  reason, organizations between the ages of 10 and 30 were most likely to experience increases in their  premiums.  (Please refer to Appendix J.) The cost of insurance premiums varies by region: Toronto has the  highest rates, followed by the Northern region. Premiums in the Eastern region cost just under half of  what they do in Toronto. (See Figure 15 and Appendix H.)   

 
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                43 

  Organizations that receive the majority of their funding from the government subscribe to more policies,  use more agents and as a consequence, pay more for premiums. This is especially true of organizations  that receive more than 70% of their funding from government sources.  The higher the percentage of  funds from government the greater the number of policies, the more agents used, the greater the cost of  insurance. This is more pronounced when the proportion of total funding from government is greater than  70%.  (Please refer to Appendix K.) 

Organizational size 
19B

  Since all three measures of organizational size: budget, number of employees and volunteer contingent,  are related to each other, it is not surprising that they are all related to premium costs, number of policies  held and number of agents used. The larger the budget, the greater the number of employees and  volunteers, the higher all three of these variables are.  Organizations with budgets of more than  $1,000,000 were far more likely to have submitted a claim in the previous five years, as were  organizations with the largest staff. Conversely, organizations with the fewest volunteers were the least  likely to submit claims. Organizations with the smallest budgets were less likely to experience increases in  insurance premiums. (Please refer to Appendix L.)    Stepwise regression analysis reveals that almost half (47.8%) of the explained variance of insurance  premiums is attributable to the three size variables, with number of employees accounting for 31.7% and  annual budget increasing the explained variance by 15.1% to 46.8%. Number of volunteers adds little to  the explained variance, raising it only 1% to 47.8%.    A more complete regression model including other variables that seemed to be related to cost of  premiums include: organization age, claims submitted, and total number of policies explains 51.4% of the  variance. Table 10 presents the order of variables and their relative contribution to the explained variance  (R Square). As above, the two strongest predictors of the price of insurance premiums are number of  employees and annual budget. However, having had a claim in the last 5 years adds significantly to the  explained variance indicating that it is an important factor in the cost of insurance.    Table 10. Stepwise Regression:  Price of insurance premiums regressed on organizational variables and insurance variables  Dependent variable: Cost of premiums   Model a  1 Start: Number of employees  2 Add: Annual budget  3 Add: Claims in last 5 years  4 Add: Number of policies  5 Add: Organization age  6 Add: Number of volunteers 
a   b 

R  .554  .677  .701  .710  .717  .720 

R Square  .307  .458  .491  .504  .514  .518 

Adjusted R  Square  .306   .456   .489   .502   .511   .514  
c b b b b

Std. Error of the  Estimate  12121.59540  10731.63546  10404.24484  10273.49370  10178.63600  10148.57597 

Each of the 6 models is significant at p<.000.   Change in R Square is significant at p<.000.   c  Change in R Square is significant at p<.03. 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                44 

Risk management 
3B

  All respondents, including those without insurance, were asked to rate their organization's level of risk.   Figure 16 indicates that of 83% of the sample who responded, almost half (48.6%) believe their  organizational risk is low or very low. One third (33.4%) rate the risk to their organization as medium, and  18% classify their organizational risk as high. 
 

  Respondents were asked to express, in their own words, what they think of when they hear the term "risk  management".  These answers were analyzed and combined into seven categories, as described in Figure  17. Thirtytwo percent of respondents (N=376) skipped the question. Of the remaining 805 respondents,  nine percent answered either "don't know" or gave responses indicating that they did not know what the  term really meant. Please refer to Figure 17 for the distribution of responses. From the figure it is clear  that a whole range of activities came to mind when respondents answered this question. Almost one  quarter of respondents included awareness and identification of risk in their answer; however only  thirteen percent of respondents mentioned ethical practices and due diligence.      

 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                45 

 

Risk Management policies and activities 
20B

 

A list of organizational policies and activities that are part of proper risk management procedures, as  identified in the literature, was presented to the respondents. Table 11 summarizes the percentage of  organizations having these policies and engaging in these activities. Two hundred and five organizations  (17%), failed to identify even a single activity as being practiced in their organization. On average, each  organization engages in nine of these seventeen risk management activities. 
         

Table 11. Frequencies of risk management policies and activities      Signing authority protocols  Privacy and confidentiality  Independent audits  Records and information management  Inventory of assets  Harassment and Discrimination policy  Conflict of interest policy  Performance evaluation  Employee health and safety  Grievance procedures  Volunteer health and safety  Reserve fund  Facilities and equipment management  Information technology management  Donors rights policy  Lawyer reviewed contracts  Intellectual property policies  Total    N  904  832  803  747  695  691  687  682  604  602  583  583  580  531  520  384  318  10746  Percent  8.4%  7.7%  7.5%  7.0%  6.5%  6.4%  6.4%  6.3%  5.6%  5.6%  5.4%  5.4%  5.4%  4.9%  4.8%  3.6%  3.0%  100.0%  Percent of Cases 92.3%  85.0%  82.0%  76.3%  71.0%  70.6%  70.2%  69.7%  61.7%  61.5%  59.6%  59.6%  59.2%  54.2%  53.1%  39.2%  32.5%  1097.7% 

* Percentages do not add up to 100% because of valid multiple responses 

Implementation of risk management 
21B

 

Table 12 lists five risk management practices that organizations are advised to undertake with respect to  their board members, staff and volunteers: provide written position descriptions for staff and volunteers;  screen new recruits (both volunteer and paid staff); provide general training to staff and volunteers;  provide risk training to staff and volunteers; and monitor performance of staff and volunteers.  As the  table demonstrates, implementation of risk management practices is most widespread with respect to  paid employees of an organization; each risk management practice is more frequently applied to the staff  members than to board representatives or volunteers. Monitoring the performance of board members is  practiced in barely one third of organizations, and almost half of all organizations have no risk training for  board members and no screening procedures for their recruitment. The only area in which there is no  significant difference among the three types of organizational members is "general training".   
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                46 

 

Table 12. Risk management practices with respect to board, staff and volunteers 
  

Variables  Written  Position  Description  76.1%  80.7%  58.9%  1184  Screening  of New  Recruits  54.8%  82.6%  71.2%  1184  General  Training  73.6%  78.8%  75.8%  1184  Monitoring  Performance  37.2%  84.6%  75.3%  1184 

   Board  Staff  Volunteer  N 

Risk Training  54.9%  77.4%  60.9%  1184 

* Percentages do not add up to 100% because of valid multiple responses    On average, organizations have at least six of the fifteen risk management practices in place, however 21%  of the sample (256 organizations) do not practice any of these five risk management procedures with any  group in their organization. Six percent of organizations have all of the risk management procedures in  place with respect to all their members: board, staff and volunteers.  Risk management is practiced least  with respect to board members (Mean=1.9) and most with respect to staff members (Mean= 2.6). On  average 2.2 are practiced with respect to volunteers.   

Responsibility for risk management 
2B

  Table 13 illustrates the distribution of responsibility for risk management in the organizations sampled.  In  three quarters of the organizations the board is involved in deciding on risk policy, however in one quarter  of the organizations the board seems to defer to others. Determining the extent of risk seems to be a joint  activity between the board and the CEO. Responsibility for implementation of risk policies seems to lie  most commonly with the CEO, although staff members have a larger role to play in implementation than  in either determining risk or deciding on risk policy. A small minority of organizations rely on specialists.   

Risk management profile by organizational characteristics 
4B

  Level of organizational risk, total number of risk management policies and total number of risk  management practices are all significantly related to the three size measures. The higher the budget, the  greater the number of employees and volunteers, the greater the selfestimated risk level, the greater the  number of risk management policies and the more ways in which risk management is practiced. With  respect to budget, the relationship is strongly linear.  

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                47 

    Table 13. Responsibility for risk management  
  

Variables  Implemen Determine  Decide  t Risk  Risk  Risk Policy  Policy  61.0%  61.5%  24.3%  5%  3.8%  1184  75.0%  54.1%  16.5%  3.4%  2.3%  1184  33.1%  67.4%  37.0%  1.9%  3.0%  1184  None of  these  28.1%  28.1%  52.5%  87.8  52.2  1184 

   Board  CEO  Staff  Specialist  Other  N 

* Percentages do not add up to 100% because of valid multiple responses    The three nonprofit subsectors that rate their risk the highest are Health, Social Services, and  Development and Housing, the same three that have the highest number of insurance policies and pay the  highest premium rates. Arts and Culture organizations rate their risk the lowest. As far as risk policies and  practices are concerned, the pattern is the same except that social service organizations have the most  policies and practice risk management in more ways.     Organizations that serve people directly estimate the risk levels of their organizations as being higher, and  therefore have more risk policies and engage in more risk management. Organizations serving seniors,  vulnerable populations, children and youth and women and children rate their risks higher than  organizations serving other populations.  Concomitantly they engage in risk management in more ways,  but the difference in numbers of risk policies is not significant at the .01 level of probability.  

Risk management related to insurance premiums 
23B

  It is to be expected that higher risk levels are related to higher insurance premiums, and our data confirm  this: the higher the level of risk, the higher the insurance premiums (r = .32, p < .01). And, although  anecdotally, there is agreement that having risk management policies in place and practicing risk  management do not necessarily confer an organization with lower insurance rates, the fact that our  analysis reveals that risk management policies and practices are significantly and positively related to the  cost of insurance (r=.35 and r=.25 respectively, p < .0 each) is surprising. Path analysis might present some  clues as to why this may be so.  

Path model 
5B

  To conclude the analysis we present a Path Model to illustrate how organizational characteristics, risk  levels, risk management practices, types of insurance policies and claims history are related to each other  and how they help explain the differences in insurance premiums among the organizations in the sample. 
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                48 

  Path analysis is used to identify both the factors that explain a phenomenon and how these factors are  interrelated. It is an extension of regression analysis wherein variables are ordered in sequence to help  explain the relationship between endogenous characteristics (in this case organizational characteristics),  intervening factors (in this case risk levels, risk management and claims history) and the dependent  variable (in this case cost of insurance premiums). The dependent variable is regressed on each  independent variable while all of the other variables in the equation are held constant.    Thus, by controlling for all the other variables in the equation, one can determine the uncontaminated  effect of a specific independent variable on the dependent variable. Path analysis works backwards in a  stepwise fashion: in the first step, the dependent variable is regressed on all of the independent variables,  both intervening and endogenous; in the next steps, each intervening variable is regressed on prior occurring intervening variables and the endogenous variables.     Applying these principles to our model, in the initial path analysis, we regressed the dependent variable,  "Cost of Insurance Premiums", on all the variables that had been found to be significantly related to it in  our individual analyses.  The final Path Model however, as depicted in Figure 18, displays only those  variables that remained significantly related to the cost of insurance after controlling for all the other  variables in the initial analysis.    In Figure 18 the endogenous organizational characteristics are listed along the left hand of the diagram  and the intervening factors relating to perceived risk, risk management policies, risk management  practices, claims history and number of policies are arranged in the centre of the diagram according to  sequence. 8   The lines leading into each of the variables are all significant at the .01 level. The numbers  beside the lines are beta weights depicting the actual strength of the effect when controlled for all other  effects. The lines are depicted in different colours and forms (solid lines, dashed lines, etc.) to help the  reader follow the various paths.    Thus we see that four endogenous characteristics and three intervening factors are significantly related to  the cost of insurance (gray dashed line). Most strongly related are: "Number of Employees" and  "Organizational Age", followed by "Claims History", "Annual Budget", "Number of Policies", "Risk  Management Practices" and "Located in Toronto".  These seven variables account for 55% of the variance  in the cost of insurance.     Each intervening variable can in turn be viewed as a dependent variable. Thus, moving to the next level of  analysis, we see that the number of insurance policies an organization holds is influenced by five  endogenous organizational characteristics and risk management policies and practices. Note the negative  relationship between "Location Toronto" and "Number of Insurance Policies" indicating that organizations  located in Toronto tend to hold fewer policies.     Interestingly, two of the five intervening variables do not have a direct effect on the cost of insurance:  "Risk Levels" and "Risk Management Policies". As indicated in the section above, both of these variables  were highly and significantly correlated with the cost of premiums (r = .32 and r = .35 respectively, p < .01  each). Those high correlations can be explained by their relationships to other variables that affect  insurance rates, as demonstrated in the Path Model: the former, by its impact on claims history, and the  latter by its impact on the number of policies held by an organization and their risk management practices. 
F F

In the event that historical sequencing is not possible, the use of recursive equations helps determine the sequence of occurrence. Thus in this case, Risk Management Policies and Risk Management Practices are highly correlated (r = .65, p < .001), but in recursive analysis the impact of Policies on Practices is greater than vice versa (54% vs. 48%).   Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                49 

8

Note the very strong relationship between risk management policies and risk management practices (beta  = .54). Organizations with risk management policies are more likely to practice risk management.  "Risk  Management Practices" however, maintains a direct positive relationship with the cost of insurance  premiums albeit the impact is reduced (beta = .12). The rest of its impact is channelled through "Number  of Insurance Policies". It seems that organizations practicing more risk management also tend to have a  higher number of insurance policies, perhaps as part of their risk management practices.    Similarly, when looking at organizational characteristics, we note that not all of them have a direct impact  on insurance costs. In fact, none of the mandate variables (social service organizations, health service  organizations and organizations serving women and children) is directly related to the cost of insurance;  however, they have an indirect influence through some of the intervening variables.    For example, organizations serving women and children tend to hold a greater number of insurance  policies, and thus are more likely to have higher premiums. Both health service organizations and social  service organizations tend to have higher risk levels which affect their claims history and thus their  insurance premiums. The number of volunteers in an organization does not have a direct impact on its  insurance rates, however, the greater the volunteer contingent, the greater the level of risk, the more  policies likely to be held and the greater the likelihood of practicing risk management.    In summary, the Path Model depicted in Figure 18 provides a more accurate explanation of the various  determinants of the price of insurance premiums than simple correlation and regression analyses can.  Reading from right to left, the reader can determine how the dependent variable and each of the  intervening variables are influenced by the variables that precede them, and how much of the variance of  each variable is explained by the influencing variables. The total model explains 55% of the variance of the  cost of insurance premiums indicating that the current survey measured many of the most important  elements related to determining the cost of insurance.    Following the lines carefully from left to right, the reader can determine the paths of influence for  organizational characteristics on risk levels, risk management, insurance behaviour and finally the cost of  insurance premiums.    An interesting finding with respect to being located in Toronto can serve as an example. We know from  previous analyses in this report that insurance rates are generally higher for organizations in Toronto.  From the path diagram we know that part of the explanation lies simply in the fact of being located in  Toronto (perhaps because cost of living is higher etc.). This is depicted by the direct dashedline linking  "Located in Toronto" to "Cost of Insurance Premiums" (beta = .10). Some of the influence on insurance  rates is indirect, mediated through "Risk Levels" and "Risk Management Practices". However, there is a  negative relationship between being located in Toronto and the number of insurance policies held (beta =  .08); thus we can conclude that the rates in Toronto are not higher because Toronto organizations are   more heavily insured, but rather, they are due to other factors as explained above.   

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                50 

 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                51 

Discussion 
6B

  The current survey of insurance and risk management in Ontario's voluntary sector is the first indepth  study of its kind in the province and the first in Canada to examine risk management in nonprofit  organizations in such depth. Close to 1300 organizations from every region of the province responded to  the invitation to participate in the survey, covering a wide segment of Ontario's nonprofit sector. Although  the sample is skewed towards larger organizations and those with a social service mandate, organizations  of all sizes and subsectors are well represented.       While ninety percent of organizations in the sample are insured, 112 organizations in the sample operate  without insurance. These organizations tend to be small, with few if any paid employees, annual budgets  of less than $15,000, and unlikely to be getting funding from any level of government. They are also less  likely to be registered charities and less likely to serve people directly or be in the social service sector.  Although half of the uninsured organizations rate their risks as low, a number of organizations  acknowledge the high risks they are taking and the dire consequences that could follow. The most  frequently mentioned repercussion of not having insurance is difficulty recruiting volunteers.     The percentage of organizations without insurance in this sample is slightly higher than the 6.7%  estimated in the national survey Island or Iceberg (Meinhard, 2006).  However, because in both studies  small organizations are underrepresented and uninsured organizations are less likely to respond to a  survey about insurance, the reported rates for uninsured organizations are probably lower than those  found in reality. Using the NSNVO distributions for size and weighting the current sample by that  distribution, a more accurate estimate of the percentage of uninsured organizations would be around  seventeen percent.     The ninety percent of insured organizations in the sample hold an average of six types of insurance  policies. The most subscribed to policies are: General Property, General Liability, Directors' and Officers'  Liability and Accident and Injury. More than two thirds of the organizations obtained insurance from  commercial agents. The average (median) cost for insurance premiums is $7,500 and almost half the  organizations report that their premiums had increased an average of 10% over the previous two years,  however, for one quarter of the respondents the rate increase was 15% or more. Close to forty percent of  organizations attributed their increased rates to internal reasons which included broadening coverage and  claims history. Fortyfive percent attributed the rise in costs to various external reasons, including  inflation, 9/11 and other disasters.      Despite the fact that almost half of the organizations in the sample believe their organizational risk is low,  two thirds of the sample practice risk management in some detail. On average, organizations engage in  nine risk management activities. Most frequently practiced procedures are: signing authority protocols,  privacy and confidentiality protocols and independent audits. Insured organizations are more likely to  have risk management policies and procedures in place and to implement risk management practices.         When asked to define the meaning of risk management in their own words, respondents most frequently  mentioned that risk management was being aware of risks, identifying risks and then minimizing them.  But almost one third of respondents did not answer this question and another nine percent either  answered that they don't know or gave answers that indicated they had an incorrect concept of risk  management.          
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                52 

Insurance costs are related to a number of variables.     The most expensive premiums are in Toronto and Northern Ontario, at a rate almost double those in  Eastern Ontario. Organizations serving more than 100 people a month pay roughly twice as much in  insurance premiums as organizations serving less than 100 people. The larger the organization, the more  likely they are to have submitted claims and the higher their premiums cost. Although an organization's  perceived level of risk is related to the cost of insurance, risk management policies and practices were not  directly related.     A Path Analysis is presented to illustrate the relationship of all organizational, risk and insurance variables  in explaining the reasons for the cost of insurance. The measured variables in the survey explain 55% of  the variance in insurance rates; in other words, the survey captured 55% of the reasons determining the  cost of insurance. This high rate of explained variance attests to the validity of the survey questions.  

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                53 

5. QUALITATIVE RESEARCH 
  From October 2007 through February 2008, seven focus groups and an indepth interview were conducted  in the various regions of Ontario, including:     Timmins (Northern Ontario)  Research Methodology   Peterborough (Eastern Ontario)  See Appendix O for a more detailed   London (Western Ontario)  discussion of the methodology used   Hamilton and Niagara (Central Ontario)  in conducting this research.   Toronto (Toronto)    A focus group planned for Ottawa did not materialize, but one participant agreed to an indepth interview.  All subsectors of Ontario's nonprofit sector were represented across the entire sample of focus groups,  but not necessarily in each focus group.     All of the focus group discussions began with the interviewer introducing herself to the participants,  explaining the purpose of the study, going over the informed consent document and then asking the  participants to briefly introduce themselves and the organizations they represented. The first question  participants were asked was whether or not they had insurance and if so, what kind. Some participants  came prepared with a list of their various insurance policies. The types and numbers of policies discussed  by focus group participants are identical to those reported in the survey findings so they are not  summarized here. Interestingly, in accordance with the survey estimate of 10% noninsured, only 4  discussants represented uninsured organizations. It was when the interviewer asked about some of the  concerns they had about their insurance coverage that the discussions got animated.    

Concerns about insurance coverage 
  Most organizations think that they could have better coverage. Although some hold several different  policies they all feel that there are probably eventualities for which they are not covered. As some  respondents put it:    "Every year there are riders on insurance policies that there are different things  that aren't covered."     "A lot of insurance that you need most is withheld."    Others realize that they need more coverage but just cannot afford it.     "As smaller organizations, like ours, who can't get decent coverage or benefits for  their employees, we are taking on a huge risk."      "Anytime you involve children, the premium is exorbitant."    These sentiments are echoed over and over by the smaller organizations and those serving vulnerable  populations.    
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                54 

Two organizations had to resort to selfinsurance because they were unable to get the proper coverage for  childrelated, high risk programs "because of prior claims, not by us, but by similar organizations".    Difficulties getting insurance are not only focused on price and risk, but also on the unavailability of  insurance providers and, in smaller locations in the North region and East region, the lack of  understanding with respect to the needs of nonprofits on the part of local brokers.     "Insurance companies don't like new businesses where there is a learning curve;  and with nonprofits particularly, you are starting a learning curve with each one."    "They are not fully informed about the complications of the nonprofit sector so  they might not provide the right coverage."     "Many insurance companies have left the area."    Not only are the participants concerned about the lack of knowledge of nonprofits among insurers, but  they are concerned that in the event of claims, there is a lack of understanding within the organization  regarding their coverage.    "We don't know exactly what we are covered for. I'm not sure if the insurance  salesman would if we were to make a claim."    "Nobody really understood the coverage. They just renew automatically."    "At one time there were packages, but they no longer exist. Makes things harder."   

Repercussions of inadequate or no insurance coverage 
  Mirroring the openended survey responses, focus group participants also feel that the greatest detriment  to inadequate coverage is difficulty recruiting volunteers at all levels of the organization, but especially so  at the board level.    "The more professional the potential voluntary board member, the more they will  ask about D&O coverage."    "Volunteers will just not join uninsured boards."    One participant offers an interesting organizational perspective:    "We are scared to get volunteers because we cannot afford to cover them,  however, we choose to take the risk."    As in the survey, there are organizations that increased user/member fees and/or  dropped programs.     "We had to increase membership rates to cover the cost of insurance."    "There are some things we just no longer provide our clients."   
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                55 

The role of insurance brokers 
  Some organizations feel very fortunate and appreciate the efforts made by their brokers on their behalf.     "We are fortunate because we ended up with a broker (colleague of a board member) who, I think, worked extra hard on our behalf. But he was frank with us  that this was `the best I could get you'."    "We currently have sufficient coverage through friendship with an insurance  agent."    While some organizations in smaller municipalities seek agents in bigger centers "because they are the  only ones that can supply our needs," others prefer brokers close to home because...    " ...he understands our needs and knows us well. He is interested in our cause and participates in  local fundraising, so he makes sure we get the coverage we need."    There is a suspicion among some participants that some brokers really do not know about the provision of  insurance coverage for specific activities.    "Insurance brokers come and do workshops and even then we don't really know  what we are covered for. Got the renewal and had heart failure `where is this  coming from?' Our broker didn't really know what she was covering."    "Each insurance company has their own forms, their own exclusions...and you  really have to read and know what they're getting at. Your broker doesn't know  what you're doing as well as you do. You have to have a broker that is willing to  listen and spend time."   

Risk management 
  In each of the focus groups, much time was spent discussing this issue. There seems to be a general  consensus that risk management is an activity that is fairly common in terms of policy, but not always  successfully implemented.    "I would think that the majority [of organizations] have something in writing  about riskmanagement that does nothing functional."    "We do provide a [risk management] training once a year for managers and  volunteers but as we know, that tends to have very little impact in the decision making process of an organization. They can be as together as they want to be but  how much they're going to influence the overall action of the organization in  relation to the volunteer program is pretty minimal."     Participants feel that risk management is rapidly becoming a prerequisite to receiving any kind of  coverage. At the same time, they generally concede that the practice of risk management has not resulted  in lower premiums. This reflects the findings in the survey. However, as one participant points out,  although risk management may not help keep rates down, it will help organizations get insurance in tight  markets. 
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                56 

  "We are coming to the end of what we call 'the soft market'. Which means that  from this point on probably the cost of insurance will go up. If you exercise risk  management, and if you have a clean record, you're going to be much better off."    This same person gives the following example:    "If you come to an insurance broker with two or three claims and they say, `How  did these things happen' and you say `Oh these things happen,' that's bad because  it means that you don't have the right attitude. But if you come in and say look,  `We haven't had a claim since 1968 and this is how we handle our risk  management', in a tight market, it's going to help you get insurance."     In general, the participants identify risk management as activities and policies that either eliminate or  mitigate the danger of incurring a lawsuit of some sort.    "Thinking through worst case scenarios, either eliminating risk or trying to make it  better and reduce the risk, and then afford coverage for the risk that is left and if  it can't be covered, then decide if we should continue the activity or not."    "Understanding where your exposures are and ameliorating those risks. I don't  think you can totally eliminate them."      Some of the participants see risk management in terms of impact on insurance.    "The insurance part of risk management is fairly minor once we exhaust every  other possibility of dealing with risk to insure it, if you can."    "If we're taking on something new, one of the first questions we ask is:  `what is  the impact on the insurance, what's the impact on the staff, what's the impact on  everything else we're doing? And all of that I see as risk management."    "Organizations that deal with children have to have proper screening procedures  else they won't be covered."    Screening procedures are a bane to some organizations that have experienced losing potential or past  volunteers.    "Our volunteers feel insulted by the requirement for a police check, especially  after having contributed for years to the organization in good faith."    On the other hand, other organizations see the reluctance to be screened as "separating the wheat from  the chaff".    For some organizations, risk management means taking certain risks despite everything.    "Sometimes we take the buryingyourheadinthesand approach because we  simply have no money. Our youth programs have risk, and we haven't mentioned  it to the insurance company. Instead, we think of the risks and find ways of  minimizing them. For example: No lifts from older members especially with the 
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                57 

opposite sex. So we address risks by having rules and regulations  as part of the  training of young people."    "When you get down to it, you have to assess the risk, get what coverage you can  and then after that just take the risk."    "We can't stop doing what we do so we end up tightening policies and looking at  each scenario and helping to reduce the risk."    There was also some discussion about crisis management and planning for emergencies, although most  organizations do not seem to be engaged in such activities.    

Risks that are not related to insurance 
  In many of the focus groups there seemed to be a tacit understanding that the greatest risks to the  organization are not necessarily related to insurance issues. Risks to survival because of lack of adequate  funding are implied in many of the comments made, such as the one below:    "The expectations that as a small nonprofit, you are able to deal with costofliving  increases, insurance increases, rent, hydro...everything else, but yet we are not  given any kind of corefunding that we can counton is one in a list of a million  things in terms of how solid and how protected my organization is."    "When I think of risk management, I think in terms of the average nonprofit or  charity...they're taking money in for the work that they do and then they're  spending it on program. Anything that could create a problem for money coming  in or you doing your program.... that's what you want to try to avoid."    Risk to survival entailed by loss of reputation is also on the mind of several organizations.    "One thing that insurance doesn't cover is the goodwill of your enterprise  the  public perception that your entity is doing a good job. That's the most valuable  asset that most entities have that is not covered by insurance."    "Really, it is about protecting our reputation in the community we serve, among  our donors, etc."    The importance of ethical conduct comes up frequently such as this comment:    "Ethical conduct is a way to comply with legal issues, a minimum level that you  need be compliant.  And then there is ethical behaviour which is [related to]  higher standards that you use because you think you want to operate at a higher  standard. Some organizations just want to operate at a legal standard...they don't  think about higher standards. But if you operate at a higher standard in many  cases, you will be reducing your risks because you will be thinking things through."    Some organizations see risk in lack of succession planning, poor HR policies, poor financial planning and  lack of knowledgeable board members about risk related issues.   
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                58 

"What if I leave next month? Our organization has no succession plan, and the  board is not involved enough in the organizational operations."     "How to handle finances is often overlooked, as are HR risks. Board members may  not think these things would be an issue." 

  Perception of Insurance and risk management 
  During discussions about risk management and deciding on appropriate insurance coverage, it became  clear that for most of the participants, these considerations were not their highest priority.    "Insurance isn't my biggest problem now. It's an issue but if I was going to  prioritize, that's not my number one issue."    "I think that one has to take a perspective that if you spend all your time thinking  of risk management, you wouldn't be taking money in...your organization is now  lost."     "When do we have time to do the rest of our jobs? It takes a lot of time."    There are some who lament the lack of involvement of their organization's board in issues dealing with  insurance and risk management.     "Insurance and risk management is so far out of the board's mind that they don't  even think of doing it. A staff person has to tell them."    "You can get board members that are extremely sophisticated, talented, leaders  in their particular field. Does that mean that they understand riskmanagement  from a nonprofit perspective? No. Does that mean that they are prepared to learn  more about it? Not really."     "There was no oneway to engage these people (board members). First, they are  hard to get a hold of, particularly board chairs because they volunteer."    

Comments about insurance companies 
  During discussions about insurance coverage in particular, several complaints were voiced about insurance  companies. These comments were not solicited in any way by the interviewers. They were part of the  discussion on insurance coverage. The comments range from mild complaints about costs to some  disturbing accusations of deviousness.     The cost of insurance and the way rates are calculated are frequently questioned:    "Insurance premiums for associations in Ontario that just operate an office are  extremely high. We're being clustered together with other nonprofit organizations  that are much higher risks than an association that just basically operates an  office."   
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                59 

"After 9/11, the rates have skyrocketed and the coverage has been reduced. I  don't think Ontario Nonprofits are being sued in any greater number now than  they were back then."     Of greater concern among the participants is either the lack of coverage or changes in coverage:     "A lot of insurance is withheld when you need it most."    "I find more and more that there are things that are no longer covered. For  example, we held a fundraising walk in 50 places across the country ... was  covered at first, now it is excluded."      Some accuse the insurance companies of being devious:    "Problem is that they change coverage and do not inform the client of it."      "So many different rules and regulations, that if you don't fall exactly within the  parameters, you are not insured. These are little tricks of the insurance  companies."     "They hide information."    The greatest complaint is with respect to claims. Many voiced a fear of making a claim.    "If you make a claim, it doesn't matter if it goes anywhere, the act of making the  claim increases your premium. And if you know you're at risk, you're obligated to  report it."    "Once you have made a claim they might not insure you for anything.  Even  inquiring about making a claim, you risk premiums going up."   

Comments about government 
  The comments about the government are more general in nature. Some participants, whose funding  comes from the government, and who are required by the government to have insurance, are concerned  that this requirement incurs greater costs for the organization.    "Core funding has remained the same despite insurance costs rising."    "They're going to have to put money into the sector to ensure that we're able to  provide our services."    One participant, doubting anything would come of this project, asked:    "If the government isn't going to listen to what we're telling them, that we need  support, then why are we doing this?"    The insurance concerns spilled over to more general complaints.   
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                60 

"We spend too much time worrying about where the money is coming from and  trying to get the money by writing proposals."    

Participant suggestions and recommendations 
  Each focus group was asked to suggest how the government can better assist the sector. From the analysis  of responses, it is evident that there are regional differences in terms of issues needing attention. In the  larger urban areas (Toronto, Ottawa) suggestions range from compiling a list of risk management  suggestions to arranging handson tutorials in risk management, to providing taxbreaks for volunteers.  The smaller centres (London, Niagara Falls) are concerned with a lack of consistency in required  accountability reports and risk reporting. Standardized forms would reduce their work and avoid  unnecessary duplication.  They also suggested a government sponsored low cost insurance package for  organizations that cannot afford insurance. Following are some of the specific suggestions proffered by  focus group participants to both the government and the insurance industry.      

Government 
 



         

Provide smallgroup tutorial sessions on better risk management practices. These sessions should  be provided by a neutral party with a background in risk management. Concern should be  addressed to the fact that people do not want to feel as if they are being 'sold to' in the guise of  providing support.   Publish a book that might be called 'Risk Management for Dummies' to make the idea of risk  management simple and applicable to the nonprofit/volunteer sector.   Strengthen existing networks that are being ignored rather than creating new ones.  Standardize the many and varied templates used in government communications.  Make government forms and communications more 'computerfriendly'.  Have government compile a comparative report card on the types of insurance provided by the  main companies that put their details and rates into perspective.  Allow organizations to offer volunteers a taxdeductible credit for their volunteer hours.  Reduce board liability as well as the overall amount that they can be sued.   Place limits on the size of lawsuits against nonprofits.    Recognize that nonprofits are performing a public service by holding boards less liable.  Encourage the insurance industry to give nonprofits a break.    

Insurance industry 
 

     

Provide a checklist for better risk management practices and seeing to it that abiding by these  recommendations would result in lower insurance costs.   Minimize the liability of volunteers.  Help organizations to provide accident and injury protection to volunteers when they come to  work in the organization. If volunteers were somehow covered it would encourage agencies to  recruit more vigorously.    Provide some kind of groupbased insurance geared towards smaller organizations. 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                61 

Discussion 
  The focus groups provided a richly textured understanding of the issues that are of greatest concern to  nonprofit organizations with respect to insurance and risk management. It is evident that nonprofit  organizations are deeply concerned about continuing to provide exceptional service to their clients and  society by managing risk, even while recognizing that some risks must be engaged in order to fulfill their  mission. There is some bitterness with respect to the high costs of insurance, the increasing difficulty in  getting coverage and the perceived punitive response to even enquiring about a claim. Organizations in  smaller centres felt less accommodated by their brokers, but many organizations were full of praise for  their local brokers.     The above summary of the focus group discussions was just a brief sampling of the attitudes and concerns  of the participants, who were very knowledgeable and eager to suggest improvements. A beneficial side  effect observed at the end of most focus group meetings was how much the participants learned from  hearing each others' problems and solutions.   

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                62 

6. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
  Evidence from the literature review, the survey and the focus group discussions paint a picture of a sector  that is becoming more aware of a wide range of risks that nonprofit organizations are facing. "Doing good"  no longer confers immunity to nonprofit and charitable organizations. Suddenly confronted with new  realities which include a greater focus on human rights and a more litigious society, coupled with  dwindling resources and higher insurance rates, these organizations are looking for solutions to protect  themselves and manage their risks. They are seeking assistance from government, from the insurance  industry and through their own networks.     The Ontario Volunteer Partnership (OVP) has been established to provide nonprofit organizations with  support in this quest. At the initiative of the Ministry of Citizenship and Immigration, a steering committee  has been struck which includes representatives from government, the voluntary sector, the insurance  sector and academia. Its mandate is to examine various strategies designed to help the sector attain  affordable coverage, educate voluntary sector organizations in risk management and explore ways in  which to expand the insurance industry's knowledge regarding the voluntary sector.     As part of the OVP initiative, the Ministry of Citizenship and Immigration commissioned the study that is  the subject of this report. It is the first publicly funded comprehensive study on insurance and risk  management practices in Ontario. As the province with the largest voluntary sector, it informs not only  the Ontario nonprofit and insurance sectors, but other Canadian ones as well.  Its scope is larger than any  study conducted on this topic thus far, with a sample of close to 1300 nonprofit organizations. The online  survey was augmented by indepth qualitative interviews and focus group interviews. This two pronged  approach not only provides valuable information with respect to the insurance and risk management  practices of the voluntary sector, but it also illuminates the needs and concerns of the sector.     In addition to the survey, the OVP initiative provided the impetus for the creation of the Insurance &  Liability Resource Centre for Nonprofits, whose resources can be accessed on line at  (http://riskmanagement.imaginecanada.ca). This is a timely development because, as demonstrated in the  literature, there is often a lack of awareness in nonprofit organizations about the risks they face. The  Insurance and Liability Resource Centre is also organizing educational workshops in risk management  across the province.     This kind of partnership is exemplary of a new trend in intersectoral collaboration to solve social problems  that have an impact on the viability of a truly civil society. Nonprofit organizations have to continue to  take risks in order to serve the most vulnerable of society's citizens. The importance of their work has to  be recognized and their activities have to be facilitated, not impeded, by the public and private sectors. By  inviting representatives from all three sectors to work on these issues together and find solutions that will  allow the voluntary sector to continue its important work, the OVP is providing important leadership to  resolve a growing concern.   

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                63 

Recommendations 
  Following are key recommendations from the research study for the insurance industry,  government and the voluntary sector.    

Insurance Industry 
   The insurance industry should be more aware of the importance of this sector, which  accounts for 6.8% of the GDP and employs 20% of Canada's labour force.  Insurance companies should be more aware of the particular needs of nonprofit  organizations, especially regarding volunteer liabilities.  The insurance industry should assist in exploring group insurance alternatives.  




Government 
     Government should support the development and delivery of educational opportunities and  resources related to insurance and risk management.  Government should explore options to assist the sector and increase volunteer participation.  Government should make the results of this research accessible to the sector. 

  Voluntary Sector 
            Clearly define the concept of risk management and identify areas of risk for their   employees at all levels and through all organizational processes  Encourage their employees/volunteers to participate in information sessions/workshops   on risk management  Promote sustained risk management awareness among board members, employees and   volunteers by organizing yearly orientation/ refresher programs about risk management   and insurance related issues  Practice overall good governance, as an essential aspect of risk management  Redefine management practices to incorporate risk management into organizational   activities  Monitor risk management practices in their organizations and offer attractive rewards for   employees who follow the risk management policies.  Given the varying risk levels of subsectors, subsector specific organizations should get   together and/or use their existing networks to share information about insurance and risk   management.  Nonprofits are advised to practise effective risk management, and ensure effective   implementation through the following practices: 

-

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                64 

7. APPENDICES AND REFERENCES
     

 

Appendix A: Other Canadian Insurance, Risk and Liability Studies....................................   66  Appendix B: Subcategories of Organizational Mandates ...................................................   71  Appendix C: Statistical Tables.............................................................................................   72  Appendix D: Statistical Tables ............................................................................................   75  Appendix E: Statistical Tables.............................................................................................   77  Appendix F: Statistical Tables .............................................................................................   79  Appendix G: Statistical Tables .............................................................................................  82  Appendix H: Statistical Tables ............................................................................................   83  Appendix I: Statistical Tables..............................................................................................   84  Appendix J: Statistical Tables..............................................................................................   85  Appendix K: Statistical Tables.............................................................................................   91  Appendix L: Statistical Tables .............................................................................................   97  Appendix M: Organizations Participating in Focus Groups ..............................................   113  Appendix N: Interview Protocol for Focus Groups...........................................................   115  Appendix O: Research Methodology................................................................................   116    References........................................................................................................................   120   

   
 

                                                                                                                                                  

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                65 

Appendix A.  Other Canadian Insurance, Risk and Liability Studies 
  For the purposes of this report various surveys on insurance, risk, and liability were reviewed.  This  appendix outlines the findings, similarities, and differences across eleven publicly available  Canadian studies on insurance, risk, and liability.  These studies are:   



Protecting Volunteers and Nonprofit Organizations A study on Risk Management and  Liability Insurance of Voluntary Organizations in British Columbia (2002).  (Subsequently referred to as Protecting Volunteers, BC.)  Edmonton Chamber of Voluntary Organizations (ECVO) Insurance Liability Study (2004).  (Subsequently referred to as ECVO Insurance Liability Study, AB.)   Insurance Liability in the Voluntary Sector: A Threat to Survival? (2004). (Subsequently  referred to as A Threat to Survival.)  Liability Insurance and the Voluntary Sector: Framing the Issues (2004). (Subsequently  referred to as Framing the Issues.)  Report to the Governor in Council on Rates and Availability of Fire, Other Property and  Liability Insurance for Homeowners, Tenants, Nonprofit Organizations and Small  Businesses (2004). (Subsequently referred to as Report to the Governor, NS.)  Improving the Insurance and Public Policy Environment for Nonprofit and Voluntary  Organizations in Atlantic Canada (2005). (Subsequently referred to as Improving  Insurance in Atlantic Canada.)  Approaches to the Insurance Dilemma: A First Cut for the Voluntary Sector (2005).  (Subsequently referred to as Approaches to the Insurance Dilemma, AB.)  Atlantic Task Force on Insurance Availability and Affordability (2005). (Subsequently  referred to as Atlantic Task Force on Insurance.)  Insuring Sector Survival: Insurance and the Voluntary, Communitybased Sector in  Newfoundland and Labrador (2005). (Subsequently referred to as Insuring Sector  Survival, NF.)  Island or Iceberg? Liability and Voluntary Organizations: A Research Report (2005).  (Subsequently referred to as Island or Iceberg)  Insurance Coverages for the Alberta Voluntary Sector (2007). (Subsequently referred to  as Insurance Coverages, AB.) 


  



  

   

Objectives of Reviewed Research Projects      All of the above reports are concerned with rising insurance rates and insurance availability in the  nonprofit sector to one degree or another.  Some, such as the Atlantic Task Force are more focused on  recommendations for the sector, while others, such as Insuring Sector Survival, NF are more exploratory  and try to grasp the scope, extent, and prevalence of the insurance problem.  Table 1 offers a summary of  the mandates set forth by each report and the nature and scope of the studies.   

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                66 

Perspectives      The studies vary in the way in which they address insurance, liability, and risk management issues in the  voluntary sector.  A majority address insurance issues from the perspective of the voluntary sector,  seeking to identify the problems, strategies and possible solutions available to the sector in particular.   Three provincial and three national reports use a similar lens, focusing on the problems faced by  nonprofit organizations in the wake of rising insurance premiums: Protecting Volunteers, BC; ECVO  Insurance Liability Study, AB; Insuring Sector Survival, NF; Island or Iceberg; A Threat to Survival; and  Framing the Issues.     The Atlantic Task Force on Insurance takes a multifaceted approach examining the issue from the  perspective of the insurance industry, the nonprofit sector, and public policy.  Its recommendations  address all actors who are affected by and affect the insurance policies and practices.    Insurance Coverages, AB adopts a market based approach looking at which insurance companies provide  specific coverage options to sector specific nonprofit organizations.  The study focuses on listing the  insurance companies and outlining the different coverage sold to different nonprofits.  This report also  argues that the nonprofit sector presents a large market opportunity to the insurance industry.     Table 1. Objectives of the Reviewed Research Projects    Project  Objective  Nature and Scope  Protecting Volunteers,  This study examined both risk management and insurance  Quantitative survey,  BC (2002)  concerns in nonprofit organizations in order to gain a better  provincial  understanding of the challenges facing the sector.  ECVO Insurance Liability  This study sought to understand the impact of the insurance  Quantitative survey,  Study, AB (2004)  environment on the operations of nonprofit organizations.    local      A Threat to Survival,   The focus of this study was to research the nature and scope of  Qualitative interviews,  (2004)  the insurance problem and use the information to work toward  national  an environment for the voluntary sector where programs are  not restricted by insurance considerations.  Framing the Issues,  The purpose of the study was to obtain a more accurate picture  Quantitative survey,  (2004)  of the insurance concerns of nonprofits.  national  Report to the Governor,  In response to the Government of Nova Scotia's concern that  Qualitative, provincial  NS   (2004)  property and liability insurance is not readily available, nor    affordable, to property owners, tenants, nonprofit  organizations, and small businesses, this study examined the  rates and availability of fire and other property and liability  insurance for homeowners, tenants, nonprofit organizations,  and other small businesses.  Improving Insurance in  The objective of this study was to identify workable insurance  Qualitative interviews,  Atlantic Canada (2005)  solutions suited to the particular needs of voluntary  regional    organizations in Atlantic Canada and to show the rationale for  recommending solutions.  Approaches to the  This study assessed the extent of the insurance problem and  Qualitative interviews,  Insurance Dilemma, AB  how these problems have negatively impacted the services  provincial  (2005)  delivered by charities. The focus was to identify viable solutions    that would stabilize the cost and depth of coverage of general 
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                67 

liability insurance for the province of Alberta's voluntary sector  organizations.  

Qualitative interviews,  The purpose of this study was to describe what happened to  regional  the Atlantic Canadian commercial insurance marketplace  between 2000 and 2003, describe who was affected and how  by the last hard market and identify actions that insurers --  including brokers and agents -- governments and consumers  might take to improve the situation and to better weather the  next hard insurance market.  Insuring Sector Survival,  The study's objective was to provide an overview of insurance  Quantitative survey,  NF (2005)  issues in the Newfoundland and Labrador voluntary sector.  provincial  Island or Iceberg,   The purpose of this study was to identify and document the  Quantitative survey,  (2006)  challenges that rising insurance costs have created for  national    voluntary organizations and to identify the strategies and  initiatives that they are using to cope with the situation.   Insurance Coverages,  The survey was designed to provide Alberta's voluntary  Quantitative survey,  AB (2007)  organizations with accurate information regarding the  provincial    insurance products and to inform insurance companies of the  size and scope of the provinces voluntary sector.     Methodologies    Five of the eleven studies reviewed used quantitative methodologies to survey voluntary organizations. (A  sixth used quantitative methodology on the insurance sector).  Please refer to Table 1. All five of the  studies augmented the survey data with qualitative interviews.  Surveys were administered either online  or by telephone interviews using for the most part, purposive sampling methods.  The studies varied  sample size and the number of questions asked,      The other studies were more qualitative in nature.  Improving Insurance in Atlantic Canada, Approaches to  the Insurance Dilemma and the Atlantic Task Force on Insurance all looked at insurance, liability and risk  management issues in the sector from a broad perspective, which focused on reviewing the literature,  case studies, and legislation. They explained the trends in the insurance market, the unique characteristics  of the voluntary sector and its relationship with the insurance industry, and to some extent the role of  government/public policy in framing the issues for the sector.  These studies were not accompanied by  questionnaires, and were more exploratory in their approach to the voluntary sector and insurance issues.   The Report to the Governor, NS, was a broad study on insurance in general in Nova Scotia and only briefly  touched on the issues surrounding insurance in the nonprofit sector, and A Threat to Survival was limited  to regional consultations with a select number of voluntary organizations.    Atlantic Task Force on  Insurance (2005) 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                68 

Table 2. Sampling Methods, Response Rates and Number of Questions Asked    Study  Sample  Number of Questions   Protecting Volunteers, BC    1,735   30     ECVO Insurance Liability Study, AB   46   10   Framing the Issues   130   10   Insuring Sector Survival, NF   106   Undisclosed   Island or Iceberg   1,135   16      Research Questions    All of the quantitative surveys asked similar questions in order to:    1.  Identify the number of insured and uninsured nonprofits  2.  Identify the frequency and type of coverage of nonprofits  3.  Determine if increasing insurance premiums affected operations  4.  Identify the reasons for not having insurance   5.  Determine if operations (volunteer recruitment, programs, services etc.) had been   effected by lack  of insurance    Some of the studies, such as: Island or Iceberg, EVCO Insurance Liability Study, AB and Protecting  Volunteers, BC disaggregated the results into the various nonprofit subsectors. Two studies evaluated the  average cost of annual premiums:  These were Island or Iceberg and Protecting Volunteers, BC.  Island or  Iceberg and EVCO Insurance Liability Study, AB also attempted to estimate the percentage increases in  premiums that nonprofit organizations have experienced since 2000.  Island or Iceberg and Protecting  Volunteers, BC compared rate increases for small and large organizations.     A few of the studies looked at strategies used to reduce risk and liability.  These were Island or Iceberg,  Insuring Sector Survival, NF, Protecting Volunteers, BC and Approaches to the Insurance Dilemma, AB.    Several studies evaluated risk management practices and policies, albeit from different perspectives.   Insuring Sector Survival, NF looked into risk management practices and the prevalence of risk  management plans, whereas Protecting Volunteers, BC studied risk management practices and policies  indirectly, by querying organizations about their human resource policies and procedures.  Island or  Iceberg asked nonprofit organizations if they had implemented risk management policies as a strategy to  reduce risk and liability.      Finally, only Island or Iceberg attempted to evaluate the attitudes and perceptions of nonprofits about  possible solutions to the insurance issues.     Summary of Findings      The quantitative and qualitative studies generally agree in their broad findings.  They all note that rising  insurance rates have affected the nonprofit sector and the ability of nonprofits to purchase insurance.   Some studies point out that this is the result of the `hard insurance' market, which is cyclical.  They note  that the `hard market' affected all sectors, not only the voluntary sector.  Almost all of the studies indicate  that rising insurance rates have affected the sectors' ability to recruit volunteers, particularly board 
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                69 

members.  This is a major concern given the important role nonprofits play in the socioeconomic  development of Canada.  The studies also find that costly insurance has forced a minority of nonprofits to  operate without insurance.  However, most nonprofits (70% to 90%) do have some kind of insurance.  General Liability is the most widely held, followed by Directors and Officers Liability insurance.  In general,  most of the studies conclude that nonprofits have difficulty finding the insurance they need, are unaware  of the risks and potential liabilities facing their organizations and need greater access to information  regarding how premiums are determined.  Several studies note that premiums are not necessarily  determined by claims history and that changes in tort legislation have adversely affected the willingness of  insurance companies to provide insurance to the nonprofit sector.     Although the majority of studies found that operations, programming, and services have been adversely  affected by rising premiums, the EVCO Insurance Liability Study concluded that rising premiums had little  or no impact on nonprofit operations, but that nonprofit organizations had to reallocate resources or  secure additional ones in order to continue their operations.    Most of the studies recommend a policy approach to addressing the insurance issue in the voluntary  sector, noting the need for government involvement, stakeholder participation and collaboration between  the insurance industry and the nonprofit sector.  In particular there is an overwhelming consensus that  more information, training, and education for nonprofits are necessary.  The nonprofit sector needs more  information on risk management and alternatives to traditional insurance.  The insurance industry needs  to better inform nonprofits on how premiums are determined and what they can do to get more  favourable rates.  Some studies, such as Improving Insurance in Atlantic Canada, Protecting Volunteers, BC  and Insuring Sector Survival, NF  favour government intervention.  All of these studies call for  implementing the Volunteer Protection Act or making insurance more affordable by eliminating insurance  taxes for nonprofit organizations.      Other studies, such as EVCO Insurance Liability Study, AB, Atlantic Task Force on Insurance, Insuring Sector  Survival, NF and Approaches to the Insurance Dilemma, AB emphasize the need for insurance alternatives  such as group insurance.  Only two studies, the Report to the Governor, NS and The Atlantic Task Force on  Insurance, note that the commercial insurance market has improved recently, and that many availability  and affordability concerns have diminished as a result of a healthier insurance industry.  Nonetheless,  measures can still be taken to further improve availability and affordability of insurance for nonprofits to  lessen the impact of the next hard market.                       

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                70 

Appendix B. Subcategories of Organizational Mandates 
  Organizational Mandate  Arts and Culture  Subcategories   Media and communication, visual arts, architecture,  ceramic art, performing arts, activities related to historic,  literary, or humanistic pursuits, museum operations, zoo or  aquarium operations  Business and Professional Association, Unions    Development and Housing  Community, social or economic development, vocational  training, sheltered housing and housing assistance  Education and Research  Elementary, primary and secondary education, vocational,  technical, or trade school, adult or continuing education,  literacy and reading programs, research organizations  Environment   Pollution abatement and control, recycling, natural  resources conservation and protection, environmental  beautification, and open spaces protection, animal  protection and welfare, wildlife preservation and  protection, veterinary services  Grantmaking, Fundraising and Voluntarism  Providing grants, promoting or supporting voluntarism for  Promotion  other organizations, fundraising on behalf of other  organizations, or a group of organizations that they belong  to  Health  Inpatient rehabilitation services, inpatient nursing home  services for the elderly or disabled, inpatient psychiatric  treatment, outpatient mental health treatment, community  mental health, halfway homes, mental health crisis  intervention, public health, health promotion, and wellness  education, women's health, outpatient health treatment,  outpatient rehabilitative medical services, emergency  medical services  International  Exchange, friendship or cultural programs, international  development assistance, international disaster assistance  and relief, international human rights and peace  Law, Advocacy, and Politics  Human rights, ethnic heritage, rehabilitation, consumer  protection  Religious associations    Social services  Children's services, child welfare and daycare, youth  services, youth welfare, and youth groups such as Scouts or  Guides, family services, services for single parents and  victims of family violence, services for the disabled, services  for the elderly, selfhelp and other personal social services,  disaster or emergency prevention and assistance  Sports and Recreation  Sports and physical fitness, tourism, providing recreation,  social, or leisure clubs, service clubs such as Rotary Club,  Kinsmen and Lions Club  Other (please specify)     

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                71 

Appendix C. Statistical Tables 
  Table C1a. Organizational Mandate by Insurance Variables (Significant Results Only)        N  Mean  Std. Deviation      Total number of   policies  Social Service  Health  Sports and Recreation  Arts and Culture  268  179  139  105  7.2463  7.6872  5.3813  5.0857  5.3281  5.8261  7.4848  5.1382  6.3615  3.20331  3.65237  3.17462  2.85924  3.18755  3.09339  3.06310  3.02537  3.38884 

Education and research  64  Professional Associations 46  Development and  housing  Other  Total  Cost of Insurance  Social Service  Health  Sports and Recreation  Arts and Culture  33  123  957  234  112  121  95 

14385.6838  16353.14797  15546.8750  16232.90963  9989.6694  6750.0000  9046.6102  8414.6341  14218.80345  10240.46001  12874.43291  10379.60888 

Education and research  59  Professional Associations 41  Development and  housing  Other  Total  Percentage increase in   Social Service  insurance  Health  Sports and Recreation  Arts and Culture  29  103  794  96  49  47  33 

14870.6897  14288.73506  7876.2136  12.58  11.59  11.86  23.30  10.67  9.91  11.45  14.16  13.42  11757.13560  12.679  11.567  15.490  29.283  7.490  5.204  12.910  11.377  15.406 

11434.1940  14557.07444 

Education and research  15  Professional Associations 14  Development and  housing  Other  Total      11  38  303 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                72 

Table C1b. Anova Significance Tests    Total number of  policies    Between  Groups  Total  Cost of Insurance  Between  Groups  Total  Percentage increase  Between  Groups  Total  Sum of  Squares  1136.047  Mean  Square  162.292  10.372    1.232E9  2.028E8    559.703  229.703   

df  7  949 

F 

Sig. 

15.647  .000      6.076      2.437          .000      .019     

Within Groups  9842.858 

10978.905  956  8.626E9  7  786  793  7 

Within Groups  1.594E11  1.680E11  3917.918 

Within Groups  67762.382  295  71680.300  302    Table C2a. Mandate by Claims in the Previous 5 Years                Count  Mandate Grouped  Social Service 

Claims in last 5 years  Yes  63  24.4%  No  195  75.6%  26.5%  114  70.8%  15.5%  115  84.6%  15.6%  92  90.2%  Total  258  100.0%  28.3%  161  100.0%  17.7%  136  100.0%  14.9%  102  100.0% 

% within Mandate  Grouped 

% within Claims in last 5  35.8%  years  Health  Count  % within Mandate  Grouped  47  29.2% 

% within Claims in last 5  26.7%  years  Sports and Recreation  Count  % within Mandate  Grouped  21  15.4% 

% within Claims in last 5  11.9%  years  Arts and Culture  Count  % within Mandate  Grouped  10  9.8% 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                73 

% within Claims in last 5  5.7%  years  Education and Research  Count  % within Mandate  Grouped  8  12.7% 

12.5%  55  87.3%  7.5%  41  97.6%  5.6%  23  71.9%  3.1%  101  85.6%  13.7%  736  80.7%  100.0% 

11.2%  63  100.0%  6.9%  42  100.0%  4.6%  32  100.0%  3.5%  118  100.0%  12.9%  912  100.0%  100.0% 

% within Claims in last 5  4.5%  years  Professional Associations Count  % within Mandate  Grouped  1  2.4% 

% within Claims in last 5  .6%  years  Development and  Housing  Count  % within Mandate  Grouped  9  28.1% 

% within Claims in last 5  5.1%  years  Other  Count  % within Mandate  Grouped  17  14.4% 

% within Claims in last 5  9.7%  years  Total  Count  % within Mandate  Grouped  176  19.3% 

% within Claims in last 5  100.0%  years    Table C2b. ChiSquare Tests      Value  Pearson ChiSquare  Likelihood Ratio  LinearbyLinear  Association  N of Valid Cases    34.560   38.236  12.108  912 
a

df  7  7  1   

Asymp. Sig. (2 sided)  .000  .000  .001   

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                74 

Appendix D. Statistical Tables 
  Table D1a. Direct Service by Insurance Variables (Significant Results Only)        N  Mean  Std. Deviation      Total number of policies  Yes  No  Total  Cost of Insurance  Yes  No  Total  891  62  953  735  56  791  6.4972  4.5161  6.3683  11823.1293  6026.7857  11412.7686  3.40633  2.49420  3.38895  14797.57288  9629.81622  14564.18492 

  Table D1b. Anova Significance Tests        Within Groups  Total  Cost of Insurance  Within Groups  Total                                               

Sum of Squares df  1  951  952  1  789  790  10706.227  10933.723  1.658E11  1.676E11 

Mean Square  F  227.496  11.258    1.748E9  2.102E8    20.208      8.318     

Sig.  .000      .004     

Total number of policies  Between Groups  227.496 

Between Groups  1.748E9 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                75 

  Table D2a. Direct Service by Claims in the Previous 5 Years          Claims in last 5 years        Count  % within Serve people  directly  Yes  171  20.2%  No  676  79.8%  92.3%  56  91.8%  7.7%  732  80.6%  100.0%  Total  847  100.0%  93.3%  61  100.0%  6.7%  908  100.0%  100.0%  Serve people directly  Yes 

% within Claims in last 5  97.2%  years  No  Count  % within Serve people  directly  5  8.2% 

% within Claims in last 5  2.8%  years  Total  Count  % within Serve people  directly  176  19.4% 

% within Claims in last 5  100.0%  years    Table D2b. ChiSquare Tests      Value  Pearson ChiSquare  Continuity Correctionb  Likelihood Ratio  Fisher's Exact Test  LinearbyLinear  Association  N of Valid Cases                    5.237a  4.498  6.295    5.231  908 

df  1  1  1    1   

Asymp. Sig. (2 Exact Sig. (2 sided)  sided)  .022  .034  .012    .022          .019     

Exact Sig. (1 sided)        .012     

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                76 

Appendix E. Statistical Tables 
  Table E1a. Number of People Served by Insurance Variables (Significant Results Only)        N  Mean  Std. Deviation      Total number of policies  Fewer than 50  50  100  Total  Total number of agents  Fewer than 50  50  100  Total  Cost of Insurance  Fewer than 50  50  100  Total    Table E1b. Anova Significance Tests      Within Groups  Total  Within Groups  Total  Cost of Insurance  Within Groups  Total                         
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                77 

150  150  875  146  144  818  141  121  727 

5.1733  5.9933  6.9530  6.4834  1.0890  1.1389  1.2424  1.1968  6028.3688  6012.3967  14776.8817  11621.3893 

2.88422  3.26564  3.43220  3.38433  .30897  .38524  .54227  .48643  8679.92821  6501.83077  16403.47215  14532.11864 

More than 100  575 

More than 100  528 

More than 100  465 

Sum of Squares df  2  872  874  2  815  817  2  724  726  9590.219  10010.510  190.034  193.312  1.405E11  1.533E11 

Mean Square  F  210.145  10.998    1.639  .233    6.424E9  1.940E8    19.108      7.028      33.109     

Sig.  .000      .001      .000     

Total number of policies  Between Groups  420.291 

Total number of agents  Between Groups  3.277 

Between Groups  1.285E10 

  Table E2a. Number of People Served by Claims in the Previous 5 Years          Claims in last 5 years        % within Number of  people served  Yes  15  10.1%  No  133  89.9%  19.9%  128  85.9%  19.2%  406  75.7%  60.9%  667  80.1%  100.0%  Total  148  100.0%  17.8%  149  100.0%  17.9%  536  100.0%  64.3%  833  100.0%  100.0%  Number of people served  Fewer than 50  Count 

% within Claims in last 5  9.0%  years  50  100  Count  % within Number of  people served  21  14.1% 

% within Claims in last 5   12.7%  years  More than 100 Count  % within Number of  people served  130  24.3% 

% within Claims in last 5  78.3%  years  Total  Count  % within Number of  people served  166  19.9% 

% within Claims in last 5  100.0%  years    Table E2b. ChiSquare Tests      Value  Pearson ChiSquare  Likelihood Ratio  LinearbyLinear  Association  N of Valid Cases    18.359a  19.843  17.658  833 

df  2  2  1   

Asymp. Sig. (2 sided)  .000  .000  .000   

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                78 

Appendix F. Statistical Tables 
    Table F1a. Beneficiaries of Service by Total Number of Insurance Policies        N  Mean      Total number of policies  General Public  Seniors  Children  Special Interests  Vulnerable Populations  Students  Children and Youth  Youth  Members  Families  Women  Women and Children  Total    Table F1b. Anova Significance Tests        Within Groups  Total  353  95  91  74  66  34  46  41  29  24  21  17  891  6.2578  7.4632  6.3407  5.4730  7.5303  6.2059  6.7826  5.7805  6.0000  7.4167  6.0476  9.1765  6.5006 

Std. Deviation  3.35814  3.46966  3.23941  2.96196  3.73021  4.03605  3.14758  3.82434  3.03550  2.51805  2.88922  3.10715  3.40600 

Sum of Squares df  11  879  890  9884.153  10324.750 

Mean Square  F  40.054  11.245    3.562     

Sig.  .000     

Total number of policies  Between Groups  440.597 

    Table F2a. Beneficiaries of Service by Difficulty in Obtaining Insurance          Difficulty getting insurance (past two  years)    Beneficiaries  (Grouped)    General Public    Count  % within Beneficiaries  (Grouped)  Yes  22  6.6%  No  310  93.4%  Total  332  100.0% 

% within Difficulty  getting insurance (past  47.8%  two years) 

38.3% 

38.8% 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                79 

Children, Youth and  Students 

Count  % within Beneficiaries  (Grouped) 

12  5.8% 

196  94.2% 

208  100.0% 

% within Difficulty  getting insurance (past  26.1%  two years)  Seniors  Count  % within Beneficiaries  (Grouped)  2  2.2% 

24.2%  91  97.8% 

24.3%  93  100.0% 

% within Difficulty  getting insurance (past  4.3%  two years)  Special Interests  Count  % within Beneficiaries  (Grouped)  3  4.2% 

11.2%  68  95.8% 

10.9%  71  100.0% 

% within Difficulty  getting insurance (past  6.5%  two years)  Vulnerable Populations  Count  % within Beneficiaries  (Grouped)  2  3.0% 

8.4%  64  97.0% 

8.3%  66  100.0% 

% within Difficulty  getting insurance (past  4.3%  two years)  Members  Count  % within Beneficiaries  (Grouped)  0  .0% 

7.9%  28  100.0% 

7.7%  28  100.0% 

% within Difficulty  getting insurance (past  .0%  two years)  Families  Count  % within Beneficiaries  (Grouped)  0  .0% 

3.5%  22  100.0% 

3.3%  22  100.0% 

% within Difficulty  getting insurance (past  .0%  two years)  Women  Count  % within Beneficiaries  (Grouped)  1  5.0% 

2.7%  19  95.0% 

2.6%  20  100.0% 

% within Difficulty  getting insurance (past  2.2%  two years) 

2.3% 

2.3% 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                80 

Women and Children 

Count  % within Beneficiaries  (Grouped) 

4  25.0% 

12  75.0% 

16  100.0% 

% within Difficulty  getting insurance (past  8.7%  two years)  Total  Count  % within Beneficiaries  (Grouped)  46  5.4% 

1.5%  810  94.6% 

1.9%  856  100.0% 

% within Difficulty  getting insurance (past  100.0%  two years)      Table F2b. ChiSquare Tests      Value  Pearson ChiSquare  Likelihood Ratio  LinearbyLinear  Association  N of Valid Cases                          18.850a  16.740  .022  856 

100.0% 

100.0% 

df  8  8  1   

Asymp. Sig. (2 sided)  .016  .033  .883   

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                81 

Appendix G. Statistical Tables 
  Table G1a. Charitable Registration by Insurance Variables (Significant Results Only)        N  Mean  Std. Deviation      Total number of policies  Yes  No  Total  Cost of Insurance  Yes  No  Total  772  173  945  654  139  793  6.5881  5.4624  6.3820  11982.0336  8579.1367  11385.5612  3.40576  3.19065  3.39383  14757.37812  12914.50552  14501.57503 

  Table G1b. Anova Significance Tests        Within Groups  Total  Cost of Insurance  Within Groups  Total                                   

Sum of Squares df  1  943  944  1  791  792  10694.016  10873.094  1.652E11  1.666E11 

Mean Square  F  179.078  11.340    1.327E9  2.089E8    15.791      6.355     

Sig.  .000      .012     

Total number of policies  Between Groups  179.078 

Between Groups  1.327E9 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                82 

Appendix H. Statistical Tables 
  Table H1a. Region by Cost of Insurance (Significant Results Only)        N  Mean  Std. Deviation      Cost of Insurance  East  West  North  Central  Total    Table H1b. Anova Significance Tests        Cost of Insurance  Within Groups  Total                                                181  185  42  173  780  8722.3757  10533.7838  12410.7143  10404.6243  15263.8191  11392.6282  11160.87832  14383.64133  17330.17084  14015.62693  16266.29323  14491.87813 

Toronto  199 

Sum of Squares df  4  775  779  1.590E11  1.636E11 

Mean Square  F  1.155E9  2.051E8    5.632     

Sig.  .000     

Between Groups  4.622E9 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                83 

Appendix I. Statistical Tables 
  Table I1a. Organizational Unit by Cost of Insurance (Significant Results Only)        N  Mean  Std. Deviation      Cost of Insurance  Head office  Branch office  Stand alone  Total    Table I1b. Anova Significance Tests        Cost of Insurance  Within Groups  Total                                                    191  63  536  790  15955.4974  14404.7619  9519.5896  11465.1899  16973.37260  18406.60978  12648.74448  14581.76621 

Sum of Squares df  2  787  789  1.613E11  1.678E11 

Mean Square  F  3.212E9  2.050E8    15.669     

Sig.  .000     

Between Groups  6.424E9 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                84 

Appendix J. Statistical Tables 
  Table J1a. Organizational Age by Insurance Variables (Significant Results Only)        N  Mean  Std. Deviation      Total number of policies  19 years  1019 years  2029 years  3039 years  4089 years  Total  Total number of agents  19 years  1019 years  2029 years  3039 years  4089 years  Total  Cost of Insurance  19 years  1019 years  2029 years  3039 years  4089 years  Total                               
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                85 

94  190  232  179  160  956  91  183  225  168  142  895  87  166  195  149  130  794 

4.8936  6.1842  6.3103  6.5754  6.8688  7.0000  6.3619  1.1429  1.0984  1.1956  1.2500  1.2394  1.2442  1.1922  5790.2299  7891.5663  10134.6154  11258.3893  16923.0769  21063.4328  11434.1940 

3.08819  3.19933  3.25514  3.41488  3.40573  3.86005  3.39059  .38214  .29862  .47900  .53332  .54486  .61234  .47880  9474.02152  11277.20232  12815.83545  13264.22032  17336.69223  20355.80027  14557.07444 

More than 90 years  101 

More than 90 years  86 

More than 90 years  67 

  Table J1a. Anova Significance Tests        Within Groups  Total  Within Groups  Total  Cost of Insurance  Within Groups  Total 

Sum of Squares df  5  950  955  5  889  894  5  788  793  10679.120  10978.774  201.999  204.945  1.527E11  1.680E11 

Mean Square  F  59.931  11.241    .589  .227    3.064E9  1.938E8    5.331      2.593      15.806     

Sig.  .000      .024      .000     

Total number of policies  Between Groups  299.654 

Total number of agents  Between Groups  2.946 

Between Groups  1.532E10 

  Table J2a. Organizational Age by Claims in the Last Five Years            Organization Age  Grouped    19 years    Count 

Claims in last 5 years  Yes  8  No  85  91.4%  11.6%  158  86.8%  21.5%  190  83.0%  25.9%  131  77.5%  17.8%  114  77.0%  Total  93  100.0%  10.2%  182  100.0%  20.0%  229  100.0%  25.1%  169  100.0%  18.6%  148  100.0% 

% within Organization Age  8.6%  Grouped  % within Claims in last 5  years  1019 years  Count  4.5%  24 

% within Organization Age  13.2%  Grouped  % within Claims in last 5  years  2029 years  Count  13.6%  39 

% within Organization Age  17.0%  Grouped  % within Claims in last 5   22.2%  years  3039 years  Count  38  % within Organization Age  22.5%  Grouped  % within Claims in last 5   21.6%  years  4089 years  Count  34  % within Organization Age  23.0%  Grouped 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                86 

% within Claims in last 5   19.3%  years  More than 90  years  Count  33  % within Organization Age  36.7%  Grouped  % within Claims in last 5  years  Total  Count  18.8%  176 

15.5%  57  63.3%  7.8%  735  80.7% 

16.2%  90  100.0%  9.9%  911  100.0% 

% within Organization Age  19.3%  Grouped    Table J2b. ChiSquare Tests      Value 

df 

Asymp. Sig. (2 sided) 

Pearson ChiSquare  31.744a  5  .000  Likelihood Ratio  30.821  5  .000  LinearbyLinear  28.493  1  .000  Association  N of Valid Cases  911        Table J3a. Organizational Age by Changes in Premium Costs for the Previous 2 Years          Changes in Premium Costs Previous 2 Years        No  Change  Organization Age  19 years  Grouped  Count  42  % within  Organization Age  56.0%  Grouped  % within Changes  in Premium Costs  15.2%  previous 2 years  1019 years  Count  48  % within  Organization Age  29.8%  Grouped  % within Changes  in Premium Costs  17.4%  previous 2 years  2029 years  Count  64  Some  increased,  some  Increased Decreased  decreased Total  24  32.0%  5  6.7%  4  5.3%  75  100.0%

7.0%  84  52.2% 

6.9%  18  11.2% 

6.3%  11  6.8% 

9.9%  161  100.0%

24.3%  94 

25.0%  13 

17.5%  9 

21.3%  180 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                87 

% within  Organization Age  35.6%  Grouped  % within Changes  in Premium Costs  23.2%  previous 2 years  3039 years  Count  54  % within  Organization Age  37.2%  Grouped  % within Changes  in Premium Costs  19.6%  previous 2 years  4089 years  Count  48  % within  Organization Age  36.9%  Grouped  % within Changes  in Premium Costs  17.4%  previous 2 years  More than 90  Count  years  % within  20 

52.2% 

7.2% 

5.0% 

100.0%

27.2%  65  44.8% 

18.1%  14  9.7% 

14.3%  12  8.3% 

23.8%  145  100.0%

18.8%  50  38.5% 

19.4%  12  9.2% 

19.0%  20  15.4% 

19.2%  130  100.0%

14.5%  28  43.1% 

16.7%  10  15.4% 

31.7%  7  10.8% 

17.2%  65  100.0%

Organization Age  30.8%  Grouped  % within Changes  in Premium Costs  7.2%  previous 2 years  Total  Count  276  % within  Organization Age  36.5%  Grouped  % within Changes  in Premium Costs  100.0%  previous 2 years                       

8.1%  345  45.6% 

13.9%  72  9.5% 

11.1%  63  8.3% 

8.6%  756  100.0%

100.0%  100.0% 

100.0% 

100.0%

 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                88 

Table J3b. ChiSquare Tests      Value 

df 

Asymp. Sig. (2 sided) 

Pearson ChiSquare  34.627a  15  .003  Likelihood Ratio  32.709  15  .005  LinearbyLinear  7.886  1  .005  Association  N of Valid Cases  756        Table J4a. Organizational Age by Difficulty in Getting Insurance            Organization Age  Grouped    19 years    Count 

Difficulty getting insurance (past two  years)  Yes  12  No  81  87.1%  Total  93  100.0% 

% within Organization  12.9%  Age Grouped  % within Difficulty  getting insurance (past  24.0%  two years)  1019 years  Count  10  % within Organization  5.4%  Age Grouped  % within Difficulty  getting insurance (past  20.0%  two years)  2029 years  Count  8  % within Organization  3.4%  Age Grouped  % within Difficulty  getting insurance (past  16.0%  two years)  3039 years  Count  7  % within Organization  4.1%  Age Grouped  % within Difficulty  getting insurance (past  14.0%  two years)  4089 years  Count  9  % within Organization  6.0%  Age Grouped 

9.3%  174  94.6% 

10.1%  184  100.0% 

20.0%  224  96.6% 

20.0%  232  100.0% 

25.7%  165  95.9% 

25.2%  172  100.0% 

19.0%  140  94.0% 

18.7%  149  100.0% 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                89 

% within Difficulty  getting insurance (past  18.0%  two years)  More that 90  years  Count  4  % within Organization  4.4%  Age Grouped  % within Difficulty  getting insurance (past  8.0%  two years)  Total  Count  50  % within Organization  5.4%  Age Grouped  % within Difficulty  getting insurance (past  100.0%  two years)    Table J4b. ChiSquare Tests      Value  Pearson ChiSquare  Likelihood Ratio  LinearbyLinear  Association  N of Valid Cases    12.776a  10.424  1.047  920 

16.1%  86  95.6%  9.9%  870  94.6% 

16.2%  90  100.0%  9.8%  920  100.0% 

100.0%   

100.0% 

df  5  5  1   

Asymp. Sig. (2 sided)  .026  .064  .306   

 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                90 

Appendix K. Statistical Tables 
  Table K1a. Government Funding (Significant Results Only)        N  Mean      Total number of policies  0  10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80  90  100  Total  Total number of agents  0  10  20  30  40  50  60  70  80  90  100  Total  Cost of Insurance  0  10  20  30  40  50  60  70  275  95  57  41  45  48  54  78  81  97  72  943  261  93  55  38  43  44  51  74  73  91  65  888  241  82  52  37  42  40  44  63  5.1273  5.6105  5.7719  6.9512  6.8444  6.0208  6.6667  7.4231  7.9259  7.5979  7.0972  6.3446  1.0996  1.2043  1.2182  1.2105  1.3256  1.0682  1.1765  1.3784  1.2603  1.1978  1.2462  1.1937  6509.3361  10289.6341  10288.4615  13547.2973  8690.4762  9843.7500  11392.0455  14126.9841 

Std. Deviation  3.18788  2.87430  3.05905  3.34628  3.21188  2.84709  3.46954  3.12725  3.64272  3.43893  3.37413  3.38050  .32469  .47911  .49781  .52802  .71451  .25497  .38501  .63468  .47221  .52111  .61316  .48038  10291.84376  13999.97076  13354.64454  16474.18412  12960.87093  13070.89734  12526.76179  14950.58210 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                91 

80  90  100  Total 

62  78  49  790 

20584.6774  15833.3333  18341.8367  11403.4810 

18666.77944  16103.44334  17523.02755  14521.51186 

  Table K1b. Anova Significance Tests        Within Groups  Total  Within Groups  Total  Cost of Insurance  Within Groups  Total 

Sum of Squares df  10  932  942  10  877  887  10  779  789  9764.196  10764.990  197.836  204.685  1.503E11  1.664E11 

Mean Square  F  100.079  10.477    .685  .226    1.610E9  1.929E8    9.553      3.036      8.345     

Sig.  .000      .001      .000     

Total number of policies  Between Groups  1000.795 

Total number of agents  Between Groups  6.848 

Between Groups  1.610E10 

  Table K2a. Government Funding in the Previous 5 Years          Claims in last 5 years        Count  % within Government  funding  Yes  26  9.7%  No  241  90.3%  33.1%  74  80.4%  10.2%  48  84.2%  6.6%  31  77.5%  Total  267  100.0%  29.7%  92  100.0%  10.2%  57  100.0%  6.3%  40  100.0%  Government funding  0 

% within Claims in last 5  15.0%  years  10  Count  % within Government  funding  18  19.6% 

% within Claims in last 5  10.4%  years  20  Count  % within Government  funding  9  15.8% 

% within Claims in last 5  5.2%  years  30  Count  % within Government  funding  9  22.5% 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                92 

% within Claims in last 5  5.2%  years  40  Count  % within Government  funding  5  11.4% 

4.3%  39  88.6%  5.4%  38  88.4%  5.2%  42  80.8%  5.8%  55  74.3%  7.6%  47  63.5%  6.5%  68  75.6%  9.4%  44  65.7%  6.1%  727  80.8% 

4.4%  44  100.0%  4.9%  43  100.0%  4.8%  52  100.0%  5.8%  74  100.0%  8.2%  74  100.0%  8.2%  90  100.0%  10.0%  67  100.0%  7.4%  900  100.0% 

% within Claims in last 5  2.9%  years  50  Count  % within Government  funding  5  11.6% 

% within Claims in last 5  2.9%  years  60  Count  % within Government  funding  10  19.2% 

% within Claims in last 5  5.8%  years  70  Count  % within Government  funding  19  25.7% 

% within Claims in last 5  11.0%  years  80  Count  % within Government  funding  27  36.5% 

% within Claims in last 5  15.6%  years  90  Count  % within Government  funding  22  24.4% 

% within Claims in last 5  12.7%  years  100  Count  % within Government  funding  23  34.3% 

% within Claims in last 5  13.3%  years  Total  Count  % within Government  funding  173  19.2% 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                93 

% within Claims in last 5  100.0%  years    Table K2b. ChiSquare Tests      Value 

100.0% 

100.0% 

df 

Asymp. Sig. (2 sided) 

Pearson ChiSquare  47.148a  10  .000  Likelihood Ratio  46.450  10  .000  LinearbyLinear  32.972  1  .000  Association  N of Valid Cases  900        Table K3a. Government Funding  Type of Impact (Previous Two Years)          Type of impact (past two years)    Government  funding    0    Count  1  15  2  2  6.7%  3  0  .0%  4  11  36.7%  5  2  6.7%  Total  30  100.0% 

% within Government  50.0%  funding  % within Type of  impact (past two  years)  10  Count  50.0%  3 

10.0%  1  16.7% 

.0%  0  .0% 

42.3%  1  16.7% 

28.6%  1  16.7% 

33.3%  6  100.0% 

% within Government  50.0%  funding  % within Type of  impact (past two  years)  20  Count  10.0%  0 

5.0%  0  .0% 

.0%  0  .0% 

3.8%  3 

14.3%  0 

6.7%  3  100.0% 

% within Government  .0%  funding  % within Type of  impact (past two  years)  30  Count  .0%  0 

100.0%  .0% 

.0%  0  .0% 

.0%  0  .0% 

11.5%  1 

.0%  0 

3.3%  1  100.0% 

% within Government  .0%  funding  % within Type of  impact (past two  years)  40  Count  .0%  3 

100.0%  .0% 

.0%  4 

.0%  2 

3.8%  1 

.0%  0 

1.1%  10 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                94 

% within Government  30.0%  funding  % within Type of  impact (past two  years)  50  Count  10.0%  0 

40.0% 

20.0% 

10.0% 

.0% 

100.0% 

20.0%  0  .0% 

28.6%  0  .0% 

3.8%  2 

.0%  0 

11.1%  2  100.0% 

% within Government  .0%  funding  % within Type of  impact (past two  years)  60  Count  .0%  1 

100.0%  .0% 

.0%  2  40.0% 

.0%  1  20.0% 

7.7%  1  20.0% 

.0%  0  .0% 

2.2%  5  100.0% 

% within Government  20.0%  funding  % within Type of  impact (past two  years)  70  Count  3.3%  2 

10.0%  3  33.3% 

14.3%  3  33.3% 

3.8%  1  11.1% 

.0%  0  .0% 

5.6%  9  100.0% 

% within Government  22.2%  funding  % within Type of  impact (past two  years)  80  Count  6.7%  4 

15.0%  3  27.3% 

42.9%  1  9.1% 

3.8%  2  18.2% 

.0%  1  9.1% 

10.0%  11  100.0% 

% within Government  36.4%  funding  % within Type of  impact (past two  years)  90  Count  13.3%  2 

15.0%  3  33.3% 

14.3%  0  .0% 

7.7%  3  33.3% 

14.3%  1  11.1% 

12.2%  9  100.0% 

% within Government  22.2%  funding  % within Type of  impact (past two  years)  100  Count  6.7%  0 

15.0%  2  50.0% 

.0%  0  .0% 

11.5%  0  .0% 

14.3%  2  50.0% 

10.0%  4  100.0% 

% within Government  .0%  funding  % within Type of  impact (past two  years)  Total  Count  .0%  30 

10.0%  20 

.0%  7 

.0%  26 

28.6%  7 

4.4%  90 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                95 

% within Government  33.3%  funding  % within Type of  impact (past two  years)    Table K3b. ChiSquare Tests      Value  Pearson ChiSquare  Likelihood Ratio  LinearbyLinear  Association  N of Valid Cases                              59.165a  58.766  .334  90 

22.2% 

7.8% 

28.9% 

7.8% 

100.0% 

100.0%  100.0%  100.0%  100.0%  100.0%  100.0% 

df  40  40  1   

Asymp. Sig. (2 sided)  .026  .028  .563   

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                96 

Appendix L. Statistical Tables 
  Table L1a. Organizational Size by Organizational Characteristics (Significant Results Only)        N  Mean  Std. Deviation      Total number of policies  $0  $49,999  $50,000  $99,999  $100,000  $249,999  $250,000  $499,999  $500,000  $999,999  Total  Total number of agents  $0  $49,999  $50,000  $99,999  $100,000  $249,999  $250,000  $499,999  $500,000  $999,999  Total  Cost of Insurance  $0  $49,999  $50,000  $99,999  $100,000  $249,999  $250,000  $499,999  $500,000  $999,999  Total    Table L1b. Anova Significance Tests        Within Groups  Total  Within Groups  Total  Cost of Insurance  Within Groups  116  110  146  123  120  900  113  105  137  120  115  850  106  100  129  109  104  774  3.0172  4.9000  5.7466  6.3740  6.8333  8.4877  6.3900  1.0973  1.0952  1.1241  1.1833  1.1913  1.3038  1.1894  1992.9245  3337.5000  5261.6279  7844.0367  10949.5192  24706.8584  11371.1240  1.80330  2.64731  2.82797  2.81506  3.04679  3.26052  3.38322  .29775  .35420  .37269  .44878  .41666  .61197  .47120  2319.54879  3324.11130  7208.99371  10156.28961  11753.81470  17387.84913  14559.74030 

More than $1,000,000  285 

More than $1,000,000  260 

More than $1,000,000  226 

Sum of Squares df  5  894  899  5  844  849  5  768  7388.159  10290.110  182.621  188.505  1.017E11 

Mean Square  F  580.390  8.264    1.177  .216    1.243E10  1.324E8  70.230      5.438      93.873   

Sig.  .000      .000      .000   

Total number of policies  Between Groups  2901.951 

Total number of agents  Between Groups  5.883 

Between Groups  6.216E10 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                97 

Total 

1.639E11 

773 

 

 

 

  Table L2a. Annual Budget  Claims in the Previous 5 Years                Count  % within Annual Budget  (grouped)  % within Claims in last 5  years  $50,000  $99,999  Count  % within Annual Budget  (grouped)  % within Claims in last 5  years  $100,000  $249,999  Count  % within Annual Budget  (grouped)  % within Claims in last 5  years  $250,000  $499,999  Count  % within Annual Budget  (grouped)  % within Claims in last 5  years  $500,000  $999,999  Count  % within Annual Budget  (grouped)  % within Claims in last 5  years  More than $1,000,000 Count  % within Annual Budget  (grouped)  % within Claims in last 5  years  Total  Count  % within Annual Budget  (grouped)  % within Claims in last 5  years  Annual Budget (grouped)  $0  $49,999 

Claims in last 5 years  Yes  3  2.6%  1.8%  3  2.8%  1.8%  22  15.6%  13.2%  17  14.0%  10.2%  22  19.0%  13.2%  100  38.2%  59.9%  167  19.4%  100.0%  No  111  97.4%  16.0%  103  97.2%  14.9%  119  84.4%  17.2%  104  86.0%  15.0%  94  81.0%  13.6%  162  61.8%  23.4%  693  80.6%  100.0%  Total  114  100.0%  13.3%  106  100.0%  12.3%  141  100.0%  16.4%  121  100.0%  14.1%  116  100.0%  13.5%  262  100.0%  30.5%  860  100.0%  100.0% 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                98 

      Table L2b. ChiSquare Tests      Value 

df 

Asymp. Sig. (2 sided) 

Pearson ChiSquare  1.016E2  5  .000  Likelihood Ratio  110.180  5  .000  LinearbyLinear  86.866  1  .000  Association  N of Valid Cases  860        Table L3a. Annual Budget  Changes in Premium Costs for Previous 2 Years          Changes in Premium Costs previous 2 years        Some  increased,  No  some  Change  Increased Decreased  decreased Total  45  34  37.8%  8  8.9%  3  3.3%  90  100.0%

Annual Budget  (grouped) 

$0  $49,999 

Count 

% within Annual  50.0%  Budget (grouped)  % within Changes  in Premium Costs  17.0%  previous 2 years  $50,000   $99,999  Count  33  % within Annual  36.7%  Budget (grouped)  % within Changes  in Premium Costs  12.5%  previous 2 years  $100,000   $249,999  Count  56  % within Annual  46.3%  Budget (grouped)  % within Changes  in Premium Costs  21.2%  previous 2 years  $250,000   $499,999  Count  40  % within Annual  38.1%  Budget (grouped) 

10.0%  43  47.8% 

11.1%  10  11.1% 

4.8%  4  4.4% 

12.2%  90  100.0%

12.6%  51  42.1% 

13.9%  8  6.6% 

6.5%  6  5.0% 

12.2%  121  100.0%

15.0%  46  43.8% 

11.1%  14  13.3% 

9.7%  5  4.8% 

16.4%  105  100.0%

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                99 

% within Changes  in Premium Costs  15.2%  previous 2 years  $500,000   $999,999  Count  37  % within Annual  35.6%  Budget (grouped)  % within Changes  in Premium Costs  14.0%  previous 2 years  More than  $1,000,000  Count  53  % within Annual  23.2%  Budget (grouped)  % within Changes  in Premium Costs  20.1%  previous 2 years  Total  Count  264  % within Annual  35.8%  Budget (grouped) 

13.5%  53  51.0%  15.6%  113  49.6% 

19.4%  7  6.7%  9.7%  25  11.0% 

8.1%  7  6.7%  11.3%  37  16.2% 

14.2%  104  100.0% 14.1%  228  100.0%

33.2%  340  46.1% 

34.7%  72  9.8% 

59.7%  62  8.4% 

30.9%  738  100.0%

% within Changes  in Premium Costs  100.0%  100.0%  100.0%  previous 2 years    Table L3b. ChiSquare Tests      Value 

100.0% 

100.0%

df 

Asymp. Sig. (2 sided) 

Pearson ChiSquare  50.995a  15  .000  Likelihood Ratio  49.930  15  .000  LinearbyLinear  31.336  1  .000  Association  N of Valid Cases  738        Table L4a. Organizational Size by Organizational Characteristics (Significant Results Only)        N  Mean  Std. Deviation      Total number of policies  1  9 volunteers  10  19 volunteers  20  29 volunteers  30  39 volunteers  40  49 volunteers  50  74 volunteers  57  125  100  108  57  108  5.9825  5.6720  5.9400  5.8241  6.6667  6.7130  3.40950  3.05270  3.53859  3.45824  3.40867  3.44259 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                100 

75  99 volunteers  100  149 volunteers  More than 150 volunteers  Total  Total number of agents  1  9 volunteers  10  19 volunteers  20  29 volunteers  30  39 volunteers  40  49 volunteers  50  74 volunteers  75  99 volunteers  100  149 volunteers  More than 150 volunteers  Total  Cost of Insurance  1  9 volunteers  10  19 volunteers  20  29 volunteers  30  39 volunteers  40  49 volunteers  50  74 volunteers  75  99 volunteers  100  149 volunteers  More than 150 volunteers  Total    Table L4b. Anova Significance Tests        Within Groups  Total  Within Groups  Total  Cost of Insurance  Within Groups  Total     

58  171  84  868  55  122  95  103  54  103  54  157  75  818  46  110  89  86  47  93  51  134  66  722 

6.5517  6.6550  8.2738  6.4412  1.0545  1.1148  1.2000  1.2524  1.0741  1.2039  1.3148  1.2102  1.3600  1.2005  10407.6087  6784.0909  8890.4494  9883.7209  12234.0426  8602.1505  11004.9020  14570.8955  24640.1515  11608.3795 

3.55001  3.06464  3.41630  3.39312  .22918  .34490  .47490  .57255  .26435  .49228  .60887  .51927  .60716  .48870  14308.24924  9502.32210  11161.96330  13838.12390  14115.53687  11774.96403  14324.41013  16599.48398  19699.38152  14763.48237 

Sum of Squares df  8  859  867  8  809  817  8  713  721  9528.291  9982.003  189.281  195.120  1.403E11  1.571E11 

Mean Square  F  56.714  11.092    .730  .234    2.100E9  1.968E8    5.113      3.120      10.670     

Sig.  .000      .002      .000     

Total number of policies  Between Groups  453.713 

Total number of agents  Between Groups  5.839 

Between Groups  1.680E10 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                101 

Table L5a. Number of Volunteers  Claims in the previous 5 years            Number of volunteers  (grouped)    1  9 volunteers    Count  % within Number of  volunteers (grouped) 

Claims in last 5 years  Yes  10  18.2%  No  45  81.8%  6.8%  106  87.6%  16.0%  88  90.7%  13.3%  89  85.6%  13.4%  41  74.5%  6.2%  84  81.6%  12.7%  44  78.6%  6.6%  116  Total  55  100.0%  6.6%  121  100.0%  14.6%  97  100.0%  11.7%  104  100.0%  12.5%  55  100.0%  6.6%  103  100.0%  12.4%  56  100.0%  6.7%  163 

% within Claims in last 5  6.0%  years  10  19 volunteers  Count  % within Number of  volunteers (grouped)  15  12.4% 

% within Claims in last 5  8.9%  years  20  29 volunteers  Count  % within Number of  volunteers (grouped)  9  9.3% 

% within Claims in last 5  5.4%  years  30  39 volunteers  Count  % within Number of  volunteers (grouped)  15  14.4% 

% within Claims in last 5  8.9%  years  40  49 volunteers  Count  % within Number of  volunteers (grouped)  14  25.5% 

% within Claims in last 5  8.3%  years  50  74 volunteers  Count  % within Number of  volunteers (grouped)  19  18.4% 

% within Claims in last 5  11.3%  years  75  99 volunteers  Count  % within Number of  volunteers (grouped)  12  21.4% 

% within Claims in last 5  7.1%  years  100  149 volunteers  Count  47 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                102 

% within Number of  volunteers (grouped) 

28.8% 

71.2%  17.5%  49  64.5%  7.4%  662  79.8%  100.0% 

100.0%  19.6%  76  100.0%  9.2%  830  100.0%  100.0% 

% within Claims in last 5  28.0%  years  More than 150  volunteers  Count  % within Number of  volunteers (grouped)  27  35.5% 

% within Claims in last 5  16.1%  years  Total  Count  % within Number of  volunteers (grouped)  168  20.2% 

% within Claims in last 5  100.0%  years    Table L5b. ChiSquare Tests      Value 

df 

Asymp. Sig. (2 sided) 

Pearson ChiSquare  33.793a  8  .000  Likelihood Ratio  33.795  8  .000  LinearbyLinear  27.263  1  .000  Association  N of Valid Cases  830        Table L6a. Number of Volunteers  Difficulty Getting Insurance in the Previous 2 Years          Difficulty getting insurance (past  two years)        Count  Yes  2  No  53  96.4%  Total  55  100.0%  Number of volunteers  1  9 volunteers  (grouped) 

% within Number of  3.6%  volunteers (grouped)  % within Difficulty  getting insurance  (past two years)  4.5%  10 

6.7%  114  91.9% 

6.6%  124  100.0% 

10  19 volunteers 

Count 

% within Number of  8.1%  volunteers (grouped)  % within Difficulty  getting insurance  (past two years)  22.7% 

14.4% 

14.8% 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                103 

20  29 volunteers 

Count 

6 

91  93.8% 

97  100.0% 

% within Number of  6.2%  volunteers (grouped)  % within Difficulty  getting insurance  (past two years)  30  39 volunteers  Count  13.6%  4 

11.5%  102  96.2% 

11.6%  106  100.0% 

% within Number of  3.8%  volunteers (grouped)  % within Difficulty  getting insurance  (past two years)  40  49 volunteers  Count  9.1%  6 

12.8%  50  89.3% 

12.6%  56  100.0% 

% within Number of  10.7%  volunteers (grouped)  % within Difficulty  getting insurance  (past two years)  50  74 volunteers  Count  13.6%  7 

6.3%  96  93.2% 

6.7%  103  100.0% 

% within Number of  6.8%  volunteers (grouped)  % within Difficulty  getting insurance  (past two years)  75  99 volunteers  Count  15.9%  0 

12.1%  56  100.0% 

12.3%  56  100.0% 

% within Number of  .0%  volunteers (grouped)  % within Difficulty  getting insurance  (past two years)  100  149 volunteers  Count  .0%  0 

7.1%  164  100.0% 

6.7%  164  100.0% 

% within Number of  .0%  volunteers (grouped)  % within Difficulty  getting insurance  (past two years)  More than 150  volunteers  Count  .0%  9 

20.7%  68  88.3% 

19.6%  77  100.0% 

% within Number of  11.7%  volunteers (grouped)  % within Difficulty  getting insurance  (past two years)  20.5% 

8.6% 

9.2% 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                104 

Total 

Count 

44 

794  94.7% 

838  100.0% 

% within Number of  5.3%  volunteers (grouped)  % within Difficulty  getting insurance  (past two years)    Table L6b. ChiSquare Tests      Value  100.0% 

100.0% 

100.0% 

df 

Asymp. Sig. (2 sided) 

Pearson ChiSquare  25.358a  8  .001  Likelihood Ratio  34.345  8  .000  LinearbyLinear  .008  1  .931  Association  N of Valid Cases  838        Table L7a. Organizational Size by Organizational Characteristics (Significant Results Only)        N  Mean  Std. Deviation      Total number of policies  No paid staff  1 employee  2  4 employees  5  9 employees  10  19 employees  20  39 employees  40  99 employees  100  494 employees  500  10000 Employees  Total  Total number of agents  No paid staff  1 employee  2  4 employees  5  9 employees  10  19 employees  20  39 employees  40  99 employees  100  494 employees  500  10000 Employees  139  104  176  127  86  115  81  93  21  942  134  100  172  124  78  106  74  80  15  3.3309  5.1923  5.7330  6.1417  6.8605  7.5565  8.7284  9.1720  9.7143  6.3854  1.1045  1.0800  1.1105  1.2339  1.1795  1.2453  1.3243  1.3875  1.4000  2.00502  2.66978  2.95727  2.88049  2.97900  2.89946  3.09440  3.35450  3.56571  3.37792  .33061  .30748  .34961  .47897  .41852  .53115  .59927  .72030  .91026 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                105 

Total  Cost of Insurance  No paid staff  1 employee  2  4 employees  5  9 employees  10  19 employees  20  39 employees  40  99 employees  100  494 employees  500  10000 Employees  Total 

883  127  92  158  109  75  91  59  59  15  785 

1.1937  2283.4646  4279.8913  6257.9114  8486.2385  9866.6667  14931.3187  22648.3051  37055.0847  48333.3333  11393.3121 

.48079  2515.30281  4094.66324  8858.51370  11012.24250  10214.28628  11940.77200  16065.06964  15098.03223  6454.97224  14527.37025 

  Table L7b. Organizational Status and Location by Organizational Characteristics (Significant Results  Only)        Sum of Squares df  Mean Square  F  Sig.  Total number of policies  Between Groups  3104.023  Within Groups  Total  Within Groups  Total  Cost of Insurance  Within Groups  Total  7633.094  10737.118  194.930  203.884  7.707E10  1.655E11  8  933  941  8  874  882  8  776  784  388.003  8.181    1.119  .223    1.105E10  9.931E7    47.426      5.019      111.255      .000      .000      .000     

Total number of agents  Between Groups  8.955 

Between Groups  8.839E10 

    Table L8a. Number of Employees  Reasons for Increase            Number of  Employees  (recoded)    No paid staff    Count 

Reasons for increase (recoded)  Internal  reasons  8  External  reasons  20  58.8%  Don't  know  6  17.6%  Total  34  100.0%

% within Number of  Employees  23.5%  (recoded)  % within Reasons  for increase  (recoded)  1 employee  Count  7.1%  11 

15.3%  17 

13.0%  4 

11.7%  32 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                106 

% within Number of  Employees  34.4%  (recoded)  % within Reasons  for increase  (recoded)  2  4 employees  Count  9.7%  14 

53.1% 

12.5% 

100.0%

13.0%  34  52.3% 

8.7%  17  26.2% 

11.0%  65  100.0%

% within Number of  Employees  21.5%  (recoded)  % within Reasons  for increase  (recoded)  5  9 employees  Count  12.4%  24 

26.0%  12  30.0% 

37.0%  4  10.0% 

22.4%  40  100.0%

% within Number of  Employees  60.0%  (recoded)  % within Reasons  for increase  (recoded)  10  19 employees  Count  21.2%  8 

9.2%  11  47.8% 

8.7%  4  17.4% 

13.8%  23  100.0%

% within Number of  Employees  34.8%  (recoded)  % within Reasons  for increase  (recoded)  20  39 employees  Count  7.1%  21 

8.4%  12  31.6% 

8.7%  5  13.2% 

7.9%  38  100.0%

% within Number of  Employees  55.3%  (recoded)  % within Reasons  for increase  (recoded)  40  99 employees  Count  18.6%  14 

9.2%  11  37.9% 

10.9%  4  13.8% 

13.1%  29  100.0%

% within Number of  Employees  48.3%  (recoded)  % within Reasons  for increase  (recoded)  100  494  Count  12.4%  13 

8.4%  11 

8.7%  2 

10.0%  26 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                107 

% within Number of  Employees  50.0%  (recoded)  % within Reasons  for increase  (recoded)  500  10000  Employees  Count  11.5%  0 

42.3% 

7.7% 

100.0%

8.4%  3  100.0% 

4.3%  0  .0% 

9.0%  3  100.0%

% within Number of  Employees  .0%  (recoded)  % within Reasons  for increase  (recoded)  .0%  113 

2.3%  131  45.2% 

.0%  46  15.9% 

1.0%  290  100.0%

Total 

Count 

% within Number of  Employees  39.0%  (recoded)  % within Reasons  for increase  (recoded)        Table L8b. ChiSquare Tests      Value  100.0% 

100.0% 

100.0% 

100.0%

df 

Asymp. Sig. (2 sided) 

Pearson ChiSquare  33.133a  16  .007  Likelihood Ratio  34.545  16  .005  LinearbyLinear  .258  1  .611  Association  N of Valid Cases  290        Table L9a. Number of Employees  Claims in the Previous 5 Years            Number of Employees  (recoded)    No paid staff    Count  % within Number of  Employees (recoded) 

Claims in last 5 years  Yes  7  5.2%  No  128  94.8%  17.6%  95  Total  135  100.0%  15.0%  100 

% within Claims in last 5  4.1%  years  1 employee  Count  5 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                108 

% within Number of  Employees (recoded) 

5.0% 

95.0%  13.1%  154  88.0%  21.2%  110  88.0%  15.1%  63  77.8%  8.7%  84  77.8%  11.6%  55  72.4%  7.6%  34  41.5%  4.7%  4  25.0%  .6%  727 

100.0%  11.1%  175  100.0%  19.5%  125  100.0%  13.9%  81  100.0%  9.0%  108  100.0%  12.0%  76  100.0%  8.5%  82  100.0%  9.1%  16  100.0%  1.8%  898 

% within Claims in last 5  2.9%  years  2  4 employees  Count  % within Number of  Employees (recoded)  21  12.0% 

% within Claims in last 5  12.3%  years  5  9 employees  Count  % within Number of  Employees (recoded)  15  12.0% 

% within Claims in last 5  8.8%  years  10  19 employees  Count  % within Number of  Employees (recoded)  18  22.2% 

% within Claims in last 5  10.5%  years  20  39 employees  Count  % within Number of  Employees (recoded)  24  22.2% 

% within Claims in last 5  14.0%  years  40  99 employees  Count  % within Number of  Employees (recoded)  21  27.6% 

% within Claims in last 5  12.3%  years  100  494 employees  Count  % within Number of  Employees (recoded)  48  58.5% 

% within Claims in last 5  28.1%  years  500  10000 Employees Count  % within Number of  Employees (recoded)  12  75.0% 

% within Claims in last 5  7.0%  years  Total  Count  171 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                109 

% within Number of  Employees (recoded) 

19.0% 

81.0%  100.0% 

100.0%  100.0% 

% within Claims in last 5  100.0%  years      Table L9b. ChiSquare Tests      Value 

df 

Asymp. Sig. (2 sided) 

Pearson ChiSquare  1.596E2  8  .000  Likelihood Ratio  140.345  8  .000  LinearbyLinear  91.876  1  .000  Association  N of Valid Cases  898        Table L10a. Number of Employees  Changes in premium Costs for the Previous 2 Years          Changes in Premium Costs previous 2 years        Some  increased,  No  some  Change  Increased Decreased  decreased Total  57  37  34.3%  9  8.3%  5  4.6%  108  100.0%

Number of  Employees  (recoded) 

No paid staff 

Count 

% within Number  of Employees  52.8%  (recoded)  % within Changes  in Premium Costs  20.8%  previous 2 years  1 employee  Count  32  % within Number  of Employees  39.0%  (recoded)  % within Changes  in Premium Costs  11.7%  previous 2 years  2  4 employees  Count  68  % within Number  of Employees  44.4%  (recoded)  % within Changes  in Premium Costs  24.8%  previous 2 years 

10.8%  36  43.9% 

12.9%  11  13.4% 

7.9%  3  3.7% 

14.4%  82  100.0%

10.5%  74  48.4% 

15.7%  7  4.6% 

4.8%  4  2.6% 

10.9%  153  100.0%

21.6% 

10.0% 

6.3% 

20.4% 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                110 

5  9 employees  Count 

39 

47  45.6% 

12  11.7% 

5  4.9% 

103  100.0%

% within Number  of Employees  37.9%  (recoded)  % within Changes  in Premium Costs  14.2%  previous 2 years  10  19  employees  Count  26  % within Number  of Employees  37.1%  (recoded)  % within Changes  in Premium Costs  9.5%  previous 2 years  20  39  employees  Count  23  % within Number  of Employees  24.2%  (recoded)  % within Changes  in Premium Costs  8.4%  previous 2 years  40  99  employees  Count  14  % within Number  of Employees  23.7%  (recoded)  % within Changes  in Premium Costs  5.1%  previous 2 years  100  494  employees  Count  12  % within Number  of Employees  19.0%  (recoded)  % within Changes  in Premium Costs  4.4%  previous 2 years  500  10000  Employees  Count  3  % within Number  of Employees  18.8%  (recoded)  % within Changes  in Premium Costs  1.1%  previous 2 years  Total  Count  274 

13.7%  30  42.9% 

17.1%  7  10.0% 

7.9%  7  10.0% 

13.8%  70  100.0%

8.8%  51  53.7% 

10.0%  9  9.5% 

11.1%  12  12.6% 

9.3%  95  100.0%

14.9%  32  54.2% 

12.9%  3  5.1% 

19.0%  10  16.9% 

12.7%  59  100.0%

9.4%  30  47.6% 

4.3%  8  12.7% 

15.9%  13  20.6% 

7.9%  63  100.0%

8.8%  5  31.2% 

11.4%  4  25.0% 

20.6%  4  25.0% 

8.4%  16  100.0%

1.5%  342 

5.7%  70 

6.3%  63 

2.1%  749 

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                111 

% within Number  of Employees  36.6%  (recoded) 

45.7% 

9.3% 

8.4% 

100.0%

% within Changes  in Premium Costs  100.0%  100.0%  100.0%  previous 2 years        Table L10b. ChiSquare Tests      Value  Pearson ChiSquare  Likelihood Ratio  LinearbyLinear  Association  N of Valid Cases                                                            77.883   75.841  23.292  749 
a

100.0% 

100.0%

df  24  24  1   

Asymp. Sig. (2 sided)  .000  .000  .000   

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                112 

Appendix M. Organizations Participating in Focus Group Meetings 
  London Focus Group (West Region)    Thames Talbot Land Trust  London and Area Association for Volunteer Administration  United Way  London Community Health    Peterborough Focus Group (East Region)    United Way  Down Syndrome Association  Community Counseling and Resource Center  Community Care Peterborough    Timmins Focus Group (North Region)    United Way  Community Home Support  Seizure and Brain Injury Centre  Volunteer Timmins    Ottawa Interview (East Region)    Volunteer Center of Ottawa    Hamilton Focus Group (West Region)     Volunteer Hamilton  Community Services of the City of Hamilton  Community Safety  Catholic Diocese of Hamilton  Boy Scouts Hamilton Region    Niagara Focus Group (West Region)    Information Niagara  West Niagara Second Stage Housing & Counseling Inc.  Niagara Ina Grafton Gage Village  Heart Niagara  Employment Help Centre  Opportunities Niagara    Distress Centre Niagara  WARM    
U U U U U U

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                113 

Toronto (Toronto Region)    Insurance Bureau of Canada  Kids Help Phone, National Office  Canadian Anesthesiologists' Society  Fred Victor Centre Toronto  University of CapeTown Foundation  Volunteer Lawyers Service  COSTI Immigrant Services  CORE  Homeward  Golf Association of Ontario  Ontario Dental Hygienists' Association  Villa Colombo Services for Seniors  LEAF  Women's Legal Education and Action Fund   danceOREMUSdanse  Momiji Health Care Society  Ontario Women's Health Network & Ontario Prevention Clearinghouse (Health Nexus).                                 
U

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                114 

Appendix N. Interview Protocol for Focus Groups 
    Introductory Remarks   Thanks for taking time to come   CVSS/ Project/ Survey & Web report to come   Consent forms, mailing addresses for compensation, and recording permission   Focus of conversation will be on their concerns about insurance coverage and rates, strategies for  resolving their insurance problems and their risk management policies and practices.    Organizational Background   As briefly as possible, tell me a little bit about your organization, what it does, who it serves, how  old it is, how many employees and volunteers    Insurance Questions   Does your organization have insurance?   If yes, what major kinds   If no, why not   Do you have any particular concerns about your insurance coverage?   prompt: high rates, unavailability, insufficient coverage   What have you done about these problems/concerns?   prompt: internal resolutions  cutting programs people etc.          external resolutions  lobbying gov't, forming coalitions etc.    Risk Management Questions   When I mention risk management, what comes into your mind?   Don't prompt here. Give them a chance to think about it   Does your organization have risk management policies?   How are they implemented?   What HR policies, financial control mechanisms, board policies have you in place?   Would you like to know more about risk management?   What is the best way to get more information on risk management?   prompt: webbased information, workshops, insurance experts, organizational risk audits   Would you be willing to attend Risk Management Workshops?   What, if any, government/industry/sector strategies should be taken?    Closing Remarks   Is there anything else about insurance and risk management that you would like to tell us?   Thanks again for your time.           

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                115 

Appendix O: Research Methodology    Literature Review    The search for literature was conducted with a view to get a comprehensive account of all the information  and empirical evidence available on the issue of liability and risk management in general and with respect  to nonprofits in particular. For a broader environmental scan, the search was expanded to sources from  any country or province. Academic and popular references were drawn upon, from international,  Canadian and Ontario sources. Prior studies conducted in other provinces on insurance in the nonprofit  sector were especially useful. A summary of the literature review was provided in an interim report to the  OVP steering committee.    The literature review was conducted with the help of a systematic search strategy as follows: initially 43  key words were identified based on the concepts being studied and several combinations of keywords  were developed using Boolean operators. Later, we were able to determine several other keywords and  combinations which expanded our search. We included a number of online databases and several article  indices. Approximately 300 sources were reviewed, including several articles, research reports, books,  newsletters, websites, government and insurance company reports. These references were read and the  information in each source entered in an online RefWorks database in order to share comments with the  team members on the relevance and importance of the information for the study. A targeted search was  also conducted to identify legal cases involving Ontario nonprofit organizations.    Two researchers completed a search of 200 Ontario nonprofit websites to test what kind of mention was  made of insurance and/or risk. Using the website list compiled in the sampling process, one researcher  looked at the websites of 100 organizations, noting whether or not they made reference in any way to  insurance or risk management. Almost none made any reference whatsoever to these topics. The other  researcher conducted keyword web searches. Using the Google search engine, and searching only pages  from Canada, she reviewed the first 100 hits for keywords [nonprofit + risk management + Ontario], and  [nonprofit + insurance + Ontario]. The `insurance' results included about 420,000 hits with some  combination of the keywords. In the first 100 sites listed, 38 were nonprofit organization sites with  references to insurance. Another 50 were sites hosted by nonprofits, government, legal firms, or the  insurance industry with information on insurance for nonprofit audiences. The other 12 were sites less  relevant to the study, such as duplicates or board member biographies mentioning past involvement in  nonprofits and insurance. The `risk management' results included about 349,000 hits with some  combination of the keywords. In the first 100 sites listed, 28 were nonprofit organization sites with  references to risk management. Another 47 were sites hosted by nonprofits, government, legal firms, or  the insurance industry with information on and training opportunities in risk management for nonprofit  audiences. The other 25 were sites less relevant to the study, mainly board member biographies. Both  researchers `bookmarked' websites which had extensive information on these issues for further reference.     Quantitative research     Instrument Design    A prior largescale survey (Meinhard, 2006) of the impact of higher insurance premiums on nonprofit  organizations served as a starting point in the design of the current questionnaire. A draft version was  then circulated to experts and members of the Ontario Volunteer Partnership (OVP) steering committee.  Comments and suggestions from committee members and other experts were incorporated into a  subsequent draft of the questionnaire. The questionnaire and introductory text were migrated into Survey  Monkey (an online survey host program) and the functionality of the online survey was tested. This draft 
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                116 

was piloted, online, with four nonprofit agencies. Their comments led to the addition of a question and  some technical changes with the survey layout.      Scripts for initial contact in recruiting participants were developed for: focus group participants; key  informant interviews; websurvey responses; and phone interviews. Letters with more detailed  information on the project, details on how to participate, and tailored consent agreements were also  written for each set of participants. Separate consent forms and interview protocols for each of these data  collection modes were also developed. Associations of nonprofit organizations and regional umbrella  organizations were subsequently approached in a similar manner to distribute invitations for the web  survey and focus group meetings (respectively).    The research design, and all instruments, letters of recruitment and letters of consent were submitted to  Ryerson Ethics Board and were subsequently approved. Key informant interviews were conducted in order  to pilot questions and test for regional issues. The interviews were oneonone between a member of the  CVSS research team and a senior representative from: (a) an environmental organization, (b) an ethnic  social services organization, and (c) an organization serving other voluntary organizations.    Sampling    The Ontario report of the NSNVO survey (Scott, Tsoukalas, Roberts & Lasby, 2006) provided the baseline  information on which we built our sampling framework: Types of nonprofit organizations, charitable  status, and region of Ontario.    Sampling techniques were established for phone, website, focus group and key informant data sets. Each  of these considered the balance of charitable and noncharitable nonprofit organizations across the  province and the need to weight the sample to try and reflect the distribution and density of different  types of organizations across all subsectors and geographical regions. From previous work, it was clear  that smaller organizations were more reluctant to do surveys, or were often overlooked in sampling. We  made a special effort to reach those organizations through telephone solicitation. Two hundred  organizations were contacted directly by phone.    The publicly accessible online Revenue Canada searchable database of charities was utilized with relative  ease to locate and sample 60% of organizations to be contacted (although it was labourintensive). This  database allows one to search for organizations both according to type of organization and postal code  region, and includes links to tax information returns for many of the organizations listed. Aiming to sample  7500 organizations altogether, we tried to approximate their distribution across the five postal code  regions of Ontario: 24% M; 25% L; 19% K; 23% N; and 9% P. Of these 7500 organizations, 5019 would  ideally be charitable organizations, and 2481 would be noncharitable nonprofits. Conducting unique  searches for each subsector (e.g. welfare organizations) within each of these regions, we created lists of all  relevant organizations. We then selected every second organization, thereby securing our weighted  sample.    The Revenue Canada information returns often include contact information such as addresses and  telephone numbers, and useful details about, for example, an organization's budget, web address, or  programming. This was an invaluable resource for us, but resulted in few email addresses and fewer  websites. In order to secure contact information for the sample list we therefore had to look to any  available "211" lists, and most often, resort to a search on the Google metasearch engine. This alone took  much more time than had originally been scheduled for the sampling process. The noncharitable sample  set was even more difficult to construct.   
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                117 

To sample the approximately 40 percent of all nonprofits not incorporated as charities, we had anticipated  receiving a list from the Ministry of Government Services. This was not possible, and we again had to  develop our own sampling list from web searches and lists available from umbrella voluntary organizations  and relevant associations. The construction of this list, as with the charitable list, considered the  distribution of organizations by type and across postal regions, but was much more labourintensive and  added considerably to our project expenses and timeline.     A new list of nonprofit organizations that were not registered charities was generated from a search of  databases limited to Associations Canada, Canadian Environmental Directory, Canadian Almanac &  Directory, and the Directory of Libraries in Canada.     Web Survey    Respondents were invited by letter to link to a Survey Monkey website to complete the questionnaire. As  an incentive for devoting time and completing the survey, a prize draw was held for distribution of 3 prizes  worth $150 each.    Letters of invitation to participate in the survey were sent to 8556 organizations. Just under ten percent of  them were undeliverable, making the final outreach, including the 200 phone calls, to be 7592  organizations. Reminders were sent about 3 weeks after the initial request. 1294 responses were recorded  on the Survey Monkey questionnaire, resulting in a 17% response rate. This is within the 10% to 40% rate  generally recorded for online surveys solicited through email. This rate should be considered good given  the specific knowledge that was required to complete the questionnaire. In most cases, the invitation e mails were not sent to specific individuals; rather they were sent to the organization's general address.  There is no way of knowing whether the letters were forwarded to the most appropriate individual. The  questionnaire completion rate however, was very high, indicating that most of the organizations that  responded were prepared with the data. Out of the 1294 questionnaires commenced, 1184, or 91% were  completed. The lowest response rate for any question was 79%.     Telephone Interviews    Assuming that the smallest organizations might not have email access, we were concerned to ensure that  organizations without an email or web presence were not left out of our sample. Adapting the sampling  matrices used previously, a phone list was compiled starting with the list of charities created for the web  survey, and for which contact information had otherwise been collected. Organizations for which no email  was found left gaps in the sample list. These were then filled in by finding the phone number. Although it  was anticipated that a number of nonprofits would not yet have routine access to email, when calling  contacts for whom no email address had been found online, all of the 200 respondents contacted actually  opted to have the survey information emailed to them so they could participate online rather than  conduct a phone interview.    Qualitative research    Invitations to focus groups outside of Toronto were arranged by a representative from a local volunteer  centre or United Way. We used these gateway organizations because of their greater familiarity with the  organizations in their region. They were asked to make sure that the group they called together would  represent a balance from the different nonprofit subsectors. All focus groups included participants from at  least three different nonprofit subsectors, but most were represented by more than three. For the  Toronto focus groups, an email list of 2345 Toronto area organizations was compiled.  From that a list of  twentynine organizations, balanced for organizational mandate, was compiled.  The smallest group 
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                118 

consisted of four organizational representatives, and the largest consisted of 10, with an average of 67 for  the others. In all there were fortythree participants.  In appreciation of their willingness and cooperation,  a $25 donation was sent to each participant's organization.     An interviewer and notetaker were present for four of the seven focus groups, while the remaining three  groups had only an interviewer, who also took notes. The focus group discussions were recorded and the  recordings were content analyzed and compared with the notes taken during the interviews. Although an  interview protocol (please refer to Appendix N) guided the content and pace of the focus group  discussions, the interviewers allowed the discussions to flow in accordance with the needs of the  participants. Thus, of the ten themes identified by the content analysis, five arose in the discussions  unprompted by the interviewers:     Prompted:   Insurance and risk management as low organizational priorities   The role of insurance brokers   Comments about insurance companies   Comments about the government   Organizational risks not related to insurance.    Unprompted:     Concerns about insurance coverage   Repercussions of having poor or no insurance coverage   Risk management   Advocacy   Suggestions and recommendations.    

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                119 

References 
  Alberta Superintendent of Insurance.(2007). Insurance Coverages for the Alberta Voluntary Sector: A  survey of insurers licensed to undertake property & liability insurance in Alberta. Office of the  Superintendent of Insurance.  http://www.volunteeralberta.ab.ca/uploaded_files/InsuranceCoveragesReportFinalMay15Super.pdf  Alberta Voluntary Sector Insurance Council.(2006). Insurance Toolkit for the Voluntary sector.  http://www.ibc.ca/en/Business_Insurance/documents/Alberta_Voluntary/Insurance_Toolkit_online.pdf  Aldrich, H.(1979). Organizations and Environments. Englewood Cliffs NJ: PrenticeHall.  Aldrich, H. & Ruef, M.(2006). Organizations Evolving, Second Edition. London: Sage Publications.  Alexander Holburn Beaudoin & Lang, LLP.(2006). Supreme Court confirms there is no Doctrine of  Charitable Immunity. Corporate and Commercial Practice eNews.  http://www.ahbl.ca/files/publications/commercial_litigation/Corporate_Commercial_ENews_Feb_2.pdf  Algie, J. and Adams, I.(April 15, 2005). Trails at Risk: Fallout from lawsuit could make trail access too risky  and expensive. Free Press, pp. A1.  Alliance for Nonprofit Management.( 2007). Frequently Asked Questions. Accessed July 9, 2007.   http://www.allianceonline.org/FAQ 
HU U

Bazley v. Children's Foundation.(1999). http://scc.lexum.umontreal.ca/en/1999/1999rcs2534/1999rcs2 534.pdf.  Bertrand, N., & Brown, L.(2005). Good Practices in Risk Management. Toronto, Ontario: Imagine Canada.   Bugg, G. & Dallhoff, S.(2006). First National Study of Board Practices in the Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector.  Ottawa: Strategic Leverage Partners, Inc.  Bustard, R.(2004). Insurance Liability in the Voluntary Sector: A threat to survival?  http://www.cvsrd.org/eng/piaf/piaf_summary_2004.pdf 
H

Charity Commission, UK.(2007). Charities and Risk Management. http://www.charity commission.gov.uk/investigations/charrisk.asp#1  Charity Governance Blogs.(2005).  charitygovernance.blogs.com/charity_governance/2005/03/volunteer_prote.html  Eakin, L.(2006). Advancing the Nonprofit Sector in Ontario,October 2006, 27.  http://www.tidescanada.com/cms/File/Advancing_Nonprofit.pdf  Gaskin, Katharine.(2006). On the Safe Side: Risk, risk management and volunteering. London: Volunteering  England and the Institute of Volunteering Research. http://www.volunteering.org.uk     Goldberg, M.(2002). Protecting Volunteers and Nonprofit Organizations: A study on risk management and  liability insurance of voluntary organizations in British Columbia. From  http://www.ucscoop.com/uploads/images/5/risk_management_final_report_Apr_402.pdf 
HU U

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                120 

Graff, L.L.(2003). Better Safe... Risk management in volunteer programs and community service. Ontario:  Linda Graff and Associates.  Griffith, M. & Wilding, K. & Jochum, L.(2005). Voluntary Sector Strategic Analysis. London: NCVO.  Hall, M.H., McKeown, L. & Roberts, K.(2001). Caring Canadians, Involved Canadians: Highlights from the  2000 national survey of giving, volunteering and participating. Catalogue No. 71542XIE. Ottawa:  Statistics Canada. http://www.givingandvolunteering.ca/pdf/n2000hrca.pdf. 
H HU

Hannan. M. & Freeman, J.(1977). The population ecology of organizations. American Journal of Sociology,  82(5), pp. 929964.  Herman, M. L.(2002). Risk management in the nonprofit sector. Risk Management, 49(6), 26.   Herman, M. L. & Jackson P. M.(2004). No Surprises: Harmonizing risk and reward in volunteer  management. Nonprofit Risk Management Centre: Washington DC:  Herman, M., Head, G., Fogarty, T. & Jackson, P.(2004). Managing Risk in Nonprofit Organizations: A  comprehensive guide. John Wiley and Sons.   Hodgson, G., & Brakel, H.(2004). The Cycle of Insurance Premiums: Better times ahead? Retrieved from  http://www.edc.ca/english/docs/08_04_the_insurance_cycle_e.pdf 
HU U

Hunter, J. Robert; and Doroshow, Joanne.(2002). Premium deceit : the failure of "tort reform" to cut  insurance prices. New York: Center for Justice and Democracy.  http://64.233.167.104/custom?q=cache:3zBbCtvJ8ogJ:www.centerjd.org/PremiumDeceit%2520.pdf+hunt er&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=15&client=googlecoopnp    Insurance Bureau of Canada.(2005). Facts of the general insurance industry in Canada. From  http://www.ibc.ca/en/need_more_info/documents/factsbook2005.pdf.http://www.ibc.ca/en/need_more _info/documents/factsbook2006.pdf 
H H

Insurance Bureau of Canada.(2007). Retrieved May 9, 2007, from  http://www.ibc.ca/en/Business_Insurance/index.asp. 
H

Insurance Bureau of Canada.. (2007). Retrieved May 9, 2007, from  http://www.ibc.ca/en/Business_Insurance/Risk_Management/index.asp. 
H H HU UH

Jacobi v. Boys' and Girls' Club of Vernon.(1999). http://scc.lexum.umontreal.ca/en/1999/1999rcs2 570/1999rcs2570.pdf. Retrieved August 15, 2007.  Landry, C.(2005). Risk and the creation of liveable cities. In What are we scared of? London: CABE Space.  Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan.(1999). Liabilities of Volunteers and Organizations in the Not forprofit Sector (Discussion paper).  Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan.(2001). Liability of Board Members of Notforprofit  Organizations (Consultation Paper). http://www.lawreformcommission.sk.ca/PaperLiabilityBoard.htm  Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan.(2003). Liability of Directors and Officers of Notfor Profit  Organization (Consultation Paper). http://www.lawreformcommission.sk.ca/PaperLiabilityBoard.htm 
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                121 

Luchuk, L.C.(Oct. 24, 2005). Insurance for the nonprofit sector: Is the glass half full or half empty? Charity  Village Newsweek. Retrieved from www.charityvillage.com/cv/archive/acov/acov05/acov0533.html, July  9, 2007.  MacLeod, G.(2005). Approaches to the Insurance Dilemma: A first cut for the voluntary sector. Alberta:  Muttart Foundation.  McMullen, K. & Schellenberg, G.(2002). Mapping the Nonprofit Sector. CPRN Research Series on Human  Resources in the Nonprofit Sector, No.1. Ottawa: Canadian Policy Research Networks.  McMullen, K. & Schellenberg, G.(2003). Job Quality in the Nonprofit Sector. CPRN Research Series on  Human Resources in the Nonprofit Sector, No.1. Ottawa: Canadian Policy Research Networks.   Meinhard, A. (2005). Island or Iceberg?: Liability and voluntary organizations. Toronto: Imagine Canada.  Report. http://www.kdccdc.ca/attachments/easter_seals_report_island_report.pdf  Meinhard, A.(2006). Managing the Human Dimension in Nonprofit Organizations. In, Murray, V. (Ed.)  Management of Nonprofit and Charitable Organizations. Toronto: LexisNexis/Butterworths.  Meinhard, A., Foster, M. & Berger, I.(2003). The evolving relationship between Government and the  Voluntary Sector in Ontario. Paper presented at the annual conference of the Association for Research on  Nonprofit Organizations and Voluntary Action, Denver, CO.   Meinhard, A., Foster, M., Moher, L. & Fitzrandolph, S.(2005).Commercial ventures in nonprofit  organizations. In Farkas, F. (Ed.) Current Issues in Change Management: Challenges and organisational  responses. Pecs: Univ. of Pecs.  Olney, K.(2004). Managing Risk. Stanford Social Innovation Review, 2(3), 55.  Ontario Voluntary Forum.(1998). Cohesive Voice: A discussion paper on the need, issues and models for  creating a cohesive voice for the voluntary sector in Ontario.  http://www.lin.ca/resource/html/cohesive.htm, Accessed July 9, 2007.  Ontario Recreation Facilities Association Inc.(2007). User Fees, Insurance Rate Increase and Recreation  Facilities in Ontario. Newsletter of the Ontario Recreation Facilities Association Inc. Retrieved May 29,  2007 from http://www.orfa.com/pressrelease/user%20fees.pdf 
HU U

Oshinsky, J. & Dias, G.(2002). Liability of NotforProfit Organisations and Insurance Coverage for Related  Liability. International Journal of Not for Profit Law, 4 (2/3).  http://www.icnl.org/knowledge/ijnl/vol4iss2_3/art_3.htm  Protect our Volunteers.(2005). http://www.protectourvolunteers.ca/ Accessed July 9, 2007. 
H H

Public Entity Risk Institute.(2007). Myths About Nonprofit Liability and Risk Management.  http://www.riskinstitute.org/PERI/PTR/Myths+About+Nonprofit+Liability+and+Risk+Management.htm  Purdue, S.(2007). Making safety a culture, not just an initiative. Industry Week. From  http://www.industryweek.com/ReadArticle.aspx?ArticleID=13975 
H

Rice, J. J. & Prince, M. J.(2000). Changing Politics of Canadian Social Policy. Toronto: University of Toronto  Press.  
  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                122 

Scott, J.T.(1992). Voluntary Sector in Crisis: Canada's changing public philosophy of the state and its impact  on voluntary charitable organizations. Ann Arbor: University Microfilms.  Scott, Katherine; Tsoukalas, Spyridoula; Roberts; & Lasby, David (2006).Cornerstones of Community:  Highlights of the national survey of nonprofit and voluntary organizations. Catalogue no. 61533XIE.  Ottawa: Statistics Canada, Minister of Industry. http://www.statcan.ca/english/freepub/61533XIE/61 533XIE2004001.pdf 
H

Siegel, J.(2006). A Desktop Guide for Nonprofit Directors, Officers and Advisors: Avoiding trouble while  doing good. John Wiley and Sons.   Spiegel, J., Garcia, M., Bonet, M., & Yassi, A.(2006). Learning Together: A CanadaCuba research  collaboration to improve the sustainable management of environmental health risks. Canadian Journal of  Public Health, 97(1), 50.  Statistics Canada.(2004). Satellite account of nonprofit institutions and volunteering. Catalogue no.13015 XIE. Ottawa: Minister of Industry. http://www.statcan.ca/english/freepub/13015XIE/13015 XIE2004000.pdf  
H H

Stinchcombe, A.(1965). Social structure and organizations. In March, J. (ed.). Handbook of Organizations.  Chicago, IL: Rand McNally, pp. 142193.  Uebel, Wolfgang & BizNext.(2005). Improving the Insurance and Public Policy Environment for Nonprofit  and Voluntary Organizations in Atlantic Canada.. Presented to the Insurance Bureau of Canada and  Community Services Council Newfoundland and Labrador. Retrieved on May, 30, 2007 from  http://www.envision.ca/pdf/Improving%20the%20Insurance%20and%20Public%20Policy%20Environment .pdf 
HU U

Voluntary and Nonprofit Sector Organization of Manitoba Inc.(VNPSOM).(2005). Retrieved on July, 7, 2007  from http://www.voluntarysector.mb.ca/  
HU UH

Voluntary Sector Forum.(2004). Liability Insurance and the Voluntary Sector: Framing the issues.  http://www.voluntarysector.ca/eng/liability/framing_issues/framing_issues.pdf  Volunteering Australia.(2003). Running the Risk: A risk management tool for volunteer involving  organisations.(Information sheet).  Wiegmann, D., von Thaden, T. & Gibbons, A.(2007). A Review of Safety Culture Theory. AAA Foundation for  Traffic Safety.       

  Taking Risks the Safe Way                                                                                                                                                123 

