sensors
Article

UAV Based Relay for Wireless Sensor Networks in 5G Systems
Shu Fu 1, *
1 2 3
ID

, Lian Zhao 2

ID

, Zhou Su 3 and Xin Jian 1

*

The College of Communication Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, China; jianxin@cqu.edu.cn The Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ryerson University, Toronto, ON M5B 2K3, Canada; lzhao@ee.ryerson.ca The School of Mechatronic Engineering and Automation, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China; zhousu@ieee.org Correspondence: shufu@cqu.edu.cn

Received: 29 June 2018; Accepted: 21 July 2018; Published: 25 July 2018

Abstract: Relay is one of the most significant issues in smart industrial wireless sensor networks (WSN) due to the low transmitting power of sensors. By relay, the signals of sensors can be concentrated at the relay and further transmitted to the base station for decreasing energy consumption in the system. In the past decades, the relay in WSN is generally one super sensor with large transmitting power. However, the placement of the super sensor is static, which leads to the instability of performance in WSN under the time-varying wireless environment. Fortunately, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) can provide an effective leverage to improve the environment-adaptation in WSN compared to the static relay in WSN. In this paper, we employ UAV as the relay in WSN, which can move in three-dimensional space to possess a better position to minimize the system power consumption. We use a simple case study to demonstrate the effectiveness of UAV in WSN. Extended simulations are also given to verify the preferable performance of the UAV based relay in WSN. Keywords: wireless sensor networks; unmanned aerial vehicle; relay; power consumption

1. Introduction Smart industrial wireless sensor networks (WSN) [1­3] have been widely laid out to meet the ever-increasing demands of the next generation of wireless communication. Smart industrial wireless sensor networks can provide real-time service of smartphones, road condition information for vehicle networks, video-game consoles, surveillance cameras, augmented reality devices and wearable electronics, etc. [4], which can effectively support the implementation of an Internet of Things (IoT) based on the fifth generation of the wireless network (5G) [5]. Most types of sensors possess simplification features and low transmitting power to cut down on the investment cost in practice. However, when the sensors transmit signals to the base station (BS) over a long distance, the low power of the sensors may lead to a poor received signal to interference plus noise ratio (SINR) at the BS side. Relay [6­10] is a useful technology to receive and retransmit the signals of sensors to the BS, where the relay can enhance the strength of signals received at the BS side. In reference [5], the authors pointed out that a relay can achieve anti-fading capability in WSN. In reference [6­9], power splitting is investigated in a relay. In reference [10], relay-based routing protocol techniques are considered. Most of the existing works regarding a relay in WSN employ a static or semi-static relay to retransmit the signal of the sensors to the BS. This lacks flexibility of the relay position to better adapt to the time-varying wireless environment. Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) [11­15] provide a useful
Sensors 2018, 18, 2413; doi:10.3390/s18082413 www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors

Sensors 2018, 18, 2413

2 of 11

leverage when they act as the relay in WSN; they can move in the three-dimensional space for better adaptation to the wireless environment. Data gathering via UAV in WSN has been widely studied in the existing works [16,17]. However, the optimal staying position of UAV remains an open problem. By the observations above, we are motived to combine sensors and UAV as an integration, where sensors first transmit signals to a concentrator. Then, the concentrator data will be retransmitted and relayed by UAV to the BS side. By the transmitting power of the UAV, the received SINR of the signals at the BS side can be largely enhanced. Through this UAV based relay mechanism in WSN, the transmitting power of the concentrator can be cut down to meet the practical configuration of WSN. On the other hand, the specific staying position of the UAV based relay in the three-dimensional space should be appropriately determined to achieve the tradeoff of transmitting power between the concentrator and UAV, which can minimize the system's energy consumption. In this paper, in order to determine the optimal staying position of the UAV based relay, we first propose the architecture of the UAV based relay in WSN with the channel model using the fifth generation of wireless communication (5G). Then, we propose a Location of UAV (LU) algorithm based on the channel gain to obtain the optimal staying position of the UAV, which can be dynamically adjusted according to the changing wireless channel gain. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides the system model and the optimization problem model. Section 3 proposes the algorithm to determine the position of UAV. Section 4 further verifies the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm via extended simulations. In Section 5, we conclude this paper. 2. System Model and the Problem Formulation In this section, we introduce the system model of the UAV based relay in WSN. As shown in Figure 1, users contain different types of sensors (sensors, road side units, etc.), and the data sensed by each one will be collected by a concentrator (sink node/gateway). Moreover, the concentrator will retransmit the collected data to the BS, which connects the WSN to the Internet. Hence, the concentrator acts as a gateway to concentrate the traffic data sensed in WSN for transmission to the border gateway (BS). Then, the WSN can connect to the Internet. Notably, in this paper, we assume that WSN can work at 900 MHz/2.4 GHz to support the 5 GHz frequency bands, and the concentrator contains two interfaces in order to connect WSN (Zigbee, WiFi, 6LoWPAN, etc.) to the 5G mobile communications world. The approach we propose to improve the system performance is employing the UAV as a relay station, where we consider the path among SINK-UAV-BS to simplify the system model. Then, the omnidirectional path model can thus be used in this paper. We assume the wireless bandwidth of the concentrator at the sink node is BS Hz, and the wireless bandwidth of the UAV is BU Hz. The transmitting power of the concentrator is denoted as PS , and the transmitting power of the UAV is denoted as PU . The power of Gaussian White Noise is denoted as 2 . The wireless channel gain from the concentrator to the UAV is denoted as |hS |2 , and the wireless channel gain from the UAV to BS is denoted as |hU |2 . In this paper, the omnidirectional path model [18] based on the millimeter waves (mmWave) model is employed as in (1). However, the algorithm and results in this paper can also apply to the existing scenarios of WSN L = 86.6 + 24.5 × log10 d (dB), (1)

where L denotes path loss in decibels (dB), and d denotes the distance between the source and end in meter. To make the paper more focused, we ignore the impact of fast fading and slow fading on the wireless channel gain. We make such an assumption from the following two reasons: first, the impact of fading can be counteracted from the long-term average. Second, we can obtain a more theoretical analysis to guide the engineering.

Sensors 2018, 18, 2413

3 of 11

Sensors 2018, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW

3 of 10

Figure 1. 1. System System model model of of the based relay relay in in wireless wireless sensor sensor networks networks Figure the unmanned unmanned aerial aerial vehicle vehicle (UAV) (UAV) based (WSN). (WSN).

We assume the wireless bandwidth of the concentrator at the sink node is Hz, and the Define LS as the distance between the concentrator at the sink node and UAV, and LU as the wireless bandwidth of the UAV is Hz. The transmitting power of the concentrator 2 2is denoted as distance between UAV and BS, respectively. By (1), we can further derive |hS | and |hU | as in (2) and , and the transmitting power of the UAV is denoted as . The power of Gaussian White Noise is (3), respectively. denoted as . The wireless channel gain from the concentrator to the UAV is denoted as | | , and LS (2) h S |2 10- 10 , as | | . In this paper, the omnidirectional the wireless channel gain from the UAV to|BS is= denoted LU path model [18] based on the millimeter waves (mmWave) model is employed as in (1). However, (3) |hU |2 = 10- 10 . the algorithm and results in this paper can also apply to the existing scenarios of WSN To simplify the system model, in this paper we assume the concentrator transmit signal to the BS (1) (dB), = 86.6 + 24.5 × log with one UAV as the relay. This system model can better reveal the relationship between the position of where L denotes path loss insystem decibels (dB), and d denotes As theshown distance source and end in the UAV based relay and the energy consumption. in between Figure 1, the sensors first transmit meter. To make the paper more focused, we ignore the impact ofsignal fast fading fading on the signals to the concentrator. Then, the concentrator retransmit the to theand BS, slow which will deliver wireless channel gain. make such the wireless data to theWe destination in an theassumption network. from the following two reasons: first, the impact of fading can be can counteracted from as the long-term average. we canin obtain a more theoretical The model be abstracted the right triangle at Second, the right side Figure 1. The vertical analysis to from guide the dimension BS to engineering. the ground is denoted as segment BO in meter (m), and the horizontal distance Define as the distance between the concentrator at the sink the node anddistance UAV, and as the the between the concentrator and BS is denoted as SO in meter. Then, sight between distance between UAV concentrator and BS is and BS, respectively. By (1), we can further derive | | and | | as in (2) 2 2 and (3), respectively. BS = BO + SO (m). (3) (2) | | =at The optimal position of the UAV will be dotted the segment BS because the minimize distance 10 , between two arbitrary points is the line segment. As shown in Figure 2, the minimized total distance between point A and B is the line segment AB . The minimized (3) | | = 10 . transmission distance between BS and the concentrator can minimize the transmitting power of the concentrator and UAV because the path To simplify the system model, in this paper we assume the concentrator transmit signal to the loss is in direct proportion to the transmitting distance according to (1). BS with one UAV as the relay. This system model can better reveal the relationship between the position of the UAV based relay and the system energy consumption. As shown in Figure 1, sensors first transmit signals to the concentrator. Then, the concentrator retransmit the signal to the BS, which will deliver the wireless data to the destination in the network.

The optimal position of the UAV will be dotted at the segment because the minimize distance between two arbitrary points is the line segment. As shown in Figure 2, the minimized total distance between point A and B is the line segment . The minimized transmission distance between BS and the concentrator can minimize the transmitting power of the concentrator and UAV Sensors 2018, 18, 2413 4 of 11 because the path loss is in direct proportion to the transmitting distance according to (1).

Figure 2. Distance between two points (The line segment between two points is the shortest).

The key key issue issueis isto todetermine determinethe the specific position the UAV the line segment . We define The specific position ofof the UAV at at the line segment BS. We define the the length ofline thesegment line segment as x, theof length of is T , then of the length is - . length of the US as x, the length BS is T , then the length BU is T -of x. Assume that Assume that the demand of traffic capacity is C bit/s (bps) for transmission of the concentrator. To the demand of traffic capacity is C bit/s (bps) for transmission of the concentrator. To avoid packet avoid loss atcapacity the UAV, the capacity for ofbps. UAV is  also C bps. Let and loss at packet the UAV, the for transmission oftransmission UAV is also C Let S and U denote the noise denotereceived the noise power received at UAV and BS, respectively. tohave Shannon capacity, power at UAV and BS, respectively. According to ShannonAccording capacity, we we have
2 PS |hS ||2 | PU||hU | | C = BS = log2 log (1 + BU log ( 1+ (1 + 2 ) = )= log (1 + ) ,), 2 S U 2 2 - 10 - | = |h =10 10 = 10 10 S| | =
LU LS

(4)

. +24.5× . log × 10 x 86.6 10

, ,

(5) (5)
(6) (6)

. 10 × ( 10- 10 = 10- . .) | hU |2 |= = | 10 = 10 . By By (4), (4), we we can can further further prove prove the the transmitting transmitting power power of of the the concentrator concentrator and and UAV UAVas as
C S 2  2 BS - 1 = -1 = PS == S 2 22 . +24.5.×log × 10 x 86.6 || | |h 10 S 10- 10 S - 2 - 2B 1 1 , , C

86.6+24.5×log10 ( T - x )

(7)

PU =

C C U 2 U 2 BU U -- 2 1 1= -1 1 . . = |2 | 2 B2 = 2 - . . × ( ) 86.6+24.5×log10 ( T - x ) | hU | 10 10-

(8)

The objective is to minimize the system transmitting power in WSN. We denote the total transmitting power in the system as as Pmax ,, then, then, we we can canobtain obtainthe thesystem systemoptimization optimizationmodel modelas as
2  = + = minimize .S . × minimize Pmax = PS + PU = 86.6+24.5×log10 x 10 10-
C 2 -1 + 2 BS - 1 +

10

. .U × ( ) 86.6+24.5×log10 ( T - x ) - 10



2

2 BC - 1 . 2 U -1 .

(9) (9)

3. Convex Optimization Based Position of Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Vehicle To xx for minimizing Pmax in (9), optimization can becan employed. We can We first can simplify To obtain obtain for minimizing in convex (9), convex optimization be employed. first (9) as simplify (9) as minimize  = S 2 2 BS - 1 x2.45 + U 2 2 BU - 1 ( T - x )2.45 . . 2 -1 + 2 - 1 ( - ) . . minimize =
C C

(10) (10)

By deriving the second order partial derivative of , we can have  > 0. This suggests that  is > 0. This suggests that By deriving the second order partial derivative of , we can have a convex function with x, and thus the minimal  exists. By the first order partial derivative of , we is a convex function with x, and thus the minimal exists. By the first order partial derivative of , can obtain the optimal x for minimizing Pmax . we can obtain the optimal x for minimizing . T x= , (11) 1 W1 1.45 ( W2 ) + 1 where W1 = S 2 (2 BS - 1), and W2 = U 2 (2 BU - 1). By (11), we can obtain LS =
C C 1 W ( W1 ) 1.45 +1 2

T

, and

LU = T - x. We can then propose the location of UAV (LU) algorithm (Algorithm 1) to determine the best position of UAV as a relay in WSN. Specifically, we first calculate the input parameters in the LU algorithm, then, BS will be obtained by (3). Considering the optimal objective in (9), by the discussion above, we can obtain the optimal staying position of UAV; i.e., the optimal x in (11).

Sensors 2018, 18, 2413

5 of 11

Algorithm 1 Location of UAV (LU) algorithm. Input: location of the concentrator, location of BS, the length of BO and SO, respectively; C, BS , BU , PS , S 2 , U 2 and PU . Output: the optimal LS for minimizing system power consumption. 1. Determine BS by (3). 2. Obtain the optimization model in (9). 3. Obtain the optimal value of LS as in (11). Return: LS .

4. Simulation In this section, we explore the performance of the LU algorithm in UAV based relay in WSN in the 5G scenario with the corresponding parameters in Table 1. Unless otherwise specified, the parameters are defined in Table 1. In this paper, we compare the performance of LU with the traditional wireless transmission without relay; i.e., direct transmission. The simulation is based on Matlab 2013b.
Table 1. Simulation Parameter for Location of UAV (LU) algorithm. BS BU T C Noise power spectral density The omnidirectional path model Link 50 MHz 50 MHz 200 m 500 Mbps -174 dBm/Hz 86.6 + 24.5 log10 d Uplink

In Figure 3, we show the relationship between sight distance T and the system power consumption Pmax . As shown in Figure 3, the LU algorithm can largely cut down the power consumption due to the relay via UAV. As T increases, the gap between the two algorithms enlarges, which suggests that the effectiveness of the UAV based relay in WSN. In Figure 4, we study the impact of C on system power consumption. Obviously, as C increases, the power consumption increases due to the Shannon capacity. The performance of LU still outperforms the direct transmission method. In Figure 5, we study the impact of BU on the system power consumption. Since direct transmission method does not have a UAV, the power consumption remains. As shown in Figure 5, LU algorithm can largely cut down the power consumption as BU increases, because the increased wireless bandwidth of UAV can decrease the demanded power for transmission in WSN based on Shannon capacity. x In Figure 6, we define M = T as the proportion of UAV position to T. As Figure 6 shows, as BU increases, the UAV will move towards the concentrator. This can cut down the power of the concentrator, meanwhile the increase of UAV power can be controlled due to the increased wireless bandwidth of UAV.

Sensors 2018, 18, 2413 Sensors 2018 2018, , 18 18, ,x x FOR FOR PEER PEER REVIEW REVIEW Sensors

6 of 11 6 of of 10 10 6

Figure 3. 3. The The impact impact of of T T on on system power consumption (the amount amount of of total total power power needed needed in in system system Figure on system system power power consumption consumption (the Figure 3. The impact of T (the amount of total power needed in system under different configurations of sight distance). under different configurations of sight distance). under different configurations of sight distance).

Figure Figure 4. 4. The The impact impact of of C C on on system system power power consumption consumption (the (the total total power power consumed consumed in in system system under under Figure 4. The impact of C on system power consumption (the total power consumed in system under different configurations of wireless transmission capacity (bps)). different configurations of wireless transmission capacity (bps)). different configurations of wireless transmission capacity (bps)).

Sensors 2018,,18 , 2413 Sensors Sensors 2018 2018, 18 18,, x x FOR FOR PEER PEER REVIEW REVIEW

7 of 11 7 7 of of 10 10

Figure 5. The impact of on system power consumption (how down the power consumed Figure of BU on system power consumption (how to to cut down the power consumed in Figure5. 5.The Theimpact impact of on system power consumption (how to cut cut down the power consumed system by by increasing wireless bandwidth of UAV (Hz)). in wireless bandwidth of (Hz)). in system system by increasing increasing wireless bandwidth of UAV UAV (Hz)).

Figure 6. The impact of on =x (how to place the under of ). Figure The impact of on (how toplace placethe the UAV UAVunder under different different configurations configurations ).). Figure 6. 6. The impact of BU on M ==T (how to UAV different configurationsof of BU

5. Research Direction and Conclusions 5.Research ResearchDirection Directionand andConclusions Conclusions 5. We have introduced the position of a in WSN. However, to Wehave haveintroduced introduced the the LU LU algorithm algorithm to determine the position of a UAV UAV inin WSN. However, to We algorithmto todetermine determine the position of a UAV WSN. However, simplify the paper, we use an oversimplified model to reveal the relationship between the threesimplify the the paper, we use oversimplified model model to reveal relationship between the threeto simplify paper, we an use an oversimplified to the reveal the relationship between dimensional positioning of and the system energy consumption, where the dimensional positioning of the the UAV UAV and theand system energy energy consumption, where where the threethreethe three-dimensional positioning of the UAV the system consumption, the dimensional space has been considered in only one dimension. In the future, we should further dimensional space has has been considered in only one dimension. In the should further further three-dimensional space been considered in only one dimension. In thefuture, future, we should extend the work into more practical scenarios. In Figure 7, we give several scenarios based on the extend the thework workinto intomore morepractical practicalscenarios. scenarios. In In Figure Figure 7, 7, we we give giveseveral severalscenarios scenarios based basedon onthe the extend UAV in WSN. For the Scenario A in Figure 7, when multiple concentrators and UAV exist in system, UAVin inWSN. WSN.For Forthe theScenario ScenarioA Ain inFigure Figure7, 7,when whenmultiple multiple concentrators concentrators and and UAV UAVexist exist in in system, system, UAV the the UAV will largely affect the performance of Unlike the Figure 2, the position position of the UAV will largely affect the performance of WSN. WSN. Unlike the case case in Figure 2, when when the positionof of the UAV will largely affect the performance of WSN. Unlike the in case in Figure 2, multiple UAVs are considered the optimal position of the UAV cannot be directly obtained multiple UAVs are considered the optimal position of the UAV cannot be directly obtained by by the the

Sensors 2018, 18, 2413

8 of 11

Sensors 2018, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW

8 of 10

when multiple UAVs are considered the optimal position of the UAV cannot be directly obtained by LU LU algorithm. To network the relays in WSN and and determine the number of relay stages in WSN will the algorithm. To network the relays in WSN determine the number of relay stages in WSN be our work. At the bottom of Figure 7, we7, map the second scenario for a UAV relay. will be future our future work. At the bottom of Figure we out map out the second scenario for a based UAV based In this case, avoid the obstacles blocking the wireless transmission in sight distance, the UAV can relay. In this to case, to avoid the obstacles blocking the wireless transmission in sight distance, the UAV act as the between the source andand the the destination for the signal transmitting. can act as relay the relay between the source destination for the signal transmitting.

Figure 7. Scenarios of UAV based relay relay in in WSN. WSN.

On the other hand, the flightpath selection algorithm of UAV will be proposed in our future work to achieve the best path for data collection. As shown in Figure 8, different paths of UAV will determine the different wireless channel gains employed to collect the concentrator data. Unlike the

Sensors 2018, 18, 2413

9 of 11

On the other hand, the flightpath selection algorithm of UAV will be proposed in our future work achieve the best path for data collection. As shown in Figure 8, different paths of UAV will Sensors to 2018 , 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 10 determine the different wireless channel gains employed to collect the concentrator data. Unlike the model in this this paper, paper,UAV UAVin in Figure can fly three-dimensional space. The optimal flightpath can Figure 88 can fly inin three-dimensional space. The optimal flightpath can be be determined machine learning, etc., which will be left future work. determined by by machine learning, etc., which will be left for for ourour future work.

Figure Figure 8. 8. Flight Flight path path selection selection of of UAV. UAV.

Moreover, several issues should be further studied in future work to increase practicality. We Moreover, several issues should be further studied in future work to increase practicality. observe the issues as follows: We observe the issues as follows: (1) When frequency subchannels, fast fading, and slow fading are considered, the optimal position (1) When frequency subchannels, fast fading, and slow fading are considered, the optimal position for a specific UAV differs across the frequency of subchannels. How to determine the optimal for a specific UAV differs across the frequency of subchannels. How to determine the optimal position will be an intractable problem. position will be an intractable problem. (2) Considering the power consumption of UAV flight, how does the optimal position of a UAV (2) change. Considering the power consumption of UAV flight, how does the optimal position of a UAV to change. (3) How determine the optimal flightpath. This is a key issue for the UAV based relay due to the (3) moving How to feature determine optimal flightpath. This is a key issue for the UAV based relay due to the of athe UAV. moving feature the of atradeoff UAV. between the number of UAV and the performance of the WSN. This (4) How to achieve (4) should How to achieve the tradeoff between the number of UAV and performance of the be appropriately determined by an optimization tool, such as the geometric programming WSN. This should be appropriately determined by an optimization tool, such as geometric optimization, etc. programming optimization, etc. relay will be investigated where queuing theory should be (5) A caching [19­21] based UAV (5) employed A cachingto [19­21] based UAV relay of will investigated analyze the performance thebe WSN system. where queuing theory should be employed to analyze the performance of the WSN system. In conclusion, this paper aims to propose the UAV based relay in WSN to determine the optimal position of UAV based the wireless environment for minimizing system's power consumption. In conclusion, thison paper aims to propose the UAV based relay the in WSN to determine the optimal Such an architecture can effectively make up for the for disadvantage of the small transmitting power of position of UAV based on the wireless environment minimizing the system's power consumption. the wireless devicescan in effectively WSN. As make increases, adisadvantage UAV can approach the transmitting concentratorpower (i.e., M Such an architecture up for the of the small of decreases) to decrease the transmitting poweraof the can concentrator. To determine the optimal staying the wireless devices in WSN. As BU increases, UAV approach the concentrator (i.e., M decreases) position of the we have also proposed a simple scenario and the corresponding LUposition algorithm to decrease the UAV, transmitting power of the concentrator. To determine the optimal staying of based on the revealed the UAV position obtain the optimal position minimizing the UAV, we have alsophilosophy proposed a of simple scenario and to the corresponding LU algorithm based on the system consumption. We have verified of the proposed algorithms via revealedpower philosophy of the UAV position to obtainthe the effectiveness optimal position minimizing the system power extended simulations. consumption. We have verified the effectiveness of the proposed algorithms via extended simulations.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.F.; Methodology, S.F. and Z.S.; Software, S.F. and X.J.; Validation, S.F. and L.Z.; Writing-Original Draft Preparation, S.F.; Writing-Review & Editing, S.F. and L.Z.; Visualization, S.F. and X.J.; Project Administration, S.F. and X.J.; Funding Acquisition, S.F. and X.J. Funding: This work was partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC Project No. 61701054); the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central University (Project Nos. 106112017CDJXY160002, 2018CDXYTX0009).

Sensors 2018, 18, 2413

10 of 11

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.F.; Methodology, S.F. and Z.S.; Software, S.F. and X.J.; Validation, S.F. and L.Z.; Writing-Original Draft Preparation, S.F.; Writing-Review & Editing, S.F. and L.Z.; Visualization, S.F. and X.J.; Project Administration, S.F. and X.J.; Funding Acquisition, S.F. and X.J. Funding: This work was partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC Project No. 61701054); the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central University (Project Nos. 106112017CDJXY160002, 2018CDXYTX0009). Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1. Martínez, I.; Salcedo, I.; Daza, I. IoT application of WSN on 5G infrastructure. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Networks, Computers and Communications (ISNCC), Marrakech, Morocco, 16­18 May 2017; pp. 1­6. Duan, Y.; Li, W.; Fu, X.; Luo, Y.; Yang, L. A methodology for reliability of WSN based on software defined network in adaptive industrial environment. IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sin. 2018, 5, 74­82. [CrossRef] Khalil, N.; Abid, M.; Benhaddou, D.; Gerndt, M. Wireless sensors networks for Internet of Things. In Proceedings of the IEEE Ninth International Conference on Intelligent Sensors, Sensor Networks and Information Processing (ISSNIP), Singapore, 21­24 April 2014; pp. 1­6. Si, P.; He, Y.; Yao, H.; Yang, R.; Zhang, Y. DaVe: Offloading delay-tolerant data traffic to connected vehicle networks. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 2016, 65, 3941­3953. [CrossRef] Xu, L.; Collier, R.; O'Hare, G. A survey of clustering techniques in WSNs and consideration of the challenges of applying such to 5G IoT scenarios. IEEE Int. Things J. 2017, 4, 1229­1249. [CrossRef] Tse, D.; Viswanath, P. Fundamentals of Wireless Communication, 1st ed.; Cambridge University: New York, NY, USA, 2005. Goparaju, A.K. Superposition Coding Based Co-Operative Diversity Schemes. Master's Thesis, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, October 2005. Men, J.J.; Ge, J.H.; Zhang, C.S. Performance analysis of nonorthogonal multiple access for relaying networks over Nakagami-m fading channels. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 2017, 66, 1200­1208. [CrossRef] Shi, S.L.; Yang, L.X.; Zhu, H. Outage balancing in downlink nonorthogonal multiple access with statistical channel state information. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 2016, 15, 4718­4731. Bhanumathi, V.; Sangeetha, C.P. A guide for the selection of routing protocols in WBAN for healthcare applications. Hum. Centric Comput. Inf. Sci. 2017, 7, 24. [CrossRef] Costa, F.G.; Ueyama, J.; Braun, T.; Pessin, G.; Osório, F.S.; Vargas, P.A. The use of unmanned aerial vehicles and wireless sensor network in agricultural applications. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, Munich, Germany, 12 November 2012; pp. 5045­5048. Valente, J.; Sanz, D.; Barrientos, A.; del Cerro, J.; Ribeiro, Á.; Rossi, C. An air-ground wireless sensor network for crop monitoring. Sensors 2011, 11, 6088­6108. [CrossRef] Aslan, Y.E.; Korpeoglu, I.; Ulusoy, Ö. A framework for use of wireless sensor networks in forest fire detection and monitoring. Comput. Environ. Urban Syst. 2012, 36, 614­625. [CrossRef] Quaritsch, M.; Kruggl, K.; Wischounig-Strucl, D.; Bhattacharya, S.; Shah, M.; Rinner, B. Networked UAVs as aerial sensor network for disaster management applications. E & I Elektrotechnik Und Informationstechnik 2010, 127, 56­63. Ueyama, J.; Freitas, H.; Faical, B.S.; Filho, G.P.R. Exploiting the use of unmanned aerial vehicles to provide resilience in wireless sensor networks. IEEE Commun. Mag. 2014, 52, 81­87. [CrossRef] Kulakowski, P.; Calle, E.; Marzo, J.L. Performance study of wireless sensor and actuator networks in forest fire scenarios. Int. J. Commun. Syst. 2013, 26, 515­529. [CrossRef] Erman, A.T.; van Hoesel, L.; Havinga, P.; Wu, J. Enabling mobility in heterogeneous wireless sensor networks cooperating with UAVs for mission-critical management. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 2008, 15, 38­46. [CrossRef] Rangan, S.; Rappaport, T.S.; Erkip, E. Millimeter-wave cellular wireless networks: Potentials and challenges. Proc. IEEE 2014, 102, 366­385. [CrossRef] Su, Z.; Xu, Q.; Luo, J.; Pu, H.; Peng, Y.; Lu, R. A secure content caching scheme for disaster backup in fog computing enabled mobile social networks. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 2018. [CrossRef]

2. 3.

4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.

12. 13. 14.

15. 16. 17. 18. 19.

Sensors 2018, 18, 2413

11 of 11

20. 21.

Su, Z.; Hui, Y.; Xu, Q.; Yang, T.; Liu, J.; Jia, Y. An edge caching scheme to distribute content in vehicular networks. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 2018, 67, 5346­5356. [CrossRef] Xu, Q.; Su, Z.; Zheng, Q.; Luo, M.; Dong, B. Secure content delivery with edge nodes to save caching resources for mobile users in green cities. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 2018, 14, 2550­2559. [CrossRef] © 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).


