Wha What's t's Faith got to do with it?
 

   
Paul MacLean  Centre for Voluntary Sector Studies, Ryerson University  Agnes Meinhard  Centre for Voluntary Sector Studies, Ryerson University    Areeta Bridgemohan  United Way of Peel Region            Working paper series
   Volume 2011 (2)
         350 Victoria Street
   Toronto, Ontario  M5B 2K3
   Tel: 416 4169795146 x 6739 / Fax: 4169795124
 cvss@ryerson.ca
     http://w http://www.ryerson.ca/cvss/working_papers


Introduction
"What's faith got to do with it?" In this paper we explore the multilayered role of faith in  two  food  banks  in  Toronto.  We  are  drawing  on  a  larger  study  of  five  partnerships  between  faith based  organizations  and  others  for  the  common  good,  a  study  that  unpacks  the  interesting  dynamics of collaborations involving at least one faith partner. In the selection we have made for  our  present  paper,  the  reader  can  expect  to  find  a  description  and  analysis  of  those  dynamics  as  they pertain to individuals, groups, religious and secular organizations, new immigrants and long  time  residents,  a  rich  variety  of  faith  groups--all  around  the  issues  of  having  enough  to  eat,  human dignity and the formation of community.  When  we  use  the  word  "faith"  we  are  aware  of  the  multiplicity  of  meanings  carried  by  the  term.  There  is  a  basic  distinction,  famously  formulated  by  Wilfred  Cantwell  Smith,  between  the  faith  that  animates  and  is  held  by  an  individual  and  `a  faith'  in  the  sense  of  a  world  religion,  which  has  a  history,  traditions,  sacred  texts,  liturgy,  normative  practices,  teachings,  creeds,  buildings, authorized leaders-- in short all the characteristics of a religion established over many  centuries.  Of  course,  there  is  a  symbiotic  relationship  between  the  personal  and  the  institutional.  Each enlarges and enriches the other; neither can exist without the other.   In  our  paper  we  will  hear  of  personal  faith,  often  associated  with  motivation,  but  also  with  personal  change  and  growth.  Some  of  our  interviewees  reflect  theologically  on  their  experience  of  partnership;  nearly  all  find  that  the  food  banks  are  a  way  of  living  out  their  faith.  We  will  hear  of  how  faith  is  expressed  collectively  and  institutionally  through  congregations,  mosques,  relief  and  community  development  agencies,  and  a  judicatory  office.  As  we  might  expect, there is a range of behaviour that people find both supportive and frustrating. This, too, is  part  of  "what  faith  has  to  do  with  it."  We  will  touch  on  some  of  the  tensions  that  emerge  from  conflicting  attitudes  within  larger  faith  communities,  by  which  we  mean  groups  of  people  identified  by  their  basic  religious  affiliations.  How  these  tensions  are  negotiated  by  religious  leaders  form  one  of  the  more  interesting  undercurrents  of  our  study.  Finally,  the  formation  of  strong relationships between people from a variety of faiths is a feature of both our cases, and we  will offer some observations on the unique character and potency of these communities.  We  begin  with  a  review  of  the  literature  pertaining  to  partnerships  that  include  at  least  one  faithbased  organization  and  are  intended  for  community  betterment.  While  this  review  is  helpful for identifying issues and existing research, we offer two caveats. The first is that most of  the  research  is  U.S.based  and  much  is  driven  by  the  role  of  the  federal  government's  Compassion  Capital  Fund.  There  is  no  such  incentive  in  Canada;  in  fact,  in  our  two  cases  the  resources  are  generated  almost  entirely  by  the  local  partners.  The  involvement  of  any  level  of  government  in  partnership  or  funding  relationships  with  faith  groups  is  not  unknown  in  Canada,  but  it  is  far  less  common  than  in  the  U.S.  and  other  countries  such  as  Britain.  Secondly,  in  the  literature  review  there  are  descriptions  and  categorizations  of  faithbased  organizations,  often  congregations, that are derived from the perspective of secular organizations. Whatever the value  of  these  descriptions,  we  have  to  caution  that  in  Canada  the  religious  terrain  in  general  and  congregations in particular differ in significant ways from their counterparts in the U.S. 

While  our  study  should  be  seen  within  the  context  of  international  and  American  research,  there  are  aspects  of  that  research  that  don't  apply  to  the  Canadian  context,  and  unfortunately  there  is  little  or  no  Canadian  research  to  fill  in  the  gaps.  Our  research  method  is  based  on  interviews  with  key  informants,  and  summaries  and  quotations  from  these  interviews  will form the body of the paper.  We  offer  a  table  of  various  categories  to  give  an  overview  of  the  five  cases  we  examine  in  our  larger  study,  followed  by  a  short  description  of  each  case.  The  current  paper  makes  a  choice  of  two  cases,  based  in  part  on  their  similarities:  both  are  food  banks,  both  are  multifaith,  and  both  are  rich  examples  of  diversity,  the  theme  of  the  ARNOVA  conference.  We  then  give  extensive  accounts  of  the  multilayered  dimensions  of  these  two  partnerships,  and  finally  draw  conclusions on how they came to be, the values that underlie them  and, most importantly  for our  purposes, the role of faith in the partnerships that created and sustain them.  The  stories  of  these  two  partnerships  illustrate  important  lessons  for  our  increasingly  diverse society: the benefits of faiths working together for the common good; the motivation that  faith  provides;  the  enlargement  of  personal  faith;  the  importance  of  faith  teaching  and  values  for  a  successful  partnership;  the  need  for  sensitivity  to  traditions,  patience  and  constant  interaction  amongst  partners;  and  how  the  formation  of  a  compassionate  community,  rooted  in  the  faith  traditions of its members, can transform food provision into empowerment.   

Literature Review Summary
Collaborative  relationships  between  organizations  are  variously  defined  as  interorganizational  collaborations,  strategic  alliances,  social  alliances,  joint  ventures,  partnerships,  coalitions  and  networks.  Regardless  of  the  name,  the  principle  underlying  all  these  terms  is  the  same,  namely,  that  two  or  more  organizations  are  working  together  towards  a  goal  that  will  yield  mutual  and/or  thirdparty  benefits.  First,  there  appears  to  be  general  agreement  that  collaboration  (as  opposed  to  cooperation)  goes  beyond  sharing  information;  it  involves  mutual obligations with  respect to the use of organizational resources or coordination of services  (Snavely  & Tracy, 2000). Second, the scope and frequency of collaborations have been observed  to  be  steadily  increasing  as  environmental  uncertainty  grows  (Connor  et  al.,  1999;  Mulroy  &  Shay,  1997;  Provan  &  Milward,  1995;  Rapp  &  Whitfield,  1999).  Third,  despite  the  increase  in  collaborative  relationships,  almost  half  of  all  efforts  fail    because  the  conditions  necessary  for  successful  collaboration  are  difficult  to  achieve  (Dyer  et  al.,  2001).  These  have  been  identified  as:  shared  vision  and  values;  clear  goals;  good  personal  relationships;  frequent  interaction;  expectation  of  mutual  benefit;  shared  power  and  risk;  and  mutual  trust  (Austin,  2000;  Huxham,  1993;  Phillips  &  Graham,  2000;  Rapp  &  Whitfield,  1999;  Rein  &  Stott,  2009;  Wilson  &  Charleton,  1993;  Zadek  &  Radovich,  2006).  The  difficulties  in  achieving  these  synergies  are  exacerbated in crosssectoral collaborations (Googins & Rochlin, 2000; Milne et al., 1996).  There  has  been  increasing  focus  on  the  role  of  faithbased  organizations  in  providing  social  services,  particularly  in  the  wake  of  the  Compassion  Capital  Fund  in  the  U.S.  Despite  the  fact that community organizing in churches is the fastest growing form of organizing in the U.S., 

and  that  churches  often  collaborate  with  secular  groups  (CPN,  accessed  March  2011),  there  has  been but limited research on the influence of faith in crosssectoral or interfaith partnerships.   Methods Searches  were  conducted  in  a  number  of  electronic  databases,  mainly  ABI/Inform  Global,  Google  Scholar,  JSTOR,  Scholars  Portal,  PsycArticles,  Sage  fulltext  collections,  Web  of  Science,  and  Web  of  Knowledge.  Article  searches  on  journal  databases  were  also  conducted,  mainly  in  the  Nonprofit  and  Voluntary  Sector  Quarterly.  Key  search  terms  that  were  employed  included  partnerships,  faithbased  partnerships,  crosssector,  publicprivate.  A  total  of  approximately 50 articles were reviewed and 33 were included in this literature review.     The  primary  goal  of  this  literature  review  was  to  obtain  an  overview  of  the  existing  literature  on  partnerships  between  faithbased  organizations  or  between  secular  and  faithbased  organizations.  Articles  were  included  if  they  contained  information  relevant  to  the  definitions  of  faithbased  organizations,  types  of  partnerships  with  faithbased  organizations,  benefits  and  challenges  of  partnering  with  faithbased  organizations,  as  well  as  gaps  in  the  existing  literature  on partnerships with faithbased organizations.  Scope and type of Faith Based Organizations In  order  to  understand  some  of  the  dynamics  that  might  occur  in  partnerships  with  faith based  organizations,  it  is  helpful  to  grasp  the  wide  variety  of  organizations  that  exist  within  this  category.  The  Compassion  Capital  Fund  has  increased  attention  towards  government  and  faith based  partnerships.  This  attention  has  given  rise  to  a  number  of  considerations  with  regard  to  faithbased  organizations,  including  the  types  of  faithbased  organizations.  The  Working  Group  on  Human  Needs  and  FaithBased  and  Community  Initiatives  produced  a  report  intended  to  inform  public  debate  on  government  support  of  faithbased  organizations.  One  of  the  recommendations  from  this  report  focused  on  the  need  for  better  understanding  of  the  variety  of  faithbased  and  other  nonprofit  organizations,  and  for  greater  attention  from  participants  in  public discussions to the confusion in the current vocabulary regarding faithbased organizations.     In  relation  to  this  recommendation,  the  Working  Group  drew  upon  a  typology  in  an  attempt  for  clarity.  The  organizational  typology  includes  the  following:  faithsaturated  (where  religious  faith  is  important  at  all  levels  and  most  staff  share  the  organization's  faith  commitments);  faithcentred  (organizations  founded  for  a  religious  purpose,  in  which  the  governing  board  and  almost  all  staff  are  required  to  share  the  organization's  faith  commitments;  however,  program  participants  may  opt  out  of  explicitly  religious  programming  and  still  expect  positive  outcomes);  faithrelated  (founded  by  religious  people,  but  which  do  not  require  staff  to  affirm  any  religious  belief  or  practice    except,  perhaps,  the  executive  leadership;  programming  may  have  no  explicitly  religious  messages  or  activities  although  religious  dialogue  may  be  available  for  participants  who  request  it);  faithbackground  organizations  (look  and  act  secular,  and  may  not  have  a  historical  tie  to  a  faith  tradition:  programs  have  no  explicit  religious  content  or  materials);  and  faithsecular  partnerships  (no  explicit  reference  to  religious  content;  religious  change  is  not  necessary  for  outcomes  but  it  is  expected  that  the  faith  of  participants  from 

religious partners will add value to the program).     This  typology  built  upon  work  that  Sider  and  Unruh  developed  and  continued  to  develop  after  the  report  from  the  Working  Group  was  published.  Some  typologies  that  have  been  developed  focus  on  the  institutional  and  behavioural  manifestations  of  religion,  others  focus  on  organizational  attributes  and  still  others  examine  the  inclusion  of  religious  practices  in  program  methods.  The  typology  developed  by  Sider  and  Unruh  (2004)  looks  at  characteristics  of  organizations as well as characteristics of programs. Sider and Unruh (2004) used case studies of  15  congregations  with  active  communityserving  programs  and  interviews  at  another  21  churches  identified  by  faith  leaders  and  social  service  providers  as  being  actively  involved  in  community  outreach.  One  of  the  findings  they  present  is  that  whether  or  not  an  organization  is  faithbased(an  FBO)  cannot  be  answered  with  a  simple  yes  or  no.   Sider  and  Unruh  (2004)  also  developed  a  typology  of  the  basic  ways  that  a  social  ministry  can  incorporate  a  religious  dimension, from passive to integratedmandatory.   Sider  and  Unruh's  (2004)  typology  has  a  number  of  drawbacks,  including  that  the  methods  used  examined  only  Protestant  Christian  traditions;  that  the  separation  between  the  internal  (personal)  and  corporate  (expressive)  is  too  facile  and  that  congregations  should  not  be  described  as  FBOs  in  all  circumstances  (Jeavons,  2004).  Furthermore,  Sider  and  Unruh  themselves  point  out  a  number  of  limitations,  including  that  the  typology  focuses  mostly  on  explicitly  religious  characteristics  because  they  are  more  observable  and  verifiable  as  well  as  more controversial (Sider & Unruh, 2004).     It  has  also  been  noted  that  the  type  of  congregation  influences  the  tendency  of  members  to  get  involved  in  volunteer  activities,  either  within  or  externally  to  the  church.  Becker  and  Dhingra  (2001)  studied  four  types  of  local  congregations:  family  congregations  (which  concentrate on providing members with close and supportive interpersonal relationships), houses  of worship (which do not foster interpersonal intimacy or draw members into activities outside of  main  worship),  community  congregations  (which  foster  a  great  deal  of  lay  involvement  and  create  a  space  for  debate  about  political/social  issues)  and  leader  congregations  (which  tend  to  play  an  active  role  in  local  civic  life  and  social  activism).  These  authors'  study  of  165  congregations  in  the  U.S.  examined  the  role  that  congregations  play  in  generating  civic  engagement  and  social  capital.  They  concluded  that  social  ties  to  congregation  members  encourage  volunteering  in  the  congregation  as  opposed  to  the  secular  organization  and  congregations  that  create  networks  both  inside  and  outside  the  church,  fostering  strong  connections that directly encourage volunteering.   Extent of Social Service Provision The  reviewed  literature  varied  in  estimating  the  extent  of  congregational  social  involvement.  Estimates  vary  from  9/10  congregations  in  the  U.S.  providing  social  services  (Hodgkinson  et  al.,  1993)  to  a  little  more  than  half  (Chaves,  1999).  A  survey  that  took  place  in  Philadelphia estimated that 88% of congregations provided at least one social service; most were  focused  on  emergency  assistance  (shelter,  food,  clothing)  and  youth  programming  (Tangenburg, 

2005).  There  are  a  few  studies  from  the  U.S.  that  attempt  to  understand  the  nature  and  extent  of  partnerships,  in  particular  between  health  organizations  and  faithbased  organizations.  Barnes  &  Curtis  (2009)  reported  that  83.1%  of  the  local  health  departments  studied  (434  local  health  departments  were  included  in  this  study)  were  engaged  in  at  least  one  partnership  activity  with  an FBO, and information exchange was the most common collaborative activity.   What's faith got to do with it? There  is  some  literature  examining  the  role  of  faith  in  social  services  provided  by  faithbased  organizations as they create partnerships.   In  2001,  faithbased  organizations  were  one  of  the  primary  recipients  of  $30  million  allocated  through  the  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  to  expand  services  to  vulnerable  populations  (Barnes  and  Curtis,  2009).  Barnes  and  Curtis  note  that  faithbased  organizations may not be aware of the latitude permitted them nor may they want to  compromise  their  beliefs  or  mission  by  creating  these  partnerships  with  the  government.  However,  partnerships are not limited to relationships of funding.     Much  of  the  literature  on  partnerships  with  faithbased  organizations  comes  from  the  health  literature.  The  focus  of  this  literature  is  on  the  instrumental  benefits  of  partnering  with  faithbased organizations. Some of the cited benefits to partnering with faithbased organizations  include:  the  trust  that  faith  communities  establish  with  their  members;  the  programming  that  facilitates  health  education  or  other  such  programs;  skills  that  that  leadership  have  that  may  also  facilitate  behavioural  change,  such  as  listening  skills  (Kegler,  Hall  and  Kisler,  2010;  Fosarelli,  2009; Jones & Fowler, 2009; Poole et al., 2009;  Bailey  et al., 2007; Otterness et al., 2005; Small,  2001).  Furthermore,  ministers  have  been  cited  as  being  a  first  line  of  awareness  and  this  may  help  raise  early  awareness  of  community  issues  (Bailey  et  al.,  2007);  partnerships  with  faith  communities  may  increase  the  visibility  of  the  other  partners  in  those  communities  (Otterness,  Gehrke  &  Sener,  2005)  and  faith  communities  represent  considerable  capital  and  may  have  easily leverageable resources (Boddie, 2002).     The  literature  also  documents  several  examples  of  challenges  in  these  partnerships.  One  of  the  most  important  themes  emerging  from  these  challenges  are  limited  resources,  including  financial,  human  and  time.  Two  additional  challenges  are  a  sense  of  competition  between  the  participating  organizations  in  some  of  the  faithhealth  teams,  and  internal  team  conflict  due  to  either  personality  or  disagreements  about  the  vision  or  direction  of  the  team  (Kegler,  Kisler  &  Hall,  2010).  From  the  health  sector  perspective,  there  was  some  discomfort  with  faithbased  organizations,  particularly  the  concern  about  underlying  agenda  of  the  faithbased  organization,  discomfort  with  spirituality,  and  a  perceived  lack  of  credibility  of  the  faithbased  organizations.  Other  barriers  that  were  identified  include  the  diversity  within  the  faith  community  (leading  the  authors  to  state  that  "there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  faith  community"),  and  the  seemingly  divergent  approaches  to  the  same  issue,  such  as  using  prayer  to  address  health  problems  (Kegler,  Kisler  &  Hall, 2010).  Not  by  Faith  Alone:  Social  Services,  Social  Justice  and  FaithBased  Organizations  in  the 

United  States  (Adkins,  Occhipinti,  Hefferan,  editors,  Lexington  Books,  2010)  "provides  an  in depth  ethnographic  study  of  faithbased  development  organizations"  through  a  critical  analysis  of  various  cases.  One  of  these  cases  is  a  partnership  between  a  school  and  a  small  multi denominational  intentional  community.  In  American  Grace:  How  Religion  Divides  and  Unites  Us  (Putnam  and  Campbell,  Simon  &  Shuster,  2010)  the  authors  devote  one  chapter  to  the  influence  of  religion  on  community  life,  which  includes  participation  in  initiatives  for  the  common good ("Religion and Good Neighborliness"). 

Conclusions
Much  of  the  literature  on  faithbased  organizations  and  their  partnerships  is  from  the  United  States,  particularly  in  response  to  the  Compassion  Capital  Fund,  which  formalized  the  partnership possibilities between the  government and faithbased organizations. Furthermore, the  majority  of  articles,  which  examined  faithbased  organizations  or  their  partnerships,  focused  on  Christian  organizations.  Lastly,  the  majority  of  articles  that  were  written  about  partnerships  with  faithbased organizations were written from the secular organization's perspective.     The Working Group on  Human Needs and FaithBased and Community  Initiatives report  notes  that  detailed  case  studies  are  needed  to  contribute  towards  the  development  of  best  practices,  in  particular  studies  that  detail  the  specific  ways  in  which  organizations  manage  their  programs  especially  where  "faithsaturated"  or  "faithcentred"  program  elements  operate  side byside with "secular" or "faithbackground" components.  

Research method
  We  have  used  a  qualitative  method  of  research,  interviewing  key  informants  from  five  case  studies.  Using  existing  networks  and  contacts  we  identified  a  number  of  potential  cases  for  study.  From  this  list  we  chose  five  partnerships  that  offered  the  best  opportunities  for  learning,  using these criteria:  ·   Wide variety of organizations, both secular and religious  ·   History, stability and length of partnership  ·   Wide variety of types of programs emerging from the partnership  ·   Diverse  geographical  placement,  with  attention  to  Toronto's  priority  neighbourhoods  (Toronto  has  13priority  neighbourhoods  designated  as  such  by  their  low  income  levels  and general lack of social services.)  ·   Partnerships that were deemed to be successful by key informants    In  some  of  our  cases  a  faithbased  organization  is  partnering  with  secular  agencies;  in  other  cases  all  the  partners  are  faithbased  organizations,  but  represent  a  variety  of  faiths  and  traditions.  These  latter  cases  include  faithbased  partners  who  are  from  many  Christian  denominations,  Muslim  charitable  organizations  and  a  Buddhist  foundation.  Secular  agencies  include  a  police  force,  a  town  recreation  department,  a  cancer  care  charitable  organization  and  a  school  board.  The  programs  operated  by  the  partnerships  are  a  youth  dropin,  two  food  banks 

with  ancillary  services,  outpatient  cancer  support  and  care,  and  specialized  classroom  learning  for Lesbian, Gay Bisexual, Transgendered (LGBT) youth.  Fifteen  questions  formed  the  basis  of  our  interviews.  They  covered  the  founding  and  history  of  the  partnership,  key  events  and  leaders,  resources,  objectives,  and  outcomes.  Relationships,  trust,  and  accountability  were  explored.  We  asked  about  how  the  partnership  contributed  to  the  health  of  the  larger  community.  A  final  section  dealt  with  motivation,  belief,  and  assumptions  about  life  in  the  various  partners.  We  asked  what  participants  had  learned  from  their  partnerships.  These  questions  and  the  entire  interview  process  were  approved  by  the  Ryerson University Ethics Review Board.    The  interviews  were  conducted  by  one  of  the  principal  investigators,  mostly  in  person,  with a few done by phone. They were recorded and transcribed. The transcriptions were analyzed  by  the  research  team,  and  this  analysis  forms  the  basis  for  our  presentation.  The  interviews  are  a  rich resource for many themes to do with partnerships involving a faithbased element. However,  for  the  purposes  of  this  presentation  we  will  focus  on  the  unique  or  significant  factors  in  such  a  partnership.  

Table 1: Overview of 5 cases
 
CASE  PROGRAM 
   

PARTNERS 
 

INTERFAITH 
 

SECULAR 
 

STAFF 
 

LOCATION 
 

HISTORY 
 

Case  #1 

Dropin for  youth at risk 

Church,  police, town  recreation    Churches,  Muslim  charitable  organizations    Churches,  mosques,  Buddhist  charitable  organization    Church,  foundation,  cancer care  agency    Church,  school board 

No 

Yes 

  Case  #2 

  Food bank 

  Yes 

  No (local  businesses  contribute) 

Professional  (nonpaid)  &  volunteers    Volunteers  with  professional  paid support    Volunteers  with  professional  support    Professional  &  volunteers 

Growing town,  outer suburbs 

Four years of  operation 

  Priority  neighbourhood,  high  immigration    Mostly affluent,  inner suburb 

  Case  #3 

  Food bank,  meal & other  services 

  Yes 

  No (local  businesses  contribute) 

  In 2010  moves from  churchrun to  independent  operation    About four  years of  development  & operation    20052008:  Fund raising.  2008  services  begin.     Begun 1995.  Program  grows &  develops to  present. 

  Case  #4 

  Fund raising  & outpatient  cancer care 

  No 

  Yes 

  New town,  outer suburb,  high growth 

  Case  #5 

  School for  LGBT youth 

  No 

  Yes 

  Professional  teachers,  church  volunteers 

  Serves  dispersed, gay  community 

Five cases: differences and commonalities 

  As  can  be  seen  from  the  accompanying  table,  the  five  cases  we  have  chosen  have  both  similarities and diversity  under the seven headings that  comprise their basic description. We will  briefly  summarize  these  similarities  and  differences,  then  move  to  consider  some  generalizations  that are common to all of them. 

Similarities and differences
Beginning  with  the  partnerships,  we  see  that  three  cases  (1,  4  &  5)  involve  secular  organizations  partnering  with  religious  ones.  In  two  of  these  three  instances  (1  &  5)  the  secular  organizations  have  clear  boundaries  and  policy  that  guide  their  relationships.  In  one  of  these  two  cases  (5),  partnering  with  a  church  was  unprecedented.  A  further  connection  between  these  two  cases  is  that  they  both  are  programs  focused  on  youth  at  risk  (although  the  programs  themselves  are  very  different).  Case  #4  involves  an  organization  that  recognizes  the  important  supportive  role  of  spirituality  and  religion  in  their  work  of  cancer  care,  and  so  the  partnership  is  building  upon  a  value  internal  to  the  secular  agency.  Cases  4  &  5  have  strong  secular  partners  that  are  in  complete control of the program, although in both cases the faith partners played the primary role  in significant fund raising efforts.  The  remaining  two  cases  (2  &  3)  have  a  number  of  things  in  common.  First,  both  are  primarily  interfaith  partnerships  and,  secondly,  both  are  food  banks  with  ancillary  services.  Although  they  rely  heavily  on  the  generosity  of  businesses,  these  secular  organizations  are  not  partners  to  the  same  extent  as  the  religious  ones.  We  will  find  from  our  analysis  that  both  see  their  work  as  far  more  than  providing  food  to  the  hungry;  they  operate  from  a  culture  of  empowerment.  This  culture  is  very  important  to  the  interfaith  collaboration.  The  key  difference  between  the  two,  which  we  will  explore,  is  that  one  operates  in  a  priority  neighbourhood  where  most  people  are  poor,  while  the  other  serves  a  pocket  of  poverty,  invisible  to  the  politicians,  within  an  affluent  community.  The  two  dramatically  different  settings  contribute  to  the  distinct  dynamics at work in these two food banks.  There is an important distinction to be made between two types of faith partners. The first  two cases involve church social service agencies with professional staff, while the latter three are  congregationally  based.  Apart  from  having  paid  professionals  from  the  faith  side  engaged  in  the  partnership,  the  relations  with  an  agency  are  significantly  different  from  those  with  a  congregation.  An  agency  and  its  staff  are  usually  responsible  to  a  parent  body,  while  a  congregation  is  more  autonomous  (depending  upon  the  faith  or  denomination).  Also,  a  congregation  has  the  potential  of  providing  volunteers,  considerable  networking,  financial  resources  and  a  building,  all  of  which  may  not  be  within  the  capacity  of  an  agency.  On  the  other  hand,  an  agency  has  a  clear  focus  on  service,  which  a  congregation  does  not.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  agency  in  case  1  consists  of  staff  within  a  team  based  in  a  congregation,  who  have  a  mandate  to  work  with  youth  in  the  community;  they  are  able  to  draw  on  volunteers  from  the  congregation for the program. 

We  can  also  note  that  a  geographical  sense  of  community  is  important  to  four  of  the  five  cases,  while  case  5  serves  youth  drawn  from  a  dispersed  group  identified  by  sexual  orientation.  The first four  cases  are  all in communities that need social and health services, even though their  indicators  of  poverty  and  stability  vary  considerably.  In  some  cases  the  need  is  obvious  and  initiatives are supported by organizations from all sectors, but in case 3 the relative affluence and  stability  of  the  neighbourhood  meant  that  certain  attitudes  of  denial  were  present.  These  are  important  factors  for  determining  obstacles  and  support  for  the  partnerships  from  the  wider  community.  We  shall  find  many  differences  with  regard  to  the  levels  of  formality  in  these  partnerships,  so  much  so  that  comparisons  are  not  particularly  fruitful.  However,  we  know  that  formality  is  an  important  factor  for  the  development  and  survival  of  an  organization.  Also,  we  shall find in these cases that our informants discuss formality, or the lack of it, in terms of trust.  Finally,  our  cases  represent  a  spectrum  of  organizational  life  cycle:  one  has  been  in  existence  for  over  fifteen  years;  another  whose  program  has  been  running  for  many  years,  became  a  very  recent  partnership  as  a  result  of  a  crisis;  three,  with  some  variation,  track  their  existence over a period of four or five years. 

Generalizations
There  are  some  generalizations  that  hold true  for  all  the  cases.  The  first  is  that  faith  plays  an  important  role  in  all  the  partnerships.  It  would  not  be  possible  to  simply  substitute  a  secular  partner  for  a  religious  one,  and  end  up  with  more  or  less  the  same  partnership  and  the  same  program.  Faith  makes  a  significant  difference  at  the  personal  level  of  motivation  and  at  the  corporate level of the resources a faith organization brings to the partnership.   In  their  recent  book,  American  Grace,  Putnam  and  Campbell  argue  that  social  networks  (whether  of  family,  friends  or  small  groups)  rooted  in  congregational  life    "are  extremely  powerful predictors of the entire range of generosity, good neighborliness, and civic engagement  ..." (p. 472) Putnam and Campbell claim that these social behaviours are considerably higher for  religious than for secular Americans. Whether their research and conclusions would hold true for  Canada, we are not in a position to say; however, all our cases show a very high, even sacrificial,  level  of  generosity,  good  neighbourliness  and  civic  engagement  from  the  religious  partners.  Again,  we  are  not  arguing  that  it  is  only  people  who  participate  in  organized  religion  who  bring  these qualities to a partnership: far from it, as can be seen from an analysis of the three religious secular  partnerships.  The  idea  of  these  and  other  qualities  finding  their  origin  in  congregationallybased  social  networks  is  intriguing,  and  is  worth  reflecting  on  as  we  come  across the role of networks in our interviews.  Further,  it  is  true  in  all  cases  that  faith  is  an  element  valued  by  all  partners.  Adherents  of  one faith or denomination benefit from working with those of another. Secular partners with little  or  no  adherence  to  organized  religion,  or  with  varying  degrees  of  personal  spirituality,  attest  to  the  benefits  of  working  with  their  more  religious  and  spiritual  partners.  And  in  some  instances  benefits  flow  the  other  way  as  well:  religious  partners  speak  of  being  profoundly  affected  by  the 

commitment  of  their  secular  counterparts.  The  faith  element  we  are  identifying  here  is  usually  described by our interviewees in terms of motivation, commitment and trust.  This  same  motivation  provided  by  faith  also  carries  with  it  an  obstacle  or  danger.  In  all  our  cases  people  are  wary  of  motive.  Do  faith  partners  have  an  ulterior  or  unacknowledged  motive  of  seeking  converts  or  promoting  their  religious  brand?  Sometimes  this  fear  is  discussed  openly;  other  times,  the  focus  and  demands  of  the  project  crowd  out  any  religious  discussion.  "We're too busy feeding people to discuss theology.")  Finally,  all  our  cases  exhibit  considerable  development  of  the  initial  partnership,  well  beyond  the  original  mandate:  many  additional  services  are  added  to  food  provision;  food  provision is added to teaching; events to impact the larger community  are  held; new partners and  allies  are  brought  in;  fund  raising  projects  are  planned.  Can  we  trace  this  phenomenon  of  partnership  development  to  the  faithbased  social  networks  described  by  Putnam  and  Campbell?  Whatever the explanation, it remains a striking feature common to all of our investigations.  

Two cases
For presentation at the ARNOVA conference, knowing that five cases represent too much  material,  we  have  chosen  to  focus  on  the  two  food  banks  (2  &  3).  These  two  cases  have  enough  similarities to warrant comparison; yet their differences are also instructive. Both similarities and  differences lead us into fruitful analysis and conclusions on faith and partnerships.  First  of  all,  the  two  cases  fit  well  into  the  ARNOVA  theme  of  diversity.  They  are  both  interfaith  partnerships  with  the  primary  goal  of  feeding  people;  both  serve  very  diverse  communities,  including  a  large  number  of  recent  immigrants.  Both  are  in  Toronto.  Both  have  experienced conflict with a parent body, although  their methods of managing their conflicts have  been radically different. Both are largely volunteer efforts, although one does have the support of  paid, professional staff. Both serve very large numbers of people, one being the largest food bank  in the city.  Looking  at  the  differences  in  these  two  cases,  we  note  that  one  is  in  a  priority  neighbourhood.  The  second  food  bank  exists  in  a  relatively  affluent  inner  suburb,  with  a  few  isolated  pockets  of  poverty.  The  two  are  at  very  different  stages  in  their  life  cycle:  one  has  existed  for  years,  but  recently  has  had  to  reinvent  itself  as  a  result  of  a  crisis;  the  other  is  relatively  new,  having  started  about  four  years  ago.  Another  significant  difference  lies  in  the  formality  of  their  organizational  structure  and  the  identity  of  the  participating  religious  partners.  The first is highly structured, with a constitution and legal charitable status; the partners are para religious  organizations  or  agencies;  it  is  housed  in  rented  space  in  the  basement  of  a  residential  highrise tower. The second is not a legal entity of its own: although it has many partners, its legal  status is as a project of the congregation from whose building it operates, free of charge.   These  two  food  banks  have  enough  in  common  that  a  solid  basis  for  comparison  can  be  established.  Their  differences  are  simply  illustrative  of  the  wide  variety  of  food  bank  operations  in  Toronto,  a  city  in  which,  it  has  been  remarked  by  a  provincial  politician,  there  are  more  food  banks  than  Tim  Hortons'  (an  omnipresent  coffee  and  doughnut  chain).  Further  to  that  comment, 

as  all  our  interviewees  pointed  out,  the  very  existence  of  food  banks  in  our  society  is  a  disgrace,  a  fact  that  we  keep  in  mind  as  we  talk  about  the  `success'  of  these  partnerships.  We  begin,  therefore, with a brief description and history of each case. 

Food Bank One (Case 2)
  This  is  the  story  of  how  a  community  of  people  in  a  priority  neighbourhood  rallied  to  save  and  restructure  a  vital  community  asset.  The  food  bank  in  question  moved  from  being  the  project  of  a  single  church  agency  to  become  a  partnership  involving  two  Christian  and  four  Muslim  organizations.  In  the  process  historic  tensions  and  solitudes  were  overcome  and  a  new  collaboration  emerged  that  the  leaders  hope  will  be  a  model  for  a  multicultural  and  multifaith  city.  Faith  had  a  lot  to  do  with  this  transformation.  However,  as  we  shall  see,  in  this  case  the  boundaries  of  what  we  normally  mean  by  faith  are  challenged  and  expanded.  "By  the  community,  for  the  community"  became  the  motto  for  the  food  bank,  the  partnership  that  sustains  it,  and  the  other  community  services  that  are  connected  to  it;  the  motto  also  applies  to  the role of faith.  Program This  is  one  of  the  busiest  food  banks  in  the  city.  It  operates  four  days  a  week  in  the  basement  of  a  high  rise  tower,  serving  well  over  2000  clients  in  a  month  and  feeding  at  least  1000  children.  Estimating  from  the  amount  of  Halal  food  that  is  distributed,  approximately  60%  of the clients are Muslim. There are at least 50 volunteers who assist with running the food bank,  and  a  further  20  who  organize  special  events  such  as  a  fundraising  walk  or  food  collections  during Ramadan.  Although  her  role  is  intended  to  diminish,  an  energetic  Anglican  priest  serves  as  coordinator  for  the  food  bank,  along  with  her  main  duties  as  executive  director  of  the  diocesan  social  service  agency  in  the  neighbourhood.  This  agency,  Flemindon  Park  Ministries  (FPM)  has  two staff who provide some administrative assistance to the food bank. Going further behind the  scenes  we  find  that  six  partner  organizations  fund  the  food  bank:  Anglican,  Presbyterian,  and  four  Muslim  relief  and  development  agencies  or  foundations.  All  of  these  partners  are  represented on the board, along with some community representatives.  There  is  a  general  impression  of  great  energy  and  commitment  at  all  levels.  People  talk  excitedly  about  the  service  to  the  community  and  what  it  means  for  their  lives.  Even  board  attendance is impressively high.  What  we  see  now  at  the  food  bank  represents  both  continuity  and  radical  change  in  comparison  to  its  previous  incarnation.  Until  a  crisis  in  early  2010  the  food  bank  had  been  a  project  of  the  Anglican  ministry  (FPM),  funded  and  staffed  by  the  Anglican  diocese.  This  crisis  precipitated  the  formation  of  the  new  partnership  and  some  significant  changes  in  the  actual  operation  of  the  food  bank.  This  case  study  is  mostly  the  story  of  how  the  new  partnership  came  into being. 

A Priority Neighbourhood Flemingdon  ParkVictoria  Village  is  designated  one  of  13  priority  neighbourhoods  in  the  City of Toronto, which means that it has a high degree of poverty or low income households and  few  social  and  community  services.  Although  it  is  poor  and  underserviced  by  comparison  with  the  rest  of  the  city,  the  neighbourhood  is  known  to  be  very  resourceful,  with  many  community  leaders and networks.    These are some of the demographics of Flemingdon ParkVictoria Village from the 2001 census:  ·  Population 40,000  ·  Immigrant population 65% (49% for City)  ·  Visible minority population 66% (43% for City)  ·  Average household income $43,876 ($69,125 for City)  ·  Low income persons 32.8% (22.6% for City)  ·  80% of population live in apartments, 63% in towers of over five stories  ·  Arrival of immigrants: > 1980 26%; 1981 > 1990 20%; 1991 > 2000 55%    In  addition  to  low  income  levels  and  lack  of  services,  the  neighbourhood  demographics  show  a  very  high  immigrant  population  with  largest  numbers  coming  from  Sri  Lanka,  Philippines,  China, and India (top 4). As can be seen from "arrival of immigrants" above,  there is a very high  proportion  of  recent  immigrants.  Also,  the  age  profile  of  the  neighbourhood  is  younger  than  the  city as a whole.  Partnership and food bank history Flemingdon Park Ministries (FPM) was established in the 1960s by the Anglican Diocese  of Toronto as a social outreach and community development agency.  It is not expected to have a  worshipping congregation or a church building and has operated from a variety of rented spaces.  The  Flemingdon  Park  Food  Bank  (FPFB)  was  started  and  run  by  the  Red  Cross,  but  about  ten  years  ago  the  Red  Cross  pulled  out.  As  the  result of  fierce  advocacy  by  the  executive  director  of  FPM,  the  food  bank  was  taken  on  as  a  project  of  the  Anglican  organization  and  continued  as  such until the retirement of this executive director (ED) three years ago.   The food bank had very strong community support and participation. Well and efficiently  run,  it  was  seen  to  be  an  essential  service  by  the  community,  responsive  to  the  diverse  needs  of  community  members  by  supplying  Halal  food  for  example.  In  the  opinion  of  the  present  ED  of  FPM,  the  Anglican  ministry  and  its  former  ED  developed  a  strong  reputation  for  selfless  community development and service, partly due to the operation of the food bank.   However, tensions and issues developed. The Diocese of Toronto decided  it did not want  to  operate  a  food  bank  as  part  of  its  ministry:  the  Diocese  questioned  the  use  of  staff  time  and  financial  resources  for  this  purpose,  and  was  very  concerned  about  liability.  Furthermore,  the  Diocese  felt  that  it  was  carrying  the  full  responsibility  for  what  should  be  a  community  based  service.  (This  opinion  was  shared  by  other  interviewees,  who  agreed  that  the  situation  was 

unjust.)  These  tensions  coincided  with  the  retirement  of  the  ED  and  subsequent  search  for  her  replacement.  In  fact,  when  the  new  ED  for  FPM  was  hired,  there  was  no  mention  of  a  food  bank  in  her  job  description,  despite  its  continuing  existence  and  community  expectations  that  it  would  be  business  as  usual  for  the  new  arrival.  The  Diocese  gave  clear  instructions  to  the  new  ED  that  she should divest herself of operational responsibilities for the food bank.  A  seemingly  minor,  but  nevertheless  important  shift  had  occurred  under  the  aegis  of  the  now  retired  ED.  The  board  of  directors  of  FPM  had  been  drawn  from  the  Anglican  community,  and  none  of  these  members  lived  in  Flemingdon  Park.  Similarly,  the  staff  person  for  the  food  bank  came  from  outside  the  neighbourhood.  While  these  were  all  competent  and  committed  people, they had little contact or identification with the diverse neighbourhood and clients served  by  FPM. The board realized this lack and invited  a  young  Ismaili community leader to join them  with the intention of having community voices represented. This move proved prescient.  There  was,  present  within  the  board  of  FPM,  a  further  significant  factor  in  dealing  successfully  with  the  tensions  mentioned  above.  The  chair  of  the  board  became  an  important  advocate  and  interpreter  at  the  Diocesan  level  for  the  food  bank  and  its  emerging  partnership.  This took some of the pressure off the new ED in dealing with her employer and bishop.   Crisis Early in 2010 the lease on the space in which the  food bank  was  situated  expired, and the  new rent was well beyond the capacity of the food bank. The Diocese took this as an opportunity  to  precipitate  the  removal  of  the  food  bank  from  FPM.  On  the  other  hand  the  new  ED  had  come  to  the  conclusion,  along  with  other  leaders,  that  the  food  bank  was  an  essential  community  service. However, she obviously had no support from her employer for sustaining its operation.  She  called  an  open  community  meeting  to  inform  people  of  the  crisis.  About  60  people  from  the  neighbourhood  showed  up,  comprised  mostly  of  volunteers  and  users,  and  they  expressed  many  ideas  for  saving  the  food  bank.  It  was,  according  to  the  ED,  a    surprisingly  hopeful and energetic meeting.  From  the  community  meeting  contacts  were  made  and  a  coalition  of  the  future  partners  emerged,  determined  to  save  the  food  bank.  They  formed  a  corporation  that  assumed  responsibility  for  the  food  bank,  thereby  addressing  the  concerns  of  the  Anglican  Diocese  by  removing  the  food  bank  from  the  Anglican  program  and  accompanying  financial  liability.  Additional  and  crucial  help  for  setting  up  the  new  organization  was  given  by  the  executive  director  of  Flemingdon  Park  Legal  Services.  The  elected  representatives  from  all  three  levels  of  government participated in the transition and were seen as being very supportive.  There  were  several  remarkable  features  of  this  rush  of  activity.  First,  it  was  clearly  initiated  and  sustained  by  an  outpouring  of  concern  from  the  community  who  used  and  volunteered  at  the  food  bank.  Secondly,  the  four  Muslim  organizations  drawn  into  the  fray  had  not previously cooperated with one another, even though several imams had friendly relations. In  fact,  the  food  bank  represents  the  first  time  that  Sunnis,  Shias  and   Ismailis  (a  Shia  sect)  in  the  area have worked together in an organized partnership. Thirdly, the facilitative role of the female 

Anglican  priest  in  creating  this  partnership  deserves  further  examination.  We  shall  look  at  all  these features in more detail shortly.  The  creation  of  FPFB  is  a  dramatic  story  of  a  diverse  religious  community  coming  together to avert a crisis and was featured in a Toronto Star article and a CBC interview.  After  some  initial  growing  pains,  the  food  bank  appears  to  be  a  viable  operation  that  attracts  strong  community  support.  At  the  time  of  the  interviews,  it  had  been  operating  in  its  new  incarnation  for  less  than  a  year.  A  sponsored  walk  had  much  higher  than  expected  participation  and  raised  $20,000.  The  new,  much  reduced  budget  meant  that  the  staff  person  had  to  be  let  go.  Her  place  was  taken  by  volunteers;  however,  the  FPM  ED  observed  that  the  operation  was  smoother under this arrangement. Rather than hiring  an outsider to manage the food bank, it was  now "by the  community, for the community." Plans  are  being  made  to  apply  for  a  grant  that  will  employ and train community volunteers on a parttime basis.  Intertwined relationships and community capacity Although  the  story  of  the  community  rallying  to  reinvent  its  food  bank  is  inspiring  by  itself,  further  investigation  reveals  that  this  story  is  built  upon  some  very  important  infrastructure,  which  comes  under  the  heading  of  community  capacity.  A  prime  example  of  this  capacity  is  that  the  food  bank  and  FPM  are  still  intertwined,  sharing  staff  and  integrating  services,  although,  as  noted  earlier,  the  ED  is  in  process  of  removing  herself  from  her  coordinating  role.  However,  the  food  bank  is  the  first  port  of  call  for  many  of  the  people  who  eventually  use  the  services  of  FPM.  People  will  come  seeking  food,  and  this  becomes  an  opportunity to establish trust and introduce them to the services offered by FPM. The two staff of  FPM  are  Sunni  Muslim  women,  from  Afghanistan  and  Sri  Lanka.  They  had  previously  been  volunteers  with  FPM,  and  their  language  skills  are  an  important  asset  that  helps  FPM  connect  with  a  wide  constituency.  Being  able  to  communicate  in  their  home  language  is  seen  as  the  most  important issue for women who come seeking help.   Dealing  with  a  wide  range  of  social  and  behavioural  issues  (addiction,  family  abuse,  mental  disability  and  disease)  is  part  of  the  daily  routine:   "some  people,  they  are  very  sick  and  most  of  the  people,  they  are  addicted,  and  we  have  to  be  careful  ...  but  we  know  how  to  deal  with  this  kind  of  people  because  we  are  working  in  this  community  for  a  long  time."  The  capacity  of  the  staff  team  to  maintain  connection,  confidentiality  and  professional  standards  is  very important for trust in the community ­ both for FPM and FPFB.  The  programs  offered  by  FPM  are  for  individual  and  community  empowerment,  and  include  personal  planning,  groups  for  seniors  and  women  and  a  children's  after  school  program  designed  for  selfesteem  and  relationship  building.  In  addition  to  help  with  homework  and  other  activities,  there  is  a  summer  camp  attracting  about  60  children.  These  children's  programs  are  done  in  partnership  with  the  local  Presbyterian  church.  These  programs  all  require  the  development  of  trust  and  religious  sensitivity,  since  most  of  the  participants  are  Muslim.  This  is  especially  true  of  the  children's  program.  For  example,  parents  trust  that  the  leaders  will  not  require female children to remove articles of clothing when taken on a swimming trip. 

Although  the  FPM  programs  are  not  within  the  partnership  being  studied,  they  provide  important  contextual  information  about  community  capacity  for  the  food  bank  partnership.  The  values that drove the Anglican agency are evident in the new partnership:  ·   There  is  a  culture  of  "by  the  community,  for  the  community"  in  FPM.  This  culture  encourages  strong  ownership  of  programs  and  projects  on  the  part  of  both  service  providers and users. Users often become volunteers and sometimes paid staff.  ·   The  desired  outcome  of  programming  is  interdependency:  that  is,  people  (including  children)  who  are  individually  well  developed  and  in  community  building  relationships  with one another.  ·   A  bank  of  trust  over  many  years  has  been  built  up.  People  know  that  they  will  be  treated  respectfully.  Muslims  are  comfortable  in  the  programs  sponsored  by  a  Christian  organization.  The  Anglicans  have  been  in  the  community  since  the  1960's;  they  have  focused  on  community  development  without  religious  discrimination  and  have  not  used  their position for proselytizing.  ·   The culture of FPM is to focus on people's needs, not their religion. "When you get into a  position,  you don't think about that first (a person's religion). You think about humility."  "We are here to serve." (Muslim staff person at FPM)  ·   Wellestablished,  strong,  female  leadership  is  evident  in  staff  and  volunteers.  Surprisingly,  this  leadership  was  accepted  by  the  exclusively  male  leaders  of  the  Muslim  organizations.  ·   Relationships  have  been  established;  people  are  used  to  working  together;  programs  emerge organically.  Community capacity: additional strengths and obstacles We  have  already  mentioned  that  the  four  partnering  Muslim  organizations  have  had  a  history  of  not  working  together.  The  reasons  are  not  difficult  to  understand.  The  Muslims  in this  community  are  very  diverse:  they  come  from  many  countries  and  cultures;  they  speak  many  languages;  religiously  they  comprise  Shias,  Sunnis  and  Ismailis.  They  are  Afghan,  Bangladeshi,  Palestinian,  Somalian,  Malaysian,  Moroccan  and  from  many  other  cultures.  There  is  an  understandable desire to "help our own". Barriers and rivalries have grown up within the Muslim  community.  One  of  the  remarkable  features  of  this  story  is  that  the  catalyst  for  Muslim  cooperation  was  the  female  Anglican  priest.  She  brought  strong  facilitative  skills  to  the  table  and  was  enthusiastic  in  her  engagement  with  Muslim  people  and  their  faith--careful,  for  example,  to  observe  Muslim  rules  for  women  in  prayer  spaces.  Nonetheless,  it  is  unusual  that  a  woman  was  able to bring the male Muslim leaders together around the same table. In addition to her personal  skills  and  interfaith  sensitivities,  she  was  probably  helped  in  her  mission  by  her  relatively  powerless  position.  (As  noted  earlier,  her  employer  wanted  the  food  bank  removed  from  its  obligations.)  On  the  other  hand,  she  was  an  authorized  religious  leader  supported  by  a  long 

tradition  of  credibility  in  the  community.  She  also  spoke  on  behalf  of  the  female  leadership  in  FPM and the larger community.  As  an  example  of  the  strong  loyalty  that  has  developed,  one  of  the  Muslim  leaders  advocated  in  person  on  her  behalf  to  her  bishop  in  regard  to  the  food  bank  issue.  She  has  been  invited to many Muslim gatherings and events, and (remarkably) is occasionally asked to lead in  prayer. All this speaks to the credibility of the Anglican priest as an interfaith leader, and also the  way  in  which  norms  have  been  challenged  or  at  least  have  developed  flexibility  in  the  Muslim  community.   These  tensions  have  also  been  explicitly  addressed  by  imams.  This  is  one  of  the  most  important  factors  in  the  success  of  the  partnership.  Against  the  idea  of  "looking  after  our  own"  several imams and other  Muslim leaders have been very clear that the food bank is for everyone,  no  matter  what  their  faith.  They  have  argued  that  the  Muslim  obligation  is  to  care  for  one's  neighbour  in  need,  and  there  are  no  restrictions  on  who  is  one's  "neighbour".  "It's  a  compulsory  act  that  we  must  give  to  the  poor."  As  a  result  the  food  bank  is  promoted  as  a  service  organization  by  and  for  the  whole  community.  It  builds  upon  the  practice  established  by  the  Anglican  FPM.  This  approach  has  built  a  strong  following  and  resulted  in  much  support.  However, it has also raised conflict.  One  area  of  conflict  is  that  mosques  wish  to  raise  money  for  their  own  outreach  efforts  within  their  Muslim  constituency;  it  is  very  easy  to  see  the  food  bank  as  a  competitor  for  funds  and  influence.  To  counter  this  attitude  imams  have  therefore  encouraged  giving  to  both  the  local  mosque  and  the  food  bank.  A  Sunni  group  from  a  nearby  city  decided  to  set  up  a  Muslimonly  food  bank  in  a  neighbouring  community,  despite  entreaties  to  join  their  efforts  with  the  FPFB.  The  Muslim  (Shia/Ismaili)  leaders  of  FPFB  chose  to  give  assistance  in  the  form  of  equipment  to  this  rival  food  bank,  and  are  working  to  establish  relations  with  the  new  food  bank  that,  they  hope, will lead to its becoming a satellite of FPFB. (As predicted, the two food banks are serving  many  of  the  same  people.)  As  one  Ismaili  board  member  noted,  "It  is  a  big  issue  for  Sunnis  to  work  with  Shias."  The  imam  of  the  Sunni  mosque  in  this  community  has  encouraged  his  members to work with the Shias.  Tensions  are  also  evident  in  the  daytoday  interchanges  experienced  by  the  two  Muslim  staff  of  FPM.  The  women  frequently  are  challenged  by  people  who  come  to  FPM  or  the  food  bank  as  to  why  they,  as  Muslims,  are  working  for  a  Christian  organization.  These  people  are  usually  recent  arrivals  to  Canada,  and  bring  religious  hostility  and  conflict  from  their  home  countries with them. The two staff reiterate the policy of FPM, which is to help people regardless  of  their  religion.  They  avoid  debate  on  the  subject,  but  note  that  with  time  people  often  come  to  accept  this  stance.  "We  have  to  be  very  soft  and  kind  and  take  it  easy,  knowing  that  they  are  trying to have a target." 

FPM  staff  often  participate  in  daily  prayers  together,  and  the  ED  leads  bible  study  sessions  attended  by  people  from  a  range  of  faiths.  The  culture  of  the  organization  has  an  inclusive  religious or spiritual dimension, probably made possible by the interfaith attitudes of the ED and  the dominance of women in the organization.  Constitution In  contrast  to  three  of  our  five  cases,  the  food  bank  has  a  formal  constitution,  and,  according  to  several  interviewees,  its  creation  was  essential  for  the  stability  of  the  organization.  The  context  we  described  above  of  community  and  religious  tensions  goes  a  long  way  to  explaining  why.  The  process  of  incorporation  and  the  development  of  a  written,  legal  agreement  on  governance  with  bylaws  were  described  as  a  "painful  process."  This  was  attributed  to  a  variety of factors:  ·   Recent  immigrants  who  have  not  been  exposed  to  civil  society  have  not  developed  an  understanding of governance practices in Canada.  ·   People of diverse cultures and faiths come with very different ideas of governance. Some  attribute these differences to generational attitudes.  ·   There  existed  the  view  that  the  board  of  the  food  bank  would  be  a  political  organization  and that  it  could  be  the  object  of  political  rivalries,  open  to  domination  or  takeover  by  an  outside group.    One  board  member  said  that  they  had  to  be  very  clear  that  the  food  bank  was  a  community  service,  and  that  the  board  was  there  solely  to  support  the  service.  Incorporation  and  the development of bylaws were intended to guard against the possibility of the food bank being  taken  over  by  an  outside  group  with  a  political  agenda.  The  context  for  these  fears  was  a  highly  politicized  environment  in  which  various  Muslim  groups  vied  for  influence.  As  one  Muslim  informant  observed,  the  present  situation  for  Muslims  in  the  neighbourhood  and  the  city  is  not  dissimilar to the religious landscape of Toronto in an earlier time, when Christian denominations  competed with one another.  In  addition  to  protecting  the  food  bank  as  a  communitybased  organization,  the  constitution ensures that relationships are organizationtoorganization, with all the organizations  represented  on  the  board  being  registered  charities.  Furthermore,  with  this  type  of  board,  commitments  are  longer  term  and  not  dependent  upon  individuals.  We  can  see  in  this  early  emphasis on legal constitution a desire to protect the new partnership and not rely solely on good  will.  Foundational elements of the partnership At this point we shall leave the story of the food bank and of the context from which it emerged,  and  move  into  a  more  reflective  mode,  allowing  our  interviewees  to  speak  of  some  of  the  foundational elements such as obstacles, motivation, trust, unique resources, making a difference  in the community, and the role of faith. 

Key phrases Each interviewee was asked to provide three words or phrases to describe the partnership:  ·   Historic  collaboration,  awesome,  privilege,  really  making  a  difference  in  the  community ­ amazing that it works  ·   Bridgebuilding, interfaith, cooperation  ·   Poverty, dignity, commitment, selfesteem, confidentiality, respect  ·   Inspiring, creative, pragmatic    The  partnership,  of  course,  cannot  be  completely  separated  from  the  project  for  which  it  exists,  and  so  these  phrases  reflect  key  aspects  both  of  the  food  bank  and  the  collaboration  that  enables it:   ·   Barriers, especially religious, that had to be overcome to create the partnership;   ·   The value of the partnership project to the community;  ·   The  core  values  of  the  project  that  are  the  heart  of  its  contribution  to  individual  and  community development.  Obstacles We  have  already  described  some  of  the  obstacles  faced  by  the  partners.  Probing  a  bit  deeper  into  the  process  of  getting  faithbased  organizations  to  work  together,  we  hear  that  although  each  partner  assumed  an  equal  share  of  costs,  it  is  still  difficult  raising  funds.  Furthermore,  it  was  hard  work  getting  faith  groups  to  make  a  legal  commitment  to  work  together.  Process  issues  added  to  these  difficulties:  people  work  very  differently  and  have  differing  norms  of  discipline  about  time  and  agenda.  "The  price  of  partnership  is  to  put  up  with  frustration."  We  have  mentioned  the  need  for  faith  groups  (Muslims  in  this  case)  to  show  that  they  are  helping  their  own,  and  also  the  implicit  suspicion  that  social  services  may  have  an  ulterior  motive  related  to  conversion.  However,  there  was  parallel  obstacle  experienced  by  the  church  partners  in  their  own  constituencies,  and  this  was  the  jealousy  that  could  develop  from  having  a  successful  food  bank  overshadow  other  local  efforts  at  mission,  particularly  when  fund  raising  was  at  stake.  Finally,  as  our  earlier  story  makes  clear,  the  partners  had  to  deal  with  the  higher  levels  of  a  hierarchical  organization,  which  had  financial  responsibility  and  decision making power, but did not have knowledge of the grassroots vision.  These obstacles may not all be unique to faithbased organizations; however, in this short  summary we can imagine the concerted determination of partners necessary to overcome them.  Motivation and strengths If  partnerships  involving  faithbased  organizations  produce  obstacles  that  are  directly  related  to  faith  or  religion,  then  they  also  have  some  countervailing  motivations  and  benefits.  After  all,  even  though  there  are  a  number  of  secular  agencies  in  the  community,  it  was  six  faith based ones that came together in response to the crisis. When asked about the role of faith in this  partnership,  respondents  replied  that  faith  is  part  of  the  solution:  "each  one  of  us  has  an  ethical 

imperative  to  help  those  in  need;  that's  the  glue  that  brought  us  together."  Furthermore,  the  partnership  is  not  just  a  utilitarian  means  to  the  end  of  helping  those  in  need.  For  many  the  partnership  is  just  as  important  as  the  food  bank,  and  the  two  cannot  be  separated:  although  "we  were  all strangers to  each other  ...  the  more  we work  together  the  more  we  realize  how  common  and  fundamental  our  values  are;"  and,  the  focus  on  a  common  practical  project  helps  to  sustain  the  partnership,  fostering  patience  and  tolerance  for  one  another.  People  spoke  of  the  "humanitarian  gesture",  rooted  in  their  faith,  as  being  the  primary  motivation  to  work  together,  and how they were "driven by faith".  There  is  also  more  at  stake  than  a  single  food  bank:  "the  bigger  picture  is  the  broader  commitment to this coming together of the different faiths, to work together, to be an example to  the  rest  of  the  city,  to  the  province,  to  other  countries."  Respondents  felt  that  "people  are  watching us, to see how we nurture and sustain pluralistic coexistence."  How  were  they  measuring  success  apart  from  sustaining  a  reliable  core  service?  Interviewees  spoke  of  media  attention,  the  capacity  to  develop  the  partnership  and  its  services  further  and  to  "reach  out  to  the  unknown  and  uncomfortable".  They  took  pride  in  the  successful  community food drives connected to Ramadan and noted the involvement of young people under  the  age  of  30  in  awareness  and  fund  raising  efforts.  They  felt  that  working  together  in  an  interfaith  partnership  had  created  a  ripple  effect  in  the  community  and  encouraged  other  volunteers.  Not  surprisingly,  there  are  strengths  that  came  with  these  faithbased  organizations  that  directly  contributed  to  the  success  of  their  partnership.  First  is  the  goodwill  of  their  constituencies.  Each  could  draw  on  many  connections  ­  "a  chain  of  support"  ­  for  acquiring  donations  of  all  kinds.  For  example  businesses  provided  sponsorships  from  all  parts  of  the  city  for the fundraising walk. These connections were also between religious leaders, politicians and  community leaders, which led to credibility, "an instant reputation", and media coverage.  Making a difference in the community One  of  the  reasons  for  choosing  this  case  was  the  impact  on  the  larger  community.  We  have  seen  that  there  is  strong  local  ownership  of  the  food  bank  as  an  important  community  resource.  The  food  bank  instills  a  feeling  of  dignity  in  volunteers  and  users,  because  it  is  "for  the  community,  by  the  community."  However,  the  board  wishes  to  move  from  simply  providing  food  to  studying  and  acting  on  questions  of  food  access  and  food  security,  and  they  have  received  a  grant  for  this  initiative.  Similarly,  while  they  have  accommodated  religious  needs,  the  next step is to consider needs that are dietary and health related.  The  project  aims  at  developing  people  as  well  as  providing  food.  Volunteers  at  the  food  bank  develop  selfesteem  and  language  skills;  they  can  go  on  to  other  jobs  and  community  leadership  on  the  basis  of  this  experience.  And  as  noted  before,  the  food  bank  is  just  the  front  line  in  helping  people  who  come  with  a  host  of  needs:  "they  burst  with  pain  ...  everyone  has  been  tortured  in  some  way  or  another  ...  they  thought  there  were  no  resources  for  them,  but  when we give something to them that they really needed, they appreciate it." (FPM staff) 

We can't claim that these effects on the larger community are directly linked to the multi faith  partnership  aspect  of  this  project.  Rather,  they  speak  to  what  the  faithbased  partnership  is  trying  to  achieve  in  terms  of  broader  community  health  and  development.  Indeed,  this  collective  aim is congruent with the partners' own goals. For example, the Ismaili community is committed  to  nurturing  a  healthy,  pluralistic  society,  and  to  strengthening  civil  society.  The  food  bank  is  a  practical way that Muslims of all denominations can realize their mission: "everyone is for it, it's  a  major  focus  for  us."  Supporting  practices  in  community  development  that  seek  to  counteract  dependency  (that  can  often  characterize  food  handouts),  Islam  teaches  that  the  poor  shouldn't  remain  poor;  they  should  become  resourceful.  And  it  has  provided  an  inspirational  story  for  Anglicans, both in terms of social justice and interfaith collaboration.  Trust "We  came  together  as  trustworthy  people.  Who  could  better  be  trusted  than  a  person  of  faith?"  We  have  seen  the  implicit  role  of  trust  in  this  partnership,  and  here  we  have  trust  linked  to  faith.  However,  there  is  more  to  the  faith/trust  connection.  After  all,  in  our  discussion  of  tensions and obstacles we have seen that religious leaders are also capable of sowing distrust and  creating divisions.   This  case  is  an  interesting  conjunction  of  creating  new,  trustworthy  relationships  and  a  history  of  trust  built  up  over  many  decades.  We  have  seen  that  one  of  the  partners,  the  Anglican  ministry, has served the  community for nearly 50  years,  and  has  developed  a  solid  reputation,  so  much  so  that  conservative  Muslims  are  willing  to  entrust  their  children  to  its  programs.  We  also  noted  that  the  current  ED  has  gone  out  of  her  way  to  engage  with  religious  traditions  other  than  her  own,  and  has  been  rewarded  with  invitations  to  lead  prayer  and  be  present  in  public,  Muslim  settings.  The  acceptance  of  her  leadership  by  the  male  Muslim  clergy  is  a  mark  of  the  degree  of  trust  achieved.  And  perhaps  less  obvious  to  the  outsider  is  the  long  standing  relationship  of  20  years  between  two  of  the  leading  imams,  one  Sunni  and  the  other  Ismaili.  Could  the  partnership  have  occurred  without  this  building  block  in  place?  But  certainly  when  we  come  to  consider  the  birth  of  the  partnership  itself,  the  key  factor  in  creating  the  trust  necessary  for  a  successful  outcome was the overriding commitment of all parties to the common cause.  On  the  one  hand  we  have  trust  established  between  religious  leaders  that  is  based  upon  respect,  long  standing  relationships  and  the  willingness  to  cross  over  boundaries.  On  the  other  hand, when we come to  dig further into `the  common cause' we find that  trust is founded upon a  basic,  shared  theological  belief  that  God  cares  for  all  humanity  without  distinction  and  is  not  limited to "caring  for our own." This belief animated the partnership and  enabled them to defend  their project against corroding, tribal loyalties.  Role of faith, belief, and assumptions about life There  are  some  very  practical  considerations  that  entered  into  this  interfaith  partnership.  Meetings  should  not  be  scheduled  at  times  when  one  group  is  obligated  to  pray.  This  may  sound  obvious,  but  diocesan  scheduling  that  did  not  take  Muslim  prayer  time  into  account  was  a  major 

irritant.  On  a  more positive  note, food  drives could be linked to times of  religious  obligation  and  fasting: Ramadan and Lent.   The  focus  for  the  interfaith  partnership  was  a  humanitarian  project.  Therefore,  "we  don't  need  to  discuss  theology  ...  we  are  not  there  for  prayers  ...  and  we  are  not  concerned  with  how  you  practice  your  faith."  However,  this  brusque  response  to  how  the  partnership  dealt  with  potential  religious  conflicts  was  qualified  by  the  observation  that  at  board  meetings  "our  hearts  are  always  praying."  It  is  always  instructive  to  probe  the  common  language  that  a  group  uses  to  develop  its  common  life  and  to  achieve  its  goals.  In  this  case,  the  language  was  grounded  in  serving  needs  rather  than  theology,  although  an  imam  interviewee  offered  a  story  of  Abraham  as  a  model  of  the  hospitality  the  partners  show  to  one  another  and  that  the  food  bank  shows  to  its  users.  This  partnership  is  a  contrast  to  the  next  one  we  will  consider  in  that  some  of  the  leaders  are  clergy, and  clergy have professional theological training. So, while the  partners stuck to their  common,  humanitarian  goal  while  meeting  as  a  board,  in  private  some  became  more  theologically  reflective  about  the  faith  element  of  the  food  bank.  The  Anglican  priest  saw  the  interfaith partnership and the food bank it supported as a new, community development model of  "engaging  in  mission  and  being  the  church  ...  empowering  people  to  make  decisions  and  transform  their  own  lives."  She  felt  that  all  faiths  shared  the  incarnational  sense  of  the  presence  of  God:  "(We  operate  from)  a  conviction  that  God  has  already  given  the  gift  of  transformation  and  hope  and  new  life.  We  don't  have  to  create  it.  We're  just  there  to  enliven  and  empower  and  to walk alongside."   Advice? We  asked  interviewees  what  advice  they  would  give  groups  wishing  to  start  up  a  partnership  such  as  theirs.  Their  responses  apply  beyond  faith  groups,  but  they  reflect  their  particular interfaith experience. The chief advice is to exercise patience and presence. During the  course  of  creating  the  partnership,  the  players  were  present  to  one  another  without  an  agenda:  "we had an  agenda inflicted upon us, but we were successful because we were known, present to  one  another,  showed  interest  in  one  another's  story."  Be  patient:  the  proof  is  not  in  the  pudding,  but in the process. At the end  you may  get pudding, biriyani, or cookies, but don't underestimate  the process."  They  also  advised  against  complacency  or  insularity:  "push  your  thinking  about  who  could  be  brought  to  the  table  to  help  your  cause;"  "think  widely  and  push  beyond  the  familiar;"  and  take  the  attitude  that  "we  don't  have  to  solve  this  on  our  own."  They  knew  that  faith  communities  cannot  do  things  alone  to  serve  the  city;  they  should  be  complementing  the  efforts  of  government.  And  they  expressed  the  hope  that  future  partnerships  would  see  secular  agencies  collaborating with religious ones for the common good. 

How have you been affected by the partnership? Faith  has  many  dimensions  from  institutional  to  personal,  and  in  this  final  question  we  probed  for  change  at  the  personal  level  that  may  include  elements  of  faith.  Thinking  of  the  interfaith experience, people spoke of an increase in tolerance  and emotional maturity, of  respect  for  other  religions,  of  a  new  freedom  to  pray  with  those  of  another  faith,  and  of  a  deep  appreciation  of  what  we  have  in  common,  which  ultimately  is  more  important  than  the  differences that divide us. All felt their faith had been strengthened in some way.  Those  who  were  frontline  service  providers,  along  with  board  members,  found  that  "the  strengthening  comes  more  from  practice  than  it  does  from  reading  about  it,  in  the  doing."  The  interfaith project provided  a  special  place  to  work:  "you're  closer  to  being  with  the  client  ...  and  you treat the person like a human being." And work is a vocation: "I can feel the people from my  community.  It  is  a  big  goal  for  me  to  help  my  people  in  this  community."  "We  have  a  soft  heart  and try to work better."  The  Anglican  priest,  who  began  this  story  in  considerable  desperation,  had  emerged  a  year later with a new sense of God's grace and thankfulness for the unique opportunity she has in  a lifegiving job: "it's been humbling to see the  gifts that people bring together in a situation like  this  ...  people  really  do  care  about  community,  transformation,  making  a  difference,  changing,  being there for the long haul."  

Food bank two (Case 3)
The  story  of  how  this  food  bank  came  to  be  features  energetic  and  skilled  volunteer  efforts  from  people  of  faith,  who  were  convinced  that  partnerships  are  vital  to  provide  needed  services.  The  food  bank  itself  is  an  everexpanding  service  that  seeks  to  address  the  needs  of  the  whole  person.  The  ecumenical  and  multifaith  partners  bring  their  unique  values  and  contributions, which increase the health of both individuals and organizations and help to resolve  conflict.  The  intentional  creation  of  an  inclusive  and  nonhierarchical  community  is  key  to  this  project.  However,  growth  has  led  to  tensions  with  the  host  church,  and  there  are  attitudinal  obstacles  related  to  faith  that  have  to  be  met.  Faith  issues,  both  personal  and  corporate,  have  a  great  effect  on  this  collaboration  between  Muslims,  Buddhists  and  Christians.  There  is  a  large  amount  of  detail  in  this  account,  but  detail  is  what  the  leaders  pay  attention  to,  and  in  order  to  understand  this  project  we  need  to  follow  their  lead.  To  distinguish  themselves  from  more  traditional food banks, they call this "The Food Basket."  Program and partners The  Food  Basket  is  a  multiservice  program  that  operates  one  day  per  week  from  a  United  Church  in  Etobicoke,  an  inner  suburb  of  Toronto.  The  primary  service  is  a  hot  or  cold  meal  followed  by  free  groceries,  with  an  emphasis  on  fresh  produce.  Child  care  is  provided.  Additional  services  available  to  clients  (many  in  the  form  of  advice)    include  a  public  health  nurse, a social worker, legal advice, settlement services, practice in English, connections with the  library  and  ESL  services,  employment  referrals,  revolving  micro  loans  to  refugees  for  work 

permits  and  residency  status,  and  assistance  with  tax  returns.  A  community  garden  on  church  property  has  begun,  tended  by  users  of  the  Food  Basket;  the  garden  provides  produce  for  the  program. The program serves 200 families and 400 people per week, many of whom are Muslim.  Single  women  with  children  form  a  significant  proportion  of  the  clients.  The  main  languages  spoken,  other  than  English,  are  Russian,  Spanish  and  Arabic.  The  goal  of  the  Food  Basket  is  sustainability  and  empowerment,  not  just  providing  emergency  food.  One  measure  of  success  is  the  number  of  people  who  deregister  from  the  Food  Basket  services,  which  is  about  25  families  per  year (although there are also returnees). `Our key goal is to empower the families to be more  independent, so that's why there are so many other services that wrap around this Food Basket.'  The program is an informal partnership of  13  local churches,  three  mosques,  and  the  Tzu  Chi  foundation  (a  Buddhist  charitable  organization),  although  the  mosques  and  some  of  the  churches can hardly be described  as institutional partners. These partners  provide volunteers  and  material  resources.  Officially,  the  Food  Basket  is  an  outreach  program  of  the  United  Church  in  which  it  is  housed.  While  the  Food  Basket  does  its  own  accounting,  the  church  retains  trusteeship  of  their  funds.  The  Food  Basket  has  its  own  steering  team  composed  of  representatives from partners, volunteers and recipients. However, there is no formal constitution  or  partnership  agreement  that  binds  the  participating  organizations.  The  entire  operation  is  voluntary.  Some  recipients  become  volunteers  in  the  program.  The  current  coordinator  is  a  retired  social  worker  and  one  of  the  three  original  founders  of  the  Food  Basket.  She  devotes  an  enormous  amount  of  time,  attention  and  energy  to  the  program.  There  are  180  volunteers  associated with the program, many of whom are committing almost full time hours.  The  church  provides  the  facilities  for  the  program,  which  consist  of  a  very  large,  open  hall/gymnasium,  a  kitchen  and  storage  space.  Although  the  program  is  open  only  one  day  per  week,  these  facilities  are  needed  by  the  program  for  an  additional  three  days  to  prepare  and  dismantle. By using a separate phone number for the food bank, the church attempts to direct the  many  communications  away  from  its  administrative  staff.  The  food  bank  operation  makes  demands  on  the  janitorial  staff  of  the  church,  and  affects  the  other  programs,  such  as  Meals  On  Wheels, that use the church space.  Food  is  provided  by  Daily  Bread  Food  Bank,  Second  Harvest  and  many  local  merchants.  Donations  of  money  are  used  to  purchase  produce  at  the  Food  Terminal.  The  church  partners  also  provide  food,  toiletries,  money,  etc.  The  steering  team  is  responsible  for  soliciting  and  transporting donations. Home Depot helps with the community garden.  The  public  health  nurse  is  a  major  player  in  the  organization,  bringing  many  contacts  for  resources  and  fundraising,  and  keeping  the  steering  team  well  informed  about  conditions  and  programs.  "She's  a  great  font  of  knowledge,  a  real  organizer,  and  keeps  us  on  track  a  lot  of  the  time."   Neighbourhood With  its  prosperous  looking  middleclass  houses,  this  inner  suburb  does  not  look  like  a  neighbourhood  that  needs  a  food  bank.  Indeed,  the  city  councilor  famously  declared  that  there 

was no poverty in the ward.  The demographic profile would seem to support this view: levels of  income,  education,  and  home  ownership  are  all  higher  than  the  city  average.  The  population  is  older and less diverse than the city (mostly AngloSaxon in origin and Canadian born).   However, the public health nurse tells a different story. One of the top priorities she hears  about  in  her  community  development  role  for  the  whole  suburb  is  food  security,  by  which  is  meant  access  to  affordable,  nutritious  and  culturally  appropriate  food.  Most  of  the  children  in  two  sectors  of  this  suburb  eat  just  one  meal  a  day,  and  gangs  use  the  promise  of  food  to  recruit  their  members.  She  sees  a  host  of  interrelated  issues  that  affect  public  health:  poverty;  unemployment;  lack  of  food,  adequate  housing,  access  to  safe  recreational  spaces,  educational  supplements  (after  school  tutoring);  crime  and  gangs.  The  people  associated  with  these  issues  live in highrise towers and townhouses.  As  we  will  see  later,  the  two  conflicting  views  of  the  neighbourhood  are  contributors  to  both attitudinal obstacles and support for the Food Basket.   History Although  the  story  begins  with  a  request  from  secular  community  agencies,  in  the  end  these  and  other  community  agencies  lacked  the  capacity  to  partner  effectively  to  address  the  needs  they  had  identified.  Rather  it  was  the  initiative  and  determination  of  a  few  church  leaders,  highly  experienced  in  social  work,  that  led  to  the  creation  of  the  Food  Basket  and  its  impressive  network of volunteers.  Four  years  prior  to  the  interviews,  two  community  workers  from  the  Social  Planning  Council  and  Toronto  Housing  Corporation  wrote  to  the  church,  requesting  that  it  consider  opening a food bank, because two food banks in the area had closed. The sizable church building  is well situated on a main thoroughfare and has ample parking. The suburb has little public space  and  few  social  agencies;  the  church  is  close  to  three  complexes  of  community  housing.  The  congregation,  although aging  and declining in numbers, is still active and  vigorous  and is known  for  its  social  activism.  These  factors  made  the  church  a  natural  choice.The  public  health  nurse  helped  to  facilitate  a  meeting  between  tenants  from  public  housing,  local  social  service  agencies  and the church.  The  request  was  taken  up  by  the  Justice  Working  Group  of  the  church.  Church  leaders  consulted  Daily  Bread,  who  confirmed  that  there  was  a  need  for  a  food  bank  in  the  area,  and  promised  staff  and  equipment  support.  Three  volunteers  from  the  church  with  professional  experience  in  social  work  agreed  to  investigate.  They  did  not  count  on  receiving  staff  and  equipment from Daily Bread, and began to explore resources in the community.   Although  the  majority  opinion  in  the  church  was  that  a  food  bank  could  be  managed  by  the  church  membership,  one  of  the  key  leaders  (the  current  coordinator)  knew  from  her  research  that  they  would  be  inundated  with  people.  She  knew  that  the  church  was  close  to  three  large  housing  projects,  that  many  immigrants  moved  to  the  area  and  that  the  church  was  a  short  bus  ride  from  the  airport.  "We  can't  do  it  alone.  We've  got  to  have  help  from  all  of  the  other  churches  in  the  area,  or  it  isn't  going  to  work.  We  need  a  boatload  of  volunteers.  And  that's  got 

to  come  from  everywhere.  And  I  won't  do  it  if  what  we're  giving  out  is  Kraft  dinner  and  tuna.  We need donation money so we can go to the Food Terminal."  A  steering  team  was  set  up.  Representatives  from  a  variety  of  social  agencies  were  invited  to  participate;  however,  for  various  reasons,  participation  from  these  groups  was  limited.  It  was  clear  that  the  driving  force  had  to  be  the  church.  The  church  leaders  made  use  of  their  connections  and  pool  of  volunteers  to  initiate  strategic  partnerships  and  bring  new  members  to  the  steering  team  who  would  represent  the  larger  community,  including  representatives  from  nearby  churches.  From  the  outset  the  steering  team  included  members  who  were  living  in  poverty.  Others  (from  the  participating  churches)  had  professional  experience  and  first  hand  knowledge of working with people in poverty in the community, although they were now retired.  Their knowledge of poverty was an important motivator for joining the project.  An  early  conflict  arose  around  the  question,  "Who  is  this  for?"  Community  housing  representatives  wanted  it  for  their  tenants,  but  the  church  leaders  were  clear  it  could  not  be  limited  in  this  way.  The  steering  team  created  a  common  goal  that  articulated  an  inclusive  approach  and  a  common  language  for  discussion.  As  a  result  there  was  very  little  conflict  and  few  group  dynamic  issues.  The  steering  team  had  a  dual  role:  they  were  responsible  for  the  strategic  direction  of  the  food  bank,  and  they  were  also  all  volunteers  in  its  operation.  They  developed a reputation for determination and getting what they wanted.  During  six  months  of  exploration  and  research  the  three  volunteers  got  13  local  churches  on  board,  who  agreed  to  provide  volunteers,  money  and  giftsinkind.  They  received  a  startup  loan from their national church office to buy equipment and bring the kitchen up to the minimum  standard  required  by  the  Department  of  Health.  They  received  the  support  of  Future  Bakery  (owned  by  the  local  MP)  in  the  form  of  dayold  bread  and  a  ticket  to  the  Food  Terminal.  Second  Harvest  came  on  board  "after  six  difficult  months."  More  businesses,  charitable  organizations  and individual volunteers followed. "We've been flying by the seat of our pants ever since."   A developing service The  Food  Basket  opened  about  threeandahalf  years  ago.  When  it  first  opened  there  were  large  numbers,  but  the  people  who  came  were  "psychologically  quite  stoic"  and  unexpressive,  not  knowing  if  the  service  would  last  and  exhibiting  the  numbing  effects  of  social  stress.  This  was  puzzling  to  the  volunteers.  However,  the  Food  Basket  began  to  provide  food  to  be  consumed  on  the  premises,  and  this  changed  the  dynamic.  People  began  to  open  up,  there  was  conversation  and  even  a  bit  of  laughter.  The  volunteers  began  to  bring  music  to  the  program.  More  people  came,  and  the  steering  team  had  to  meet  more  often  to  discuss  how  to  respond  to  expanding  numbers  and  increasing  awareness  of  the  multiplicity  of  needs.  Crowd  control  was  a  huge  issue.  Fights  would  break  out  in  queues.  "You  have  to  understand  that  these  people  are  in  survival  mode  ...  they're  trying  to  get  food  for  their  family,  and  that's  what  their  reality  is.  They  may  not  be  the  most  polite  when  they're  in  line."  (This  issue  was  resolved  by  developing  a  numbering  system.)  Recipients  do  not  so  much  "eat  as  vacuum  the  food."  "They  probably  haven't eaten in two or three days." 

The  Food  Basket  has  continued  to  evolve.  Evolution  is  largely  driven  by  contact  with  users  and  steering  team  discussions.  The  researching  spirit  that  characterized  the  first  phase  of  exploration  into  needs  and  resources  in  the  community  continues.  These  are  some  notable  developments:  ·   There are many Muslim users who require halal food.  ·   Many  of  users  are  single  Muslim  women  with  children,  abandoned  by  their  husbands.  Their  existence,  seen  as  shameful,  is  not  acknowledged  by  their  mosques  and  religious  leaders. They have special needs.  ·   At  the  outset  users  came  from  subsidized  housing  in  the  neighbourhood;  now  users  include more refugees and recent immigrants from outside the area.  ·   In response to various health and social needs, a public health nurse, a social worker, and  volunteers  with  legal  and  financial  skills  attend  the  weekly  operation  and  make  themselves available to users.  ·   A community garden on church property that adjoins a city park has started and is largely  tended by users.  ·   There  is  an  emphasis  on  fresh  produce  and  healthy  foods.  The  volunteers  from  the  Buddhist  organization  who  sort  through  the  food  intake  from  Daily  Bread  and  other  donors on the two days prior to the weekly opening ensure that the food is of high quality  and appropriate for the users.  ·   Providing enough food has become a serious issue and produced tensions.  ·   The  steering  team  continually  seeks  new  members  who  will  represent  the  community  served  by  the  Food  Basket  and  who  will  bring  new  partnerships  "that  would  address  the  family as a whole."    After operating for nearly four  years, and feeling that it has been mostly crisis management, they  see the need for more structure in the organization.  They  successfully  applied  for  a  Trillium  grant  to  renovate  the  kitchen  and  to  add  a  structure  to  the  back  of  the  building.  Negotiating  with  the  church  board  and  the  church  groups  that  feel  ownership  of  the  space  (especially  the  kitchen)  was  very  stressful,  but  ultimately  successful. (We shall consider relations with the host church in more detail below.)  Community Capacity Building and Faith Groups The  public  health  nurse  attributes  the  community  capacity  that  supports  the  Food  Basket  to  relationship  building.  She  and  others  are  careful  to  share  stories  of  individuals  and  families  rather  than  statistics.  "It's  the  facial  interaction  that  you  can't  say  no  to."  She  also  credits  the  clergy  of  the  participating  churches  with  providing  vital  support  by  facilitating  communications  and defusing personality and other conflicts.   Her  own  contribution  to  community  capacity  building  is  considerable.  The  following  story  relates  how  she  engaged  a  Buddhist  organization,  and  describes  the  values  on  which  the  relationship  was  established.  She  had  three  friends  who  introduced  her  to  the  Tzu  Chi 

organization.  Over  dinner  the  nurse  promoted  the  virtues  of  the  Food  Basket  and  asked  for  assistance. The friends toured the Food Basket and identified help that Tzu Chi could provide. A  request  was  made  to  the  commissioners  and  to  the  Master  in  Taiwan,  who  approved  the  engagement  of  the  organization.  Tzu  Chi  respects  the  nurse  as  a  reliable  and  compassionate  witness  in  touch  with  the  needs  of  the  city;  however,  they  had  to  go  and  see  the  Food  Basket  in  operation  for  themselves.  They  found  hunger  (families  receiving  an  insufficient  amount  of  food)  and  a  declining  capacity  to  provide  healthy  food  or  respond  to  special  needs  (the  Food  Basket  lost its supply of eggs; a child with cystic fibrosis could not be given enough nutritional food).   This  careful  exploration  is  typical  of  Tzu  Chi  in  that  the  organization  wants  to  ensure  a  good  fit  with  its  own  values:  compassion,  genuine  need  not  being  met  through  government,  healthy  and  culturally  appropriate  food  (Buddhists  are  vegetarian),  emphasis  on  handson  involvement  rather  than  giving  money,  users  treated  with  respect,  commitment  and  competence  evident in leadership by an active and problemsolving board.   Once  Tzu  Chi  decided  to  become  a  partner,  it  had  a  snowball  effect.  The  Buddhists  sort  through  the  incoming  food  on  Mondays,  and  are  very  effective  at  salvaging  deteriorating  food  and  finding  uses  for  excess  quantities.  As  a  result  they  have  attracted  more  volunteers  to  their  Monday  work.  "They're  teaching  the  volunteers  (a  new  skill  each  week),  so  everybody's  always  fighting to volunteer to work with the Buddhist Foundation."  Community  capacity  building  has  a  religious  aspect.  The  partnerships  are  strengthened  through  attendance  at  each  other's  religious  festivals.  The  host  church  has  made  its  facilities  available  to  the  Muslims  for  their  Eid  festivals.  Christians  and  Buddhists  are  invited  to  participate.  Similarly,  the  Buddhists  extend  an  invitation  to  their  New  Year's  ceremonies.  Christmas  baskets  are  prepared  for  everyone,  regardless  of  their  religion.  "There  was  a  great  sharing, and there's an openness to share cultures and religious practices ..."  "I  think  there's  a  huge  growth  in  terms  of  the  relationship  between  the  churches  in  this  neighbourhood  and  communication,  which  is  quite  advantageous."  The  public  health  nurse  realizes  that  the  network  of  churches  and  mosques  established  through  the  Food  Basket  is  a  key  community  resource.  "There  is  an  understanding  that  this  is  an  affluent  community  and  they  don't need the social services. It can work to disadvantage for people in need ... the churches are  recognizing that and stepping up. The reality is that the city services here are very, very limited."  Furthermore,  as  mentioned  earlier,  the  official  view  of  this  suburb  as  an  affluent  community  means  that  the  extensive  research  done  by  the  founders  of  the  Food  Basket  that  belies  the  perception of affluence has to be kept under the radar.  Community  development  is  not  limited  to  faith  groups.  Businesses  are  solicited  for  donations of food. They  also provide volunteers.  The number of businesses involved is used as a  measure  of  success.  A  recent  event  illustrates  how  other  organizations  were  engaged  in  an  event  of community betterment that began with the Food Basket.   Food  Basket  families  wanted,  but  could  not  afford,  bicycles  for  their  children.  The  Food  Basket  decided  to  organize  a  bicycle  drive  and  managed  to  draw  in  the  Toronto  Police.  "I  don't  know  if  you  ever  worked  with  the  Toronto  Police.  It's  actually  very  difficult  (to  get  them 

committed  and  to  come  to  meetings).  They  were  at  that  meeting  every  week."  The  police  provided  bike  storage  and  tuneups,  instruction  in  traffic  safety  and  solicited  donations.  The  bicycle  drive  expanded  to  become  a  community  fair.  About  20  public  organizations  were  involved,  including  Public  Health,  Toronto  Housing,  Parks  and  Recreation,  Toronto  Libraries,  George  Hull  Centre,  and  Women's  Habitat.  Canadian  Tire  discounted  helmets.  "They're  all  really recognizing the value of an engaged community." (Other interviewees evaluated this event  differently,  noting  the  enormous  volunteer  effort  that  was  required  and  the  relatively  small  number of bicycles that were donated and reconditioned. "Idiots that we are, we're going to do it  again.")  Key phrases to describe partnership The interviewees described their partnership in the following way:  ·   Unique partnership, a learning experience for all of us, a joyful experience  ·   Ecumenical and interfaith; personal connections with clients  ·   Need  that  is  there  and  lack  of  understanding  between  communities  (especially  in  the  Muslim community)  ·   Open communication, commitment, faith in mankind  ·   Happy environment, helpful, cooperation  ·   Necessary (unfortunately), compassion, warmth, reliability, generosity.    Many of their words speak to the quality and strong sense of community that is at the heart of the  Food Basket, and to this topic we now turn, beginning with the question of governance.  Community, governance and development in the steering team There  is  no  written  constitution  and  partners  do  not  always  sign  agreements.  (Ontario  Works  is  an  exception.)  Governance  is  provided  by  a  steering  committee  that  meets  once  a  month  for  two  and  a  half  to  three  hours.  It  is  responsible  for  policy,  procedures  and  direction.  In  addition  to  addressing  the  usual  resource  and  operational  issues,  they  ask  of  themselves  the  strategic  question  "What  additional  services  can  we  provide  that  will  boost  the  families  at  the  Food Basket?"   For  the  most  part  members  of  the  steering  team  are  representatives  of  their  churches  or  organizations.  (The  churches  all  wrote  letters  of  support  for  a  Trillium  application  submitted  by  the  steering  team.)  However,  organizationtoorganization  relationships  are  informal,  and  this  is  a  possible  weakness.  The  mosques  and  at  least  one  church  have  members  who  volunteer  and  even  sit  on  the  steering  team,  but  do  so  as  individuals  rather  than  representatives  of  their  religious organizations.  In fact, relations are sometimes strained between these organizations and  the Food Basket.  It  is  a  different  story  within  the  steering  team,  which  has  a  strong  sense  of  community.  The  atmosphere  is  described  as  energetic,  "beyond  cooperative,  collegial,"  and  bubbly.  Food  is  always  provided  at  meetings  and  people  care  about  each  other.  "It's  a  first  name  basis,  strictly." 

Members  will  often  make  personal  donations  to  cover  operational  needs.  They  are  also  expert  at  soliciting  donations  ("they  won't  take  no  for  an  answer").  The  motivation  and  commitment  of  members  derives  from  relationships  formed  on  the  steering  team  and  with  the  volunteers  and  users of the Food Basket. "The goal isn't `Let's get the program  going.' The goal is making sure  that everyone is well along the way."" "The key thing is that they listen and they care. I think the  families  at  the  Food  Basket  know  that."  The  public  health  nurse  speculates  that  this  energy  and  attitude is based in the "church philosophy" and "practicing what they preach."   The leaders have included tenant representatives  from supportive housing  on the steering  and  volunteer  teams  to  ensure  that  the  local  expertise  of  poor  people  is  well  used.    "They  can  talk  to  their  peers  and  not  be  seen  as  talking  down  to  them."  They  can  say  no  to  requests.  They  give  insights  into  the  conditions  of  living  in  chronic  poverty,  and  provide  practical  advice  relevant  to  the  users.  In  a  similar  vein,  a  food  bank  user  on  the  steering  team  is  a  wellrespected  community  leader.  Due  to  his  influence  public  health  brought  a  vaccine  clinic  to  the  food  bank,  knowing that the users would not go to an immunization clinic.  "The  key  thing  is  open  communication.  We  share  everything.  We  share  the  successes.  We  share  the  conflicts.  We  share  the  issues."  The  public  health  nurse  keeps  the  minutes  and  maintains  formal  communications.  "As  much  fun  as  we  have,  there  is  a  process  of  documenting  the key decisionmaking  and how money is spent. They're very  frugal about the money ..." The  minutes and financial statements are shared with the all partners in a formal and written manner.   One  of  the  key  relationships  of  the  steering  team  is  with  the  volunteers,  who  are  a  mixture  of  people  from  the  partnering  organizations,  recipients  and  unemployed.  "If they have a  problem,  they  tend  to  come  to  one  of  us  on  the  board.  ...  by  and  large  they  are  a  very  capable  bunch." They are encouraged to "sort it out on their own, and then look for help ... we treat them  like adults."   Steering team members and volunteers are on a first name basis, and are not identified by  their  organization  or  status  (e.g.  member  of  a  particular  church,  recipient,  tenant  in  public  housing  etc.).  Sometimes  steering  team  members  are  mistaken  for  recipients  (and  are  pleased  to  be  so).  The  sense  of  equality  and  lack  of  distinctions  is  an  important  part  of  the  Food  Basket  culture;  however,  it  can  lead  to  confusion  in  identification  (for  some  folk  who  need  these  status  markers),  and  in  operations  (knowing  who  is  in  charge).  Colourcoded  nametags  have  been  introduced  to  deal  with  the  latter  issue.  Such  confusion,  interviewees  felt,  is  a  small  price  to  pay  for  the  sense  of  community  that  animates  the  operation  and  provides  one  of  the  key  motivations  for  volunteering:  "We  treat  each  other  like  family,  actually  better  ...  we  support  each  other  socially as well as workwise. It's very important."  All  is  not  sweetness  and  light.  The  steering  team  has  had  to  deal  with  some  tough  issues  and  decisions,  usually  to  do  with  difficult  behaviour  exhibited  by  some  users,  such  as  fighting  and  stealing.  A  known  pedophile  showed  up.    Strong  differences  of  opinion  on  how  to  handle  these  situations  led  to  the  resignation  of  some  members.  The  steering  team  seems  to  be  guided  through  these  tricky  waters  by  toughminded  exprofessionals  who  are  aware  of  protocols  and  come  with  a  wealth  of  experience  in  social  services.  This  professionalism  and  handon 

experience  is  an  important  element,  as  we  seek  to  understand  more  fully  the  community  of  the  Food  Basket.  It  is  reinforced  by  developing  norms  for  behaviour  of  the  recipient/volunteers,  by  establishing  a  nonjudgmental  attitude  toward  those  in  survival  mode,  and  by  a  confidentiality  agreement signed by all volunteers that ensures the anonymity of the users.  It  was  noted  that  the  empowerment  and  capacity  building  model  that  drives  the  Food  Basket  requires  a  much  higher  and  diverse  skill  set  in  the  leadership  than  that  of  a  simple  food  bank.  One  gets  the  picture  of  a  highly  energetic  organization  at  the  early  stages  of  its  development.  It  has  remarkable  achievements  and  a  shared  focus  for  its  mission.  It  has  gathered  an  impressive  array  of  partners  and  volunteers  who  create  an  expanding  web  of  services  beyond  the  provision  of  food.  It  is  characterized  by  the  building  of  strong  and  caring  relationships  at  every level, by a respect for people `as they are', and by a foundation of shared, inclusive values.  A  new  recruit  to  the  steering  team  with  some  knowledge  of  organizational  development  observed:  "Every  organization  starts  with  no  rules  and  regulations,  and  just  charisma  and  enthusiasm,  and  after  a  while  you  realize  you  need  some  kind  of  structure  to  deal  with  things  as  they come up. I think that's what the organization is going through right now."  Relations with the host church As we have  already observed, the  Food  Basket is  officially a project of the congregation,  and  it  retains  the  considerable  support  of  the  church.  In  fact,  members  of  other  churches  are  amazed  at  the  level  of  generosity  shown  by  the  host  congregation  and  voiced  no  criticisms  whatsoever.  However,  the  mushrooming  size  of  the  program,  the  demand  on  facilities,  the  competing  claims  on  space,  improvements  to  the  building,  and  negative  attitudes  to  the  Food  Basket users have all created tensions.  While  not  wishing  to  make  assumptions  about  the  attitudes  of  various  demographic  groups or the congregation as a whole, we are reminded that the congregation is largely made up  of  white,  middleclass  professional  people,  many  of  whom  are  in  their  80s  and  90s.  There  is  a  great  gulf  between  most  of  the  members  and  the  Food  Basket  users.  Generous  outreach  has  traditionally  been  part  of  the  congregation's  mission,  but  seldom  has  it  been  exercised  on  the  doorsteps of the church.  Because  of  the  large  number  of  partners  and  outside  volunteers  some  church  members  have  started  to  see  the  Food  Basket  as  an  external  program  with  no  discernible  benefit  for  members, or at least the downsides--wear and tear, dominating the facilities, etc.--outweigh the  upsides.  One  has  to  remember  that  the  norm  for  active  suburban  churches  such  as  this  one,  has  been that church space is used for church sponsored programs, and that community groups, while  welcome,  fit  in  with  the  church  programming.  By  contrast,  the  Food  Basket  is  a  very  large  presence to cope with, and many members feel they are losing control of their space.  Furthermore,  most  church  members  have  little  exposure  to  or  understanding  of  living  in  longterm  poverty.  Like  their  city  councilor,  at  least  some  thought  it  did  not  exist  in  their  neighbourhood.  For  example  there  was  considerable  opposition  to  providing  a  hot  lunch  (which 

was  to  be  the  only  cooked  meal  in  the  week  for  many  users,  and  for  some,  their  only  social  outing  of  the  week).  As  an  interviewee  remarked,  "I  think  people  in  this  church  much  prefer  the  theory  of  a  food  bank  than  the  actuality  of  it.  We  are  messy,  our  people  are  not  tidy.  They're  desperate and they do things like steal the toilet paper in the women's bathroom. ...  I don't think  they  understood  the  impact  of  it  ...  I  think  they  figured  a  food  bank  was  going  to  be  50  families,  get their bag of food and leave."  Not  surprisingly  some  church  members  came  to  fear  that  the  Food  Basket  users  would  contribute to crime and create safety issues on church property.  While  many  of  these  tensions  remain,  some  are  successfully  addressed.  To  counter  the  prejudice  about  crime,  the  coordinator  interviewed  the  police  inspector  from  the  local  division  and put his comments into the church  bulletin, to the effect that  crime had  gone down in the area  due  to  the  Food  Basket  providing  food  for  families  thereby  making  gang  recruitment  through  food less attractive.  Also, some recipients have attended worship services at several of the churches, either by  invitation  or  on  their  own  initiative.  Church  members  have  benefited  from  these  encounters,  and  also  from  hearing  the  stories  of  the  Food  Basket.  They  have  come  to  realize  that  "these  people  are just like you and me ... but we often brand and stigmatize people who are in need."  We  can  conclude  that  a  variety  of  attitudes  exist  amongst  church  members  towards  the  Food  Basket,  especially  in  the  host  congregation,  and  that  the  Food  Basket  makes  significant  formal  and  informal  efforts  to  build  relationships,  overcome  prejudices  and  solve  problems.  We  shall  further  describe  one  of  these  efforts,  which  came  about  through  an  initiative  of  the  Buddhists to deal with a garbage crisis.  Buddhists and faith The  Tzu  Chi  foundation  is  not  a  religious  organization  per  se,  but  a  charitable  organization through which Buddhists do good works. We have already described the process by  which they became involved in the Food Basket, noting the values that are important to them and  some  of  the  values  (such  as  an  emphasis  on  fresh  food)  they  are  adding  to  the  operation  of  the  Food Basket. Understanding the Buddhist's motivation will help us gain a more complete picture  of what faith means to the Food Basket.  "Our  master  says  that  we  have  to  be  more  involved  locally  ...  we  are  newcomers  ...  so  we  have  to  do  something  good  in  our  city  ...  that's  what  we  really  want  to  do."  In  this  statement  we  see  an  important  directive  that  runs  counter  to  the  more  common  experience  of  new  immigrants concentrating their energies on establishing themselves and then helping members of  their  own  ethnic  community.  The  Buddhists  desire  to  doing  something  good  for  the  city.  Furthermore,  "good"  means  handson  volunteer  time  with  a  charity  that  is  "local",  not  just  funding.  At  least  some  of  the  Buddhist  newcomers  are  not  confident  in  English,  and  so  volunteering is especially challenging.  "We're  training  ourselves.  We  do  something  of  course  to  make  people  happy,  but  we're  happy  too  because  we  help  people.  We're  training  our  minds.  It's  why  we  have  to  know  why  we 

help people." "The people who accept our help teach us too." "We hope we can share  great love  with  them,  and  then,  maybe  one  day  they  have  power,  then  they  can  help  another  person.  That's  why  we  really  want  that  everybody  can  share  love."  The  interviewees  went  on  to  explain  that  they  did  not  expect  any  return,  including  gratitude,  from  the  sharing  of  love;  rather,  their  sole  objective was that this love would be passed on by those helped to others in need.  The Buddhist philosophy is evident in what one interviewee described as "the Buddhists'  strategy  to  equalize."  They  would  identify  people  who  were  left  out  of  a  particular  program  and  organize  some  compensatory  service.  For  example,  families  with  children  registered  at  the  Food  Basket  receive  a  Christmas  hamper  with  a  turkey  and  toys.  However,  this  excluded  singles  and  couples  with  no  children,  and  so  the  Buddhists  provided  a  Christmas  luncheon  and  smaller  food  baskets for these recipients. One can see this action as contributing to the  community  as a whole  and its value for inclusiveness.  We  have  noted  some  of  the  tensions  between  the  host  church  and  the  Food  Basket.  A  particular  issue  arose  around  the  large  amounts  of  garbage  generated  by  the  program,  caused  in  part  by  the  large  amounts  of  food  delivered  by  a  central  food  bank  weekly  to  the  church,  which  were  deemed  unusable.  One  would  expect  that  these  tensions  would  be  managed  `in  house'  by  church  members,  i.e.,  the  official  board  of  the  congregation  negotiating  with  leaders  of  the  Food  Basket who were church members. However, this was not the case.  The  Buddhists  were  aware  of  the  high  demands  of  the  program  on  the  church  facilities  and  janitorial  staff.  They  volunteered  to  attend  a  church  board  meeting  to  listen  to  complaints  and  to  find  solutions.  When  the  amount  of  garbage  generated  by  the  program  emerged  as  a  contentious  issue,  The  Buddhists  offered  to  separate  the  garbage  (organics)  and  to  take  some  garbage  to  their  facility,  thereby  minimizing  the  garbage  at  the  church.  "They're  trying  to  lower  the  carbon  footprint  at  the  church  as  well  because  that's  part  of  (the  Buddhists')  environmental  protection  mission."  This  story  illustrates  how  the  Buddhists  bring  several  of  their  key  values  into  practice  in  the  context  of  the  program--environmental  concern,  value  for  harmonious  relationships,  respect  for  all  parties.  Their  initiative  also  shows  a  high  degree  of  ownership  and  sense of responsibility for the Food  Basket, realizing that an outside party  may be more effective  in resolving issues that affect the church.  Although  the  Buddhists  took  the  initiative,  discussion  of  garbage  and  other  issues  has  become  a  shared  responsibility.  "The  information  (concerns  expressed  by  the  church  board)  was  shared  with  all  the  partners  ­  all  the  churches,  the  Muslim  groups,  the  Buddhist  Foundation."  The  Food  Basket  steering  team  has  worked  on  solutions  and  begun  to  implement  a  few.  "We're  trying  to  work  with  the  church  to  make  sure  that  there  is  ongoing  open  communication  and  that  we  are  a  partner  and  that  we  respect  their  facilities  and  we  are  trying  to  minimize  the  wear  and  tear."   Muslims and faith There  is  a  significant  and  complex  obstacle  that  affects  both  the  operation  of  the  Food  Basket and the partnership: this is an  attitude prevalent in the Muslim community that denies the 

existence of poverty, single parent families and spousal abuse, and that wishes to limit help from  Muslims  to  Muslims.  From  most  accounts  the  Food  Basket  has  been  successful  in  overcoming  this  obstacle  in  that  Muslims  form  a  significant  number  of  their  recipients,  and  at  least  a  few  of  their  volunteers.  The  Food  Basket  is  sensitive  to  Muslim  needs  in  designing  their  services  (e.g.,  halal  food,  counseling  for  women);  and  from  several  personal  stories,  Muslims  feel  part  of  the  Food Basket community. On the other hand two interviews  noted  that  Muslims  tend  not  to  leave  the  ranks  of  recipients  ­  one  of  the  markers  of  success  for  the  program.  One  account  of  the  attitudinal obstacle is given below from an interview with a Muslim volunteer:  "Basically,  I'm  coming  from  the  faith  side,  and  ...  I've  noticed  from  the  mosque  side  ...  the  lack  of  understanding  as  to  what  can  be  done  and  how  you  can  reach  out  to  various  groups  and  avoid  misunderstanding...  From  the  mosque  side,  they  are  in  their  own  sort  of  cocoon,  and  they  are  looking  only  from  the  aspect  of  Islam  or  Muslims.  To  them,  Muslims  going  to  a  church  for help, they  can't understand that. Why? First of all, Muslims in mosques they do  help  out, but  they help out only to their own. They don't reach  out to nonMuslims. ...  To be honest with  you,  if  I  were  a  needy  person,  I  would  not  go  to  a  mosque.  The  reason  I  wouldn't  go  is  that  everyone  would  know  that  I  am  needy.  This  way  I  would  go  to  a  place  where  no  one  knows  me.  This  is  one of the factors why people don't go to a mosque if they  are Muslims. They  would rather  go to  a  church  or  to  the  Salvation  Army.""So  there's  an  element  of  shame?"  "That's  right.  This  is  what  I  would  like  to  explain  to  the  mosques.  It  is  difficult  to  bridge  that  gap.  There  are  some  mosques, they have told me they have their food banks, but it failed only because of this reason."   Another  interview  took  the  view  that  "helping  only  our  own"  would  give  way  to  a  more  inclusive approach as the younger generation came to the fore. "There is a change in the  younger  generation  of  Muslims.  They  are  more  capable  of  seeing  outside  their  own  community."  Muslims do need to be helped, and so there is an  argument for developing  Muslim only services,  but  this  will  eventually  change  as  Muslims  integrate  more  into  society.  "I  would  like  them  (the  older  men)  to  understand  that  their  folks  also  want  Christmas  presents  ...  it's  going  to  be  a  learning curve."    However,  Muslims  do  come  to  the  Food  Basket  in  large  numbers,  and  they  also  contribute  as  volunteers  and  steering  team  members.  As  noted,  Eid  celebrations  have  been  held  in  the  church  hall  and  the  Muslim  volunteers  have  opened  these  festivals  to  the  Christians  and  Buddhists.  There  are  many  individual  stories  of  Muslim  contributions  to  the  inclusive  community  life  of  the  Food  Basket.  One  of  the  most  affecting  had  to  do  with  the  faith  of  a  Christian steering team member.  She  and  her  husband  were  keen  volunteers  at  the  Food  Basket,  members  of  one  of  the  partner  churches  and well known and liked by all. The husband developed  cancer  and eventually  entered a hospice. One of the members of the steering team, a Muslim, asked if he could come to  pray  by  the  man's  bed.  She  assented,  and  afterwards  told  how  deeply  she  had  been  affected  by  the  silent  presence  of  this  Muslim  man,  praying  with  her  husband,  at  a  time  of  great  personal  vulnerability.  Although she had always respected  other faiths, this act changed and deepened her  own faith. "It was a beautiful moment." 

Her  husband's  illness  and  the  concern  of  the  Food  Basket  community  led  to  occasions  of  prayer,  both  corporate  and  private,  by  Christians,  Buddhists  and  Muslims,  something  that  the  steering team had earlier shied away from so as not to offend any religious sensibilities.  Reflections on the role of faith and belief Several interviewees thought that the interfaith aspect of the partnership had deepened the  mission of their own congregation by exposing them to the faith and practices of others. And as a  result  of  the  relationships  formed,  all  the  various  faithbased  organizations  have  been  very  generous; people have had their horizons expanded and have responded with generosity.  Asked  about  the  role  of  faith  in  this  partnership,  one  person  reflected  that  faith  produces  consistency  and  long  term  commitment.  "I  think  everyone  ...  is  part  of  this  ...  because  of  their  faith, because of their commitment to help their fellow man, woman and child, to give something  back,  to  try  to  make  the  world  a  better  place.  ...  I  think  you  do  it  because  you  have  a  commitment  to  helping,  and  I  don't  think  people  help  on  a  consistent,  day  in  and  day  out  basis  without  a  fairly  strong  faith  to  keep  it  going."  In  a  similar  vein  others  spoke  of  "an  outlet  for  compassion"  and  developing  a  respect  for  life  and  a  sense  of  community.  And  faith  also  was  given  credit  for  the  tenacity  necessary  to  deal  with  the  hassles  that  were  part  of  the  ongoing  relationship with the host congregation.  Although  there  is  a  clear  understanding  amongst  everyone  that  the  Food  Basket  is  not  a  place  for  proselytizing  or  discussing  faith,  a  lot  of  people  come  for  advice,  and  it  is  in  these  occasions  that  "the  faith  basis  we  come  from  plays  a  large  role  in  what  we  talk  about."  One  person remarked that faith was the  "respect for everyone who's there ... the value of each person  ...  is  a  logical  outcome  of  being  a  Christian."  "The  atmosphere  of  acceptance  is  one  of  the  big  things  that  led  to  the  success  of  the  Food  Basket  ...  regardless  of  race,  creed,  religion,  living  standards, employment, the whole thing."  Nearly  all  the  interviewees  have  experienced  a  change  in  their  faith  as  a  result  of  their  involvement,  and  they  spoke  of  this  change  in  terms  of  increasing  tolerance,  appreciation  and  acceptance of people and their faith. The following reflection captures the effects on a participant  of  the  multilayered  dimensions  of  faith  groups  working  together  to  make  a  difference  in  the  community:   "For  a  while  I  lost  my  faith  and  that  commitment  and  the  Food  Basket  brought  it  back.  Because  to  see  so  many  faith  groups,  of  various  denominations,  work  together  on  a  voluntary  basis,  committed  to  their  community,  what's  a  better  way  to  improve  your  faith  in  people?  ...  It's  about  appreciation  of  humanity  and  people,  and  not  necessarily  just  for  the  one  religious  faith.  ...  When  you  see  that  you're  actually  affecting  the  community  in  a  very  positive  way, it makes  you more committed."   Finally,  although  it  is  not  strictly  a  matter  of  faith,  the  Food  Basket  has  enabled  building  special  relationships  between  affluent  and  poor  people,  relationships  that  wouldn't  have  otherwise  happened.  From  what  we  have  heard,  we  can  surmise  that  these  relationships  are  an  outcome  of  the strong  emphasis on inclusive community and  respect that is at the heart  of the Food  Basket. 

Conclusions  

Two  cases,  of  course,  do  not  provide  us  with  a  quantitative  basis  for  making  sweeping  generalizations  or  drawing  irrefutable  conclusions.  Furthermore,  all  five  cases  were  chosen  because  they  were  deemed  to  be  `successful';  therefore,  we  don't  have  the  failures  to  learn  from  and  compare.  Another  caveat  is  that  we  can't  speak  authoritatively  about  all  the  influences  at  play  because  our  research  is  limited  to  the  perceptions  of  our  interviewees.  That  being  said,  we  do  have  enough  variety  in  the  interviews  to  give  us  a  nuanced  picture  of  these  two  food  banks,  how  they  came  to  be,  the  values  that  underlie  them  and,  most  importantly  for  our  purposes,  the  role  of  faith  in  the  partnerships  that  created  and  sustain  them.  This  latter  area  is  the  focus  of  our  conclusions.  Our  cases  are  both  examples  of  different  faiths  successfully  working  together  for  the  good  of  the  community.  In  the  first  case  rivalries  between  Muslim  organizations  were  put  aside  in  response  to  a  strong  outcry  from  the  community  and  with  the  facilitative  role  of  a  Christian  priest  who  had  to  negotiate  the  retreat  of  her  own  agency.  Collaboration  in  the  second  case  originates  from  the  organizing  power  and  skills  of  some  key  leaders  from  within  a  church  sponsored  group.  The  basic  decision  to  involve  as  many  partners  as  possible  in  the  program  led  to  the  engagement  of  many  other  churches  and  a  Buddhist  relief  organization;  also,  as  many  of  the users of the services were Muslim, Muslims became engaged as important volunteers.   Both  programs  maintained  a  clear  focus  on  the  good  of  the  larger  community  and  this    focus  was  a  primary  factor  in  their  successful  collaboration,  helping  them  to  overcome  rivalries  and  to  develop  services.  The  clear  focus  is  reflected  in  shared  objectives  and  values,  and  a  tacit  agreement to be completely respectful of the variety of religious beliefs and practices.  Faith is an important motivator in a variety of ways. For some, these partnerships were an    opportunity  to  put  their  faith  into  action  through  service  to  those  less  fortunate.  However,  there  was  also  the  strong  feeling  with  many  that  they  received  more  than  they  gave,  so  that  while  faith  may  have  led  them  to  get  involved  initially,  through  the  process  of  engagement  the  horizons  of  their  faith  were  expanded.  It's  also  true  that  the  commitment  of  some  of  the  leaders  involved  in  these  two  cases  is  heroic:  they  give  extraordinary  amounts  of  time  and  energy,  and  do  not  give  up  when  faced  with  considerable  obstacles.  It  is  fair  to  say  that  the  ecumenical  and  interfaith  nature  of  these  partnerships  increased  motivation.  Seeing  a  religiously  varied  group  of  people  work together in a common cause was an inspiration.   Turning  to  a  more  institutional  meaning  of  faith,  we  see  the  importance  of  a  faith's  teachings  to  these  partnerships.  The  declaration  that  the  Qu'ran  teaches  generosity  to  all  people,  not  just  Muslims,  was  foundational  to  the  mission  of  the  first  food  bank.  Again,  the  overriding  mission  to  help  people  in  the  best  way  possible  was  the  justification  for  hiring  local  Muslim  women to work in  an Anglican agency.  The passion for helping people without distinction, either  through  the  food  bank  or  the  agency,  created  an  atmosphere  of  trust  that  gave  rise  to  invitations  from  Muslims  to  the  Anglican  priest  to  participate  in  religious  gatherings  and  events.  Added  into  the  mix  are  the  priest's  convictions  and  welldeveloped  interfaith  theology.  It  is  interesting  that 

this  cluster  of  events,  founded  on  the  teachings  of  two  faiths,  occur  in  a  setting  in  which  one  imam board member declared, "we're too busy feeding people to talk theology."  In the second case there wasn't as much theological talk, perhaps because no clergy were  amongst  those  interviewed  (and  the  project  was  lay  led).  However,  people  were  clearly  motivated  by  their  faith  and  felt  they  received  surprising  benefits  that  came  from  engagement  with  people  of  other  faiths,  such  as  support  at  a  time  of  personal  crisis,  the  celebration  of  Eid  in  the  church  hall  and  the  Buddhist  emphasis  on  sustainability.  These  were  all  part  of  the  value added  aspects  of  interfaith  collaboration.  Perhaps  the  creation  of  a  toughminded,  caring,  inclusive and egalitarian community was the most important way in which faith was expressed in  this case.  There  is  another  dimension  to  our  conclusions  about  the  importance  of  faith,  and  that  is  the  sensitivity  shown  in  both  these  projects  to  religious  differences  and  traditions.  It  can  be  as  simple  as  scheduling  meetings  at  times  that  do  not  conflict  with  festivals  or  weekly  and  daily  prayer.  However,  it  took  some  attention  for  the  Christians  to  realize  this  basic  courtesy.  As  remarked,  interfaith  collaboration  is  not  really  about  the  world  religions  in  an  abstract  form:  there  are  a  myriad  of  traditions,  beliefs  and  customs  within  each  religion,  usually  determined  by  ethnicity  and  the  country  of  origin.  This  diversity  was  particularly  true  for  the  Muslim  immigrants  who  could  hardly  be  lumped  together  in  any  meaningful  way  as  one  religious  group.  We  heard  frequently  about  the  need  for  caution,  patience  and  sensitivity  while  working  in  an  interfaith setting.  There is a  classic distinction in community development work made between `a handout  and  a  handup'.  Handouts  are  thought  to  encourage  a  systemic  dependency,  while  handups  encourage selfsufficiency. Furthermore, many would argue that selfsufficiency is best achieved  through  a  collaborative  process  of  identifying  and  engaging  all  the  assets  of  a  community.  It's  clear  that  both  of  these  food  banks  have  begun  in  the`handout  camp,  providing  free  food  for  needy  people.  However,  this  beginning  is  by  no  means  the  whole  story.  In  different  ways,  both  have  developed  a  strong  sense  of  community  ownership,  and  so,  they  have  elements  of  the  second approach.  The  first  food  bank  is  a  story  of  how  the  larger  community  rallied  to  save  a  food  bank  that  had  been  funded  largely  by  an  outside  agency.  There  is  strong  community  ownership  shown  through  the  volunteer  corps  and  fund  raising  events;  the  motto  is  "by  the  community,  for  the  community".  The  second  food  bank  has  worked  to  create  a  sense  of  inclusive  community  amongst its volunteers, board members,  and users, so that there is a sense  of equality  and dignity  that  animates  its  operation.  The  provision  of  a  meal  before  "shopping"  not  only  gives  participants  much  needed  nutrition,  it  also  is  a  time  to  build  relationships  and  share  more  complex  and  personal  challenges.  Not  least,  the  sense  of  dignity  is  shown  through  the  provision  of healthy food and the practice of keeping intake information to an absolute minimum.  We  can  link  all  of  this  to  faith  and  partnership.  All  those  who  became  partners  in  the  two  food  banks  did  so  because  their  faith  traditions  are  clear  about  the  obligation  to  help  those  in  need.  This  is  one  area  on  which  the  different  denominations  and  faiths  agree.  It  so  happened  that 

the partners in these two  enterprises were  all convinced that handouts were not enough,  and that  the programs should aim at selfsufficiency and dignity. This aim is not unique to people of faith;  but the way in which it happens in these two cases is very much influenced by the religious faith  of  the  partners.  We  can  see  that  the  two  food  banks  try  to  realize  their  goals  of  moving  beyond  a  feeding  program  through  creating  community  in  which  people  are  treated  as  equals  and  with  compassion.  We  should  note  two  further  things  about  these  community  elements.  First,  the  leaders  in  both  food  banks  are  clear  that  a  key  measure  of  success  is  that  people  leave  the  ranks  of  users,  able  to  fend  for  themselves.  Secondly,  the  very  existence  of  a  food  bank  within  a  larger  community  is  an  indictment  of  the  capacity  of  society  to  provide  food  security  for  its  citizens.  So,  the  "community"  of  the  food  bank  wants  to  get  rid  of  its  members,  and  the  "wider  community"  should  move  beyond  the  need  for  the  food  bank.  "Community"  has  a  provisional  sense to it.  An  interesting  element  is  that  both  have  developed  times  or  occasions  of  prayer,  very  different  from  the  outmoded  practice  of  the  providers  of  food  leading  prayer  or  grace  before  a  meal for the poor.  In the  case of the second food  bank, the steering team had rejected the idea of  praying  before  the  meal,  but  the  desire  to  do  so  publicly  arose  from  the  wish  of  users  and  volunteers  to  pray  for  a  volunteer  who  was  seriously  ill.  So,  it  was  prayer  from  the  community,  rather  than  something  imposed  by  the  haves  on  the  havenots.  The  situation  in  the  Anglican  agency  is  a  little  different  in  that  prayer  is  a  part  of  the  daily  routine  of  the  ED  and  open  to  any  who  wish  to  participate,  and  the  Muslim  staff  feel  moved  to  do  so  from  time  to  time.  In  both  cases  a  spiritual  practice  has  emerged  that  gives  the  two  communities  greater  depth.  These  two  cases would differ in this regard from our other three, all of which involved a secular partner.  The  experience  of  working  in  partnership  to  improve  the  lives  of  people  in  need  has  profoundly  affected  the  partners.  Nearly  all  interviewees  attested  that  they  have  grown  in  their  understanding  and  appreciation  of  others.  ("I've  increased  my  knowledge  of  the  beauty  of  people.  I've  learned  to  be  increasingly  accepting  and  tolerant.")  They  have  developed  skills  and  confidence.  Their  faith  has  been  changed,  and  some  are  able  to  talk  more  openly  about  their  faith,  simply  by  way  of  sharing  "the  things  that  have  helped  to  keep  me  going."  This  level  of  learning  is  made  possible  by  participating  in  a  community  in  which  a  high  trust  level  has  been  developed.  In both  cases  we  find the  key leaders  in  conflict  with  their  parent  bodies,  the  institutional  church.  They  are  sustained  in  their  struggles  by  their  personal  faith  and  by  the  new  communities  of diverse and committed people formed through the partnerships.   In writing about social  capital Robert Putnam has made the distinction between  "bonding  capital"  and  "bridging  capital".  Groups  such  as  congregations  may  develop  strong  bonds  within  their  membership  and  thereby  create  communities;  however,  these  same  bonds  may  also  lead  to  distrust  of  those  who  are  not  part  of  the  membership.  Trust  is  an  essential  element  for  the  social  fabric  to  flourish.  Therefore,  there  needs  to  be  bridges  between  bonded  communities,  in  other  words,  cooperation  and  collaboration.  It's  very  clear  that  these  two  cases  have  bonding  and 

bridging  in  abundance.  They  are  charismatic  examples  of  new  communities  of  people  forming  from  the  diversity  of  Toronto's  population,  bonded by  a  common  purpose  of  increasing  love  and  justice in the city. 

References
Adkins,  J.,  Occhipinti,  L.,  &  Hefferan,  T.  (Eds.).  (2010).  Not  By  Faith  Alone  ­  Social  Service,  Social  Justice  and  FaithBased  Organizations  in  the  United  States.  Lanham,  MD:  Lexington Books, 274 pp.   Austin,  J.E.  (2000).  Strategic  collaboration  between  nonprofits  and  businesses.  Nonprofit  and  Voluntary Sector Quarterly 29(1), 6997  Bailey,  S.B.C,  Cerio,  T.M.,  Stanley,  C.L.  &  Harp  TN.  (2007).  Best  practices  in  faithhealth  partnerships  for  policy  implementation.  The  Journal  of  Law,  Medicine  &  Ethics  35  (S4),  129131.  Barnes,  P.A.  &  Curtis,  A.B.  (2009).  A  national  examination  of  partnerships  among  local  health  departments  and  faith  communities  in  the  United  States.  Journal  of  Public  Health  Management Practice 15 (3), 25363.  Becker,  P.E.  &  Dhingra,  P.H.  (2001).  Religious  involvement  and  volunteering:  Implications  for  civil society. Sociology of Religion 62 (3), 31535.  Boddie,  S.C.  (2002).  Fruitful  partnerships  in  a  rural  African  American  community:  Important  lessons  for  faithbased  initiatives.  The  Journal  of  Applied  Behavioral  Science  38  (3),  317 333.  Chaves,  M.  (1999).  Congregations'  Social  Service  Activities.  Charting  Civil  Society,  No.  6,  Washington D.C.: Urban Institute, December.   Civic  Practices  Network,  http://www.cpn.org/tools/dictionary/capital.html  Accessed  March  15, 2011.  Connor,  J.A.,  TarasKadel,  S.  &  VinokurKaplan,  D.  (1999).  The  role  of  nonprofit  management  support organizations in sustaining community collaborations. Nonprofit Management and  Leadership 10(2), 127136  Dyer,  J.H.;  Kale,  P.;  Singh,  H.  (2001),  How  to  Make  Strategic  Alliances  Work. Sloan  Management Review, 42, 4, 3743.    Fosarelli,  P.  (2009).  Book  Review:  Building  Healthy  Communities  Through  Medical  ­Religious  Partnerships. JAMA 302 (17), 19111912. 

Googins,  B.K.  &  Rochlin,  S.A.  (2000).  Creating  the  partnership  society:  Understanding  the  rhetoric  and  reality  of  crosssectoral  partnerships.  Business  and  Society  Review  105(1),  127144   Hodgkinson,  V,  et  al.  (1993).  From  Belief  to  Commitment:  The  Community  Service  Activities  and  Finances  of  Religious  Congregations  in  the  United  States.  Washington,  D.C.:  Independent Sector.   Huxham,  C.  (1993).  Collaborative  capability:  An  intraorganizational  perspective  on  collaborative advantage. Public Money & Management 13 (3),/ 2129.  Jeavons,  T.H.  (2004).  Religious  and  FaithBased  Organizations:  Do  we  know  one  when  we  see  one? Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 33 (1), 140145.  Kegler,  Hall  &  Kiser.  (2010).  Facilitators,  challenges  and  collaborative  activities  in  faith  and  health  partnerships  to  address  health  disparities.  Health  Education  and  Behavior  37  (5),  66579.  Milne,  G.R.,  Iyer,  E.S.  &  GoodingWilliams,  S.  (1996).  Environmental  organization  alliance  relationships  within  and  across  nonprofit,  business,  and  government  sectors.  Journal  of  Public Policy & Marketing 15, 203215  Mulroy,  E.A.  &  Shay,  S.  (1997).  Nonprofit  organizations  and  innovation:  A  model  of  neighborhoodbased  collaboration  to  prevent  child  mistreatment.  Social  Work  42(5),  515 525.  Otterness,  N,  Gehrke,  P.  &  Sener,  I.M  (2007).  Partnerships  between  nursing  education  and  faith  communities: benefits and challenges. Journal of Nursing Education 46 (1), 3944.  Phillips,  S.D.  &  Graham,  K.A.  (2000).  Handinhand:  When  accountability  meets  collaboration  in  the  voluntary  sector.  In  K.  Banting  (Ed.).  The  nonprofit  sector  in  Canada:  Roles  and  relationships  (pp.  149190).  Kingston  &  Montreal:  School  of  Policy  Studies,  Queen's  University.  Poole,  J.,  Pearson,  A.,  Rife,  J.  &  Moore,  W.  (2009).  Developing  community  partnerships  with  religiously  affiliated  organizations  to  address  aging  needs:  a  case  study  of  the  congregational  social  word  educational  initiative.  Journal  of  Social  Work  and  Christianity  36 (2), 176191.    Provan,  K.G.  &  Milward,  H.B.  (1995).  A  preliminary  theory  of  interorganizational  network  effectiveness:  A  comparative  study  of  four  community  mental  health  systems.  Administrative Science Quarterly 40(1), 133. 

Putnam,  R.  &  Campbell,  D.  E.  (2010).  How  Religion  Divides  and  Unites  Us.  Simon  &  Shuster:  New York, USA.   Rapp,  C.A.  &  Whitfield,  C.M.  (1999).  Neighborhoodbased  services:  Organizational  change  and  integration prospects. Nonprofit Management and Leadership 9(3), 261276  Rein,  M.&  Stott.  (2009)  Working  Together:  Critical  Perspectives  on  Six  CrossSector  Partnerships in Southern Africa. Journal of Business Ethics, 90: 7989.  Search  for  Common  Ground.  (2002).  Finding  Common  Ground:  29  Recommendations  fo  the  Working  Group  of  Human  Needs  and  FaithBased  and  Community  Initiatives.  Washington, DC: Search for Common Ground.   Sider,  R.J.  &  Unruh,  H.R.  (2004).  Typology  of  religious  characteristics  of  social  service  and  educational organizations and programs. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 33  (1),  109134.  Small,  M.A.  (2001).  Public  service  and  outreach  to  faithbased  organizations.  Journal  of  Higher  Education, Outreach and Engagement (6), 5765.   Snavely, K. & Tracy, M.B. (2000). Collaboration among rural nonprofit organizations. Nonprofit  Management and Leadership 11(2), 145157.  Snow  Jones,  A.,  Fowler,  T.S.,  Farmer,  D.,  et  al.  (2005).  Description  and  evaluation  of  a  faith  communitybased  domestic  violence  pilot  program  in  Forsyth  County,  NC.  Journal  of  Religion and Abuse, 7 (4), 5587.   Tangenburg, K.M. (2005). Faithbased human services initiatives: considerations for social work  practice and theory. Social Work 50 (3), 197206.  Wilson,  A.  &  Charleton,  K.  (1996).  Making  Partnerships  Work.  London:  J.  Roundtree  Foundation.  Zadek, S.& Radovich, S. (2006) Governing Collaborative Governance: Enhancing Development  Outcomes  by  Improving  Partnership  Governance  and  Accountability.  Cambridge,  MA:  John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University. 


