RURAL ACCESS TO EDUCATION THROUGH DIGITAL MEDIA

by

BEZAYIT MENKER Bachelor of Fine Arts, 2015 Ryerson University Toronto, Ontario, Canada

A Major Research Paper presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Digital Media in the Yeates School of Graduate Studies

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2018 ©Bezayit Menker, 2018

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION FOR ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF A MRP

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this MRP. This is a true copy of the MRP, including any required final revisions.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this MRP to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this MRP by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I understand that my MRP may be made electronically available to the public.

ii

Abstract

This paper is a summary of the research conducted during the development and design of Rural Access To Education Through Digital Media, a pilot education technology project in Tipling, Nepal. Beginning with an analysis of the relevant socioeconomic factors affecting school attainment nationally and those affecting Tipling in particular; the current challenges to formal and informal education are identified. The considerable potential of digital media and ICTs to address long-standing issues of access to both childhood and adult learning and thereby contribute to international development and education reform efforts are explored. Key project considerations and challenges are discussed along with project outcomes.

Keywords: ICTs, Rural Education, Literacy, International Development, Education Technology

iii

Acknowledgements

This research project would not have been possible without the guidance and support of my supervisor Dr. Michael Carter and collaborator, Biren Gurung. Thank you both for your generosity and excellent advice. Thank you to the MDM faculty and staff, Dr. Alex Ferworn, Dr. Alya Naumova, Am Sagarwala, Sonya Taccone and my fellow MDM students. You have fostered a truly positive academic experience and I am grateful to have worked with such an inspiring and capable team.

iv

Table of Contents

Author's Declaration Abstract Acknowledgements Table of Contents List of Appendices Introduction Project Management and Planning About Tipling, Nepal Current Educational System National Current Educational System Local Literature Review: Barriers To Education In Rural Communities Conceptual Framework: Educational Technology & International Education Reform One Laptop Per Child Hole-In-The-Wall Experiments Issues and Challenges Project Outcome Conclusion Appendix A Appendix B References

ii iii iv v vi 1 1 2 4 5 6 8 9 12 14 15 16 17 18 23

v

List of Appendices Appendix A - Rural Access to Education Through Digital Media logframe document. Appendix B - Rural Access to Education Through Digital Media project charter.

vi

Appendix A

17

B

8

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

7


