ARCHITECTURE OF INCLUSIVITY
accommodating diversity within post-war towers
Carol Nguyen

ARCHITECTURE OF INCLUSIVITY
accommodating diversity within post-war towers

by Carol Nguyen B. Arch. Sci., Ryerson University 2015 A thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Architecture in the Program of Architecture Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2018 © Carol Nguyen, 2018

Author's DECLARATION

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. This is a true copy of the thesis, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis project to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis project by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my thesis may be made electronically available to the public.

Carol Nguyen

iii

Architecture of Inclusivity: Accommodating Diversity Within Post War Towers Master of Architecture, 2018 Carol Nguyen Architecture Program, Ryerson University

ABSTRACT
While post-war apartment neighbourhoods experienced drastic changes in their socio-demographic characteristics overtime, little has changed in terms of their built form. Despite housing Toronto's most socially diverse populations, the homogeneous towers are unable to fully accommodate the diversity of households that exist within them. Currently, the most common response to the increasing obsolescence of post-war towers is inaction, thus not contributing to Toronto's urgent lack of housing diversity. Alternatively, by renewing the existing towers so that residential units can be optimized and individualized to create a larger spectrum of socially inclusive housing, people with diverse needs and/or preferences can be accommodated without compromising their individuality. By focusing on a site within the St. James Town neighbourhood, this thesis explores how to accommodate user diversity and allow for residents to participate in determining their living environments.

v

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I would first like to thank my thesis supervisor Leila Farah without whose knowledge, guidance, encouragement, and patience this thesis would not be possible. I am grateful for all the times she has pushed and inspired me when I was feeling discouraged and uninspired. Furthermore, I would like to thank the rest of my thesis committee: Christine Leu and Al Smith, for their periodic input, insightful comments, and hard questions that helped me to guide and focus this thesis. Also, a special thanks to the people at Toronto Community Housing Corporation for being so kind and co-operative in providing me with the information, materials, and drawings that were needed to explore the ideas of this thesis on one of their sites. Finally, I must express my profound gratitude to my family, friends, and especially to my loved one for their continual support over these past two years. I am eternally grateful for all your love, friendship, and time given to continually listen to my thesis woes. Thank you for being there especially during the times that I needed it the most.

vii

To my loved ones and my loved one.

ix

CONTENTS
1. INTRODUCTION  1.1 Defining Inclusivity in the Age of `Hyper-Diversity'  1.2 Architecture's Role in Creating an Inclusive Environment 2. TORONTO'S HISTORY OF INCLUSIVITY & EXCLUSIVITY  2.1 1949-1973: Misguided Attempts of Inclusion  2.1.1 Case Study - Old Regent Park  2.2 1974-1993: Model of Inclusion Prime  2.2.1 Case Study - St Lawrence Neighbourhood  2.3 1994-Present: Invisible Models of Exclusion  2.3.1 Case Study - City Place` 1  1 2 9  11 13 16 18 21 23

3. CHALLENGES OF INCLUSIVITY IN THE AGE OF HOMOGENEOUS URBANISM 31  3.1 Presence of Exclusivity within Contemporary Society  32  3.2 Effects of Exclusivity at the Neighbourhood Scale 34  3.3 Effects of Exclusivity at the Building Scale 36  3.4 An Architecture of Inclusivity Through the Accommodation of Diversity38  3.4.1 Case Study - Regent Park Revitalization 40  3.4.2 Case Study - Quinta Monroy 43 4. TOWER RENEWAL TO ACCOMMODATE DIVERSITY 49  4.1 Opportunities within Post-War Tower Neighbourhoods  50  4.2 Problems within Post-Wat Neighbourhoods 51  4.2.1. Case Study - Grand Parc District - Block G, H, I 53  4.3 Rethinking the Post-War Tower to Accommodate the Urban Collective 56  4.4 Site Selection 66  4.5 Context Analysis - St James Town 70 5. THESIS PROJECT - 325 & 375 BLEECKER STREET  5.1 Area of Focus - 325 & 375 Bleecker Street  5.2 Existing Conditions - 325 & 375 Bleecker Street  5.3 325 & 375 Bleecker Street - Design Proposal  5.4 Conclusion  6. APPENDICES + REFERENCES  6.1 Appendices  6.2 References 79 81 83 92 148  153 154 214

xi

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1 User Diversity & Housing Diversity Statistics Data from: TD Economics, GTA Housing Boom Masks Growing Structural Challenges, 2015 AND Statistics Canada, Study: A Look at Immigration, Ethnocultural Diversity, and Languages in Canada up to 2036, 2011 to 2036, 2017. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Principles of Inclusion Data from: CABE, Inclusion by Design: Equality, Diversity and the Built Environment (London: 2008) 11. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Economic Focused City User Focused City Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Canadian Social Housing Policy Greg Suttor, Still Renovating: A History of Canadian Social Housing Policy (Montreal: McGill-Queen's Press, 2016) 5. Annual Canadian Social Housing Commitments 1954-2011 Greg Suttor, Still Renovating: A History of Canadian Social Housing Policy (Montreal: McGill-Queen's Press, 2016) 10. Regent Park North, 1956 John Boyd, The Globe and Mail, 23 Jan. 1956, <https://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/toronto/regent-park-a-look-back-through-theyears-at-canadas-oldest-social-housing-project/article27612426/>. Regent Park South Graham Bezant, Toronto Star Archives, 1968, <http://www.virtualreferencelibrary.ca/detail.jsp?Entt=RDMDC-TSPA_0113718F&R=DCTSPA_0113718F&searchPageType=vrl>. St. Lawrence Aerial View Map Data from: Google Earth, 2017. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). St. Lawrence Housing Diversity Map Data from: Google Earth, 2017. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). St. Lawrence Social Incubator: David Crombie Park Jeff Brian, 30 Apr. 2013, <https://www.c2.staticflickr.com/6/5519/11079450813_b7c3f1cec2_b.jpg>. CityPlace's Newton Condominiums: Typical Floorplan Data from: Concord Adex, 2017, <http://cityplace.ca/newton/index.asp>. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). 2

Figure 2

4

Figure 3 Figure 4

5 10

Figure 5

11

Figure 6

14

Figure 7

15

Figure 8

19

Figure 9

19

Figure 10

20

Figure 11

24

xiii

Figure 12

Rising House Costs 1997-2017 Toronto Real Estate Board, 1997-2017, <http://trebhome.com/market_news/housing_charts/index.htm#archive>. Polarizing Cities David Hulchanski. The Three Cities: Income Polarization Among Toronto's, Neighbourhoods, 1970-2005, (Toronto: Urban Centres University of Toronto, 2007) 23. Social Mix Outcomes Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Regent Park Redevelopment Model Gladki Planning Associates, Regent Park Planning Report: Phases 3, 4 and 5, 03 Oct. 2013, 56. <https://www1.toronto.ca/City%20Of%20Toronto/City%20Planning/Community%20 Planning/Files/pdf/R/Regent_planning_rationale.pdf>. Quinta Monroy: Section & Floor Plan Expansion Areas Cristobal Palma, 2007, <https://www.archdaily.mx/mx/02-2794/quinta-monroy-elemental>. Quinta Monroy: Incremental User Customization Elemental, 2003, <https://www.archdaily.mx/mx/02-2794/quinta-monroy-elemental>. Tower Transformation Lacaton + Vassal, 2016, <www.lacatonvassal.com/index.php?idp=80>. Use Diversity & Freedom Phillippe Ruault, 2016, <www.lacatonvassal.com/index.php?idp=80>. Tour Bois-le-Prêtre: Plus Method Lacaton & Vassal, 2011, <http://www.lacatonvassal.com/?idp=56>. Tour Bois-le-Prêtre: Typical Floor Plan Lacaton & Vassal, 2011, <http://www.lacatonvassal.com/?idp=56>. Highrise of Homes: Theoretical project by SITE James Wines, 1981, <http://www.siteenvirodesign.com/content/drawing05>. Half a House: Incremental Change Christian Martinez & Elemental, 2010, <http://www.elementalchile.cl/en/projects/ constitucion-i-villa-verde/>. Jan Gehl's Development of Public Life Jan Gehl Architects, 2016, <http://sites.tufts.edu/uepblog/tag/jan-gehl/>. Automated On-Site Construction System Examples Kim Dae-Won et. al. Development of Conceptual Model of Construction Factory for Automated Construction, (Building and Environment: Vol. 44, 2009) 1613. xiv

32

Figure 13

35

Figure 14 Figure 15

39 41

Figure 16

44

Figure 17

45

Figure 18 Figure 19 Figure 20 Figure 21 Figure 22 Figure 23

54 55 57 57 58 59

Figure 24 Figure 25

60 61

Figure 26

3d Printing Capabilities - Materiality Bio-Plastics. Peter Dejong, 2014, <https://img.washingtonpost.com/rf/ image_1484w/2010-2019/Wires/>. Specialized Concrete Mixtures. Jorge Barrero, 2015, <http://www.pixelhunters.com/ blog/v-ray-day-dubai-2015/>. Construction Waste + Hardening Agent. Matjaz Tancic, 2017, <http://i.huffpost.com/ gen/2840616/thumbs/o-GRADIENT-AND-STAIRCASE-900.jpg?7>. Insulation Foam. Tyler Koslow, 2017, <https://all3dp.com/1/3d-printed-house-homesbuildings-3d-printing-construction/>. Powdered Metal. Trumpf, 2015, <https://www.3printr.com/trumpf-unveils-new-3dprinters-for-metal-parts-0531778/>. Glass. Andy Ryan, 2015, <http://news.mit.edu/2015/3-d-printing-transparentglass-0914>. 3d Printing Capabilities - Form 3D Printed Prototype. SOM, 2016, <https://www.dezeen.com/2016/01/25/additivemanufacturing-integrated-energy-3d-printed-structure-som/>. Mobile EU Meeting Building. Ossip van Duivenbode, 2016, <https://www. urdesignmag.com/architecture/2016/01/12/dus-architects-creates-3d-printed-facade-formobile-eu-building/>. Urban Cabin. Sophia Van Den Hoek, 2016, <https://www.designboom.com/ architecture/dus-architects-3d-print-urban-cabin-amsterdam-09-09-2016/>. Wall Prototype. Rael San Fratello, 2010, <http://www.rael-sanfratello.com/?p=916>. Bloom. Matthew Millman Photography, 2015, <https://www.archdaily.com/613171/ emerging-objects-creates-bloom-pavilion-from-3-d-printed-cement>. Office of the Future. WAM, 2016, <http://www.officeofthefuture.ae/img/gallery-1.jpg>. Site Aerial Map Map Data from: Google Earth, 2017. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Change in Average Individual Income 1970-2005 David Hulchanski. The Three Cities: Income Polarization Among Toronto's Neighbourhoods 1970-2005, (Toronto: Urban Centres University of Toronto, 2007) 27. Population Density of Low Income Neighbourhoods David Hulchanski. The Three Cities: Income Polarization Among Toronto's Neighbourhoods 1970-2005, (Toronto: Urban Centres University of Toronto, 2007) 16. Tower Neighbourhood Location Map Centre for Urban Growth and Renewal, 2014, <http://towerrenewal.com/mapping-tower-renewal-areas-of-opportunity-priority/>. St. James Town Site Analysis Existing Land Use Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). St. James Town Photographs A. Eric Sehr, St. James Town, 08 Dec. 2013, <https://www.flickr.com/photos/ ericvery/9715133512/>.

62

Figure 27

64

Figure 28

66

Figure 29

67

Figure 30

67

Figure 31

68

Figure 32 Figure 33

69 71

xv

B. MLSE Foundation, 2014, <http://www.mlsefoundation.org/How-WeGive/Community-Building-Map/St-James-Town-Outdoor-Community-Court. aspx?lat=43.6704877&long=-79.3749708>. C. Natalie Prezeau, 23 June 2013, <http://torontofunplaces.blogspot.ca/2013/06/cutemosaic-fountain-in-st-james-town.html>. D. James Marsh, Multicultural Stores at St. James Town, 2012, <http://citiesintime.ca/ toronto/story/most-densley/>. Figure 34 Future Developments Data from: City of Toronto, St. James Town Community Improvement Plan, 2015, <https://www1.toronto.ca/city_of_toronto/city_planning/community_planning/files/ pdf/stjamestown-public-meeting-pres-june10.pdf>. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Future Developments Images A. architectsAlliance, 2012, <https://www1.toronto.ca/city_of_toronto/city_planning/ community_planning/files/pdf/north_stjames_plans.pdf>. B. architectsAlliance, 2012, <https://www1.toronto.ca/city_of_toronto/city_planning/ community_planning/files/pdf/north_stjames_plans.pdf>. C. architectsAlliance, 2012, <https://www1.toronto.ca/city_of_toronto/city_planning/ community_planning/files/pdf/north_stjames_plans.pdf>. D. Page + Steele Architects/ IBI Group, June 2010, <https://www1.toronto.ca/city_of_ toronto/city_planning/community_planning/files/pdf/stjamestown-public-meeting-presjune10.pdf>. E. Page + Steele Architects/ IBI Group, June 2010, <https://www1.toronto.ca/city_of_ toronto/city_planning/community_planning/files/pdf/stjamestown-public-meeting-presjune10.pdf>. F. MJMArchitects, 2015, <http://www.mjmarchitects.com/Portfolio/Multi-UseCommunity-Recreation/Wellesley-Community-Centre>. 325 & 375 Bleecker St. Existing Site Plan Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). 325 & 375 Bleecker St. Existing On-Site Conditions Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Toronto Community Housing Resident Demographics City of Toronto, Transformative Change for TCHC, 2016, 14. <https://www1.toronto.ca/City%20Of%20Toronto/Strategic%20Communications/ Mayor's%20Task%20Force%20on%20Toronto%20Community%20Housing/Article/ Task%20Force%20FINAL.pdf>. 325 Bleecker St. Existing Conditions: Section Reference from: Toronto Community Housing Corporation Archives, June 1985. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). 325 Bleecker St. Existing Conditions: Floor Plans Reference from: Toronto Community Housing Corporation Archives, Jul. 1967. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). 72

Figure 35

73

Figure 36 Figure 37 Figure 38

80 81 82

Figure 39

85

Figure 40

86

xvi

Figure 41

375 Bleecker St. Existing Conditions: Floor Plans Reference from: Toronto Community Housing Corporation Archives, Jul. 1967. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). 375 Bleecker St. Existing Conditions: Section Reference from: Toronto Community Housing Corporation Archives, June 1985. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). 325 Bleecker St. Existing Unit Types and Distribution Reference from: Toronto Community Housing Corporation Archives, June 1985. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). 375 Bleecker St. Existing Unit Types and Distribution Reference from: Toronto Community Housing Corporation Archives, Jul. 1967. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Massing Conceptual Model Image & Model by Author (Carol Nguyen). Main Design Interventions Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). 325 & 375 Bleecker Street: Re-Cladding General Overview Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Proposed Re-cladding System Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Variability of Proposed Re-cladding System Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Existing Typical Partial Floorplan + Elevation Reference from: Toronto Community Housing Corporation Archives, June 1985. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Proposed Typical Partial Floorplan + Elevation Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). 325 & 375 Bleecker Street: Addition General Overview Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Proposed Addition System Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Addition Sunlight Study Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Addition Sunlight Study II Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

87

Figure 42

87

Figure 43

88

Figure 44

90

Figure 45 Figure 46 Figure 47 Figure 48 Figure 49 Figure 50

92 93 95 96 97 98

Figure 51 Figure 52 Figure 53 Figure 54 Figure 55

99 101 102 103 105

Figure 56 Figure 57 Figure 58 Figure 59 Figure 60 Figure 61 Figure 62 Figure 63 Figure 64 Figure 65 Figure 66 Figure 67 Figure 68 Figure 69 Figure 70 Figure 71

Full Size Modules Customizability Options Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Half Size Modules Customizability Options Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Proposed Maximum Module Allocations Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Axonometric: Maximum Module Allocations Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). User Customizability: Module Examples Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). User Customizability: Household Addition Examples Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Partial Building Model Photo and Model by Author (Carol Nguyen). 3D Printed Module Examples Photo and Model by Author (Carol Nguyen). Joining Units Through Addition Modules Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Example Typical Floor Plan Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Sectional Perspective: Typical Residential Floors Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Exterior Perspective I Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). 325 & 375 Bleecker Street: Incremental Change Overview Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Components of Proposed Incremental Change System Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Mobile Installation Centre Floorplan Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Mobile Installation Centre Section Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

105 106 107 107 108 110 112 113 114 116 118 120 123 124 125 125

xviii

Figure 72 Figure 73 Figure 74 Figure 75 Figure 76 Figure 77 Figure 78 Figure 79 Figure 80 Figure 81 Figure 82 Figure 83

Addition Module Installation Process Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Incremental Change Overtime: Example Household Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Exterior Perspective II Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). 325 & 375 Bleecker Street: Ground Plane Activation General Overview Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Site Plan Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Pedestrian Promenade Perspective Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Community Hub Perspective Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Street Frontage Perspective Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Outdoor Amenities Perspective Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Meditative Green Space Perspective Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). Proposed Module System: Additional On-Site Uses Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). The Inclusive, Accommodating and User-Focused City Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

126 128 130 133 134 136 138 140 142 144 146 149

xix

LIST OF APPENDICES
Appendix A Appendix B Supplementary Precedents & Case Studies Design Iterations 154 160

xxi

01
< Chris Bandera, 2009, <https://www.flickr.com/ photos/chipsterman/ 3672845666/ chipsterman /3672845666/>.

INTRODUCTION

1.1 DEFINING INCLUSIVITY IN THE AGE OF `HYPER-DIVERSITY' Canadian global cities such as Toronto and Vancouver are often touted as being "inclusive" and "diverse" urban environments. Since 1997, Toronto's city motto has been "Diversity: Our Strength"1 but how accurate is this city motto, especially when the city is struggling with the growing presence of social exclusivity and urban alienation?2 These contradictions stem from the multi-faceted nature of diversity, especially within large cities like Toronto. The inherent complexity within urban diversity lies with the fact that global cities have grown to hold a significant number of people each with their own individual set of needs and wants. This scale and intricacy of individualism in urban centres results in it being difficult to define, approach or respond to diversity in any universal or absolute manner. Although in most contexts, the idea of inclusivity achieved through the accommodation of diversity can be broadly understood as an attempt at responding to the increasing number of unique "others" within cities and their respective individual needs.3 While cities have been focused on embracing the cultural or racial identities of "others" and celebrating their differences, other disparities between city inhabitants have greatly increased. In The Trouble with Diversity: How We Learned to Love Identity and Ignore Inequality, Walter Benn Michaels argues that by emphasizing the celebration of obvious diversities such as racial difference for the past three decades, we have ignored the more uncomfortable diversities such as socioeconomic and class disparities.4 According to Toronto's latest census in 2016, the population of the city has increased by 6.2% since the last census in 2011, much quicker than the national growth rate of 5%.5 What this means for Toronto and cities facing similar circumstances is that to fully follow a model of inclusivity it would involve addressing the complexities of diversity that manifests itself within our cities as the population continues to grow rapidly and then confronting both the `obvious diversities' and the `uncomfortable diversities'. Jay Pitter and John Lorinc describe the intricate, complex and often contradictory social reality of diversity within cities through the notion of `hyper-diversity.'6 Hyper-diversity is the idea that every individual is comprised of multiple, intersecting identities that shape their needs, wants, and the way they experience the world.7 Thus, hyper-diversity goes beyond the current over-simplification of diversity and explores more deeply what it means to live in increasingly populated and complex global cities like Toronto. Due to the concentrated population growth within urban centres, inherently there would be a greater diversification of the population in socio-economic, social, and ethnic terms, but also in respect to lifestyles, attitudes, and activities. The intricacies that make communities inclusive can include a varied mixture of social, cultural and economic relationships between communities of faith, class and race, between affluence and poverty and between generations.8 People experience the built environment differently depending on their current and past circumstances.9 Their social, cultural and economic background all can influence how they feel and interact within a space.10 To create an atmosphere of inclusivity, the design of a space should be able to accommodate for this diversity of backgrounds if all users

1

are to be comfortable and welcomed as a part of a particular space. Thus, inclusivity and the accommodation of diversity is an interconnected process in which inclusive and socially cohesive communities are built on the bonds that embrace rather than ignore the differences amongst the people that co-exist within our shared built urban fabric. 1.2 ARCHITECTURE'S ROLE IN CREATING AN INCLUSIVE ENVIRONMENT Architecture plays a role in shaping the built environment.11 In the age of large scale urban diversity, how can architecture confront the intricate complexities involved to create an urban environment that can accommodate conflicting needs to create an inclusive city? It has been said that the design quality of buildings and spaces play a role in influencing the quality of people's lives.12 Consequently, architecture is a device that can either work to include or exclude those who live within the shared built environment.13 Decisions about the design of buildings and their surrounding spaces can enhance or restrict a sense of belonging and therefore they can remove both real and imagined barriers between communities. In cities like Toronto, composed of multiple neighbourhoods, each with their own distinct ambiance, character, and residents, being able to accommodate for the diversity that currently exists and will continue to exist into the foreseeable future is necessary in the pursuit of creating an inclusive cohesive city.

140 Languages & Dialects 60,000 Condos 60% of Increase Built in Next Few Condos are in Ethnic, Years One Linguistic People with a Bedrooms and non-Christian Units Cultural religion x 2 Diversity 1X by 2036 200 Distinct Ethnic Origins 1/5 Renters Live in Inappropriately Sized Units

Figure 1: Toronto User Diversity 2016 & Housing Diversity 2015 Statistics Various statistics showing how user diversity is increasing within Toronto, meanwhile housing diversity is decreasing.

Unfortunately, the current reality within Canadian cities is that while user diversity is increasing, housing diversity is decreasing. Recent censuses and population projections for Canada all point towards growing ethnic, linguistic, cultural, and socio-economic diversity, mostly concentrated in existing metropolitan cities like Montreal, Vancouver, and Toronto.14 Since 1981, Toronto has

2

seen a four-fold increase in ethnocultural diversity.15 However, Toronto's increasing visible minority population is not the only aspect of diversity projected to drastically change, other aspects of diversity are also expanding such as generation status, mother tongue, religious denominations, and household incomes.16 On the contrary, housing is becoming more and more homogeneous as new construction consists mainly of small similarly designed condominiums and the older existing housing stock is no longer capable of properly accommodating today's diverse population. As condo towers continue to dominate the new home marketplace, other types of housing such as singles, large purpose-built rental units, and small scale rentals have declined in importance leaving users in Toronto with a weak spectrum of housing options to suit their needs.17 Condominiums accounted for over 40% of all new homes built in the late 1990s, while more recently the share of condos under construction has jumped to 80%, half of which are being built in Toronto's downtown core.18 While initially built to be entry-level properties that are tailored to shorter-term living and smaller households, the reality is that larger households are living in spaces that are mismatched to their changing needs for much longer than expected due to the inaccessibility and limited housing options available elsewhere. This focus on small condominium units have created a disparity between available housing stock and the diversity in household types, thus raising questions and concerns on how the current lack of housing diversity is able to effectively align with contemporary and future housing demands and needs. Looking at post-war towers, the focus of this thesis, the reality is that the existing stock of purposebuilt rental units are no longer able to accommodate the diversity that exists within them. Over the last 10 years, purpose-built rentals have only accounted for 4% of construction activity.19 Thus, those in need of this type of accommodation are often forced to live in post-war towers in spaces unsuitable to their needs, in homes that may be aging, inefficient, unaffordable, or lacking a spatial organization relevant to the group of inhabitants that it houses. Apartment neighbourhoods, where these towers are often clustered, is generally home to the most diverse range of people. However, the post-war towers themselves have an organizational rigidity and spatial specificity that has hindered the ability of these dwellings to adapt to different conditions, leading to a lack of maintenance and in some cases, obsolescence. Thus, the existing stock of purpose-built rental units in the region is rapidly aging and requires substantial new investment and architectural intervention to be able to properly accommodate the diversity that now exists within the city. As a response to the reality of a varied and rapidly changing household type, housing design must be capable of accommodating the different needs of today's diverse population and the unknown needs of the future. By integrating certain elements such as user choice, customizability, adaptability over time, and mixed use within a design, together they can maximize the accommodation of unique individuals that exist within a city to create an overall sense of user inclusivity. There is no longer such a thing as "neutral design" as the built environment is often constructed with certain agendas whether it is social, economical, or political.20 Therefore, architecture is no longer simply functional, innocuous and pre-political as it can have enduring effects and implications within society.21 The built environment, and therefore architecture can contribute to a more equal, inclusive, and cohesive society if the places where we live, the facilities we use, and our neighbourhood meeting places are designed to be approachable and accommodating.22

3

CABE'S PRINCIPLES OF INCLUSIVE DESIGN Be responsive to people's needs Be flexible in use Be convenient so they can be used without undue effort or `special separation' Be welcoming to a wide variety of people, making them feel they belong Offer choice when a single design solution cannot meet all users' needs Accommodate without fuss or exception those who have specific requirements.

Figure 2: Principles of Inclusive Design Defined by CABE (Commission for Architecture and Built Environment), the United Kingdom's government advisor on prevalent issues within architecture, urban design, and public space.

There are many facets to inclusive design. CABE (Commission for Architecture and Built Environment), the United Kingdom's government advisor on prevalent issues within architecture and urban design, has set out broad principles of inclusive design seen in Figure 2. They define inclusive design as being responsive, flexible, convenient, welcoming, accommodating and offering choice.23 Advocates for inclusive design, such as former RIBA (Royal Institute of British Architects) president, Jane Duncan, often focus on universal design as a strategy to achieve an architecture of inclusivity. Universal design does not focus on the provision of special features for various segments of the population, but instead emphasizes a universal approach that makes the mainstream built environment applicable to all users.24 However, while this thesis is also pursuing a built environment that works to include all users, it approaches it differently from the universal design concept. Universal design is often a compromised design that works to minimize the diversity and differences that inherently exists between people. This compromising of needs eventually creates spaces that are unable to cater to specific needs or preferences. To avoid this situation, this thesis wishes to explore the architecture of inclusivity through the accommodation of individuality, difference, and diversity to create spaces in which all types of users can make their own. Using these different approaches to inclusive design as a general reference, this thesis explores the question of how, in the current urban reality of homogeneous residential development and limited housing options, can the design of homes progress to reflect the hyper-diverse needs, wants, and preferences that exists between every and all households? Furthermore, what design strategies will need to be implemented to utilize the aging existing housing stock of post-war towers present in clusters all throughout Toronto in a manner that contributes to a more inclusive environment- one that is able to collectively accommodate the diversity of households that inhabit the contemporary urban fabric without comprising their individuality? These are the questions and inquiries that this thesis aims to explore and address to ultimately create an architecture of inclusivity, more specifically a user-focused architecture that can accommodate for the social diversity that currently exists within post-war towers.

4

By responding to an architecture of inclusivity through a focus on the accommodation of user and need diversity in housing, this thesis proposes a new approach to residential architecture. By engaging with post-war tower renewal and exploring its capacity to accommodate for different individual households, this implicates a change with the current trajectory of urban development towards a more accommodating, inclusive, and ethical housing design solution. By reassessing Toronto's existing apartment towers and exploring the relationships between resident diversity and housing diversity culminating in a design proposal, this thesis aims to reinterpret `the urban home' to instill an architecture of inclusivity within Toronto's landscape and transform it from a socially unsustainable economic-focused city towards an accommodating user-focused city.
Figure 3: Economic Focused City User Focused City Image depicting the uniformity of an economic focused city that contrasts against the blend of diversity that exist within the needs of its citizens. Instead a userfocused city that accounts for the diversity in needs is proposed.

VS.

ECONOMIC-FOCUSED CITY

DIVERSITY OF NEEDS

USER-FOCUSED CITY

5

ENDNOTES
1

"Coat of Arms and City Motto" City of Toronto Website, 1998-2017, <http://www1.toronto.ca/wps/portal/contentonly?vgnextoid=6fd87aac783a1410VgnVCM10000071d60f89RCRD&vgnextchannel=83574d3dab5f1410VgnVCM10000071d60f89RCRD>. 2 John Lorinc, The New City: How the Crisis in Canada's Urban Centres is Reshaping the Nation, (Toronto: Penguin Canada, 2006) 6. 3 Jay Pittal & John Lorinc, Subdivided: City Building in and Age of Hyper-Diversity, (Toronto: Coach House Books, 2016) 6. 4 Statistics Canada, Population size and growth in Canada: Key results from the 2016 Census, 2017, <http://www.statcan.gc.ca/daily-quotidien/170208/dq170208a-eng.htm>. 5 Walter Benn, The Trouble with Diversity: How we Learned to Love Identity and Ignore Inequality, (London: Picador, 2006) 15. 6 Pittal & Lorinc, 6. 7 Ibid. 8 Ibid. 9 CABE, Inclusion by Design: Equality, Diversity and the Built Environment, (London: 2008) 11. 10 Ibid., 4. 11 Ibid. 12 Sarah Schindler, Architectural Exclusion: Discrimination Segregation Through Physical Design of the Built Environment, (Yale Law Journal: Vol. 126, No. 6, 2015). <http://www.yalelawjournal.org/article/architectural-exclusion>. 13 CABE, 3. 14 Schindler. 15 Statistics Canada, Study: A Look at Immigration, Ethnocultural Diversity, and Languages in Canada up to 2036, 2011 to 2036, 2017, <http://www.statcan.gc.ca/daily-quotidien/170125/dq170125b-eng.htm>. 16 Ibid. 17 TD Economics, GTA Housing Boom Masks Growing Structural Challenges, 2015, <https://www.td.com/document/PDF/economics/special/GTA_Housing.pdf>. 18 Ibid. 19 Ibid. 20 Schindler. 21 Ibid. 22 CABE, 4. 23 Ibid. 24 Jane Duncan, Is Inclusive Design Achievable? (London: RIBA Journal, 2016). <https://www.ribaj.com/culture/is-inclusive-design-achievable>.

6

7

02
< Fairchild Aerial Surveys Company of Canada, 1926, <http://www. distilleryheritage.com/ PDFs/photos/1926. pdf/3672845666/>.

Toronto's HISTORY OF INCLUSIVITY & EXCLUSIVITY
Toronto, like all cities, has had an extensive and rich history that brought the city to where it is today. By looking at Toronto's historical context that coincided with various phases of inclusion and/or exclusion within collective urban housing, this chapter examines the city's past attempts to accommodate diversity. These periods of inclusion and/or exclusion are looked at through the lens of collective urban housing, which includes housing provided by both the private and public sectors, to identify the city's strategies utilized in various periods to house large populations. One aspect that this chapter delves into is the role that the private sector contributes in creating homes for Toronto's collective, and if their developments are encouraging or hindering the pursuit of a more accommodating user-focused city. The other aspect of collective housing that this chapter examines is the presence of social housing (or lack thereof) as a tool to gauge the city's collective commitment to an inclusive urban environment through the accommodation of the more complex and diverse populations within the city. These are the people that are often socially excluded and their more complicated and diverse individual needs are ignored in the pursuit of city growth. By analyzing past and present urban collective housing strategies as a representation of Toronto's social and political convictions, it gives us a sense of past attempts and the city's willingness (or unwillingness) to accommodate and shelter its diverse inhabitants to create an inclusive Toronto. In Still Renovating: A History of Canadian Social Policy, Greg Suttor pinpoints six turning points from the early postwar period to the turn of the millennium illustrated in Figure 4.1 The two largest turning points in Toronto and other Canadian cities, would be the mid 1960's and the mid 1990's.2 Thus, this chapter will focus on the circumstances right before the first turning point in the 1960's, when high density urban collective housing production first started until the period after the 1990's where the paradigm-shift happened, and still mostly exists today.3 According to Suttor, there were three distinct phases during this time frame (refer to Figure 4) which this chapter breaks down into the following sub-sections. Starting with the misguided attempts of inclusion from 1949-1973, which led to a readjustment towards the prime period of inclusion from 1974-1993, and then to the declension towards the invisible models of exclusion prominent from 1994 until now. The contexts of these three phases are further explained in the following sections and linked to different architectural executions that resulted from the predominant social models of each sub-chapter and seen through three example case studies- Old Regent Park, St. Lawrence, and City Place. Each of these case studies is a representation of the inclusive and/or exclusive ideologies that prevailed during each distinct era of collective housing provision. By understanding the resulting design and communities that formed as a result of misguided attempts of inclusion, prime period of inclusion, and invisible models of exclusion, this thesis can extrapolate the broader ideologies that contribute to an accommodating user-focused community and those that take away from it.

9

1

Figure 4: Canadian Social Housing Policy Greg Suttor, 2016 Table describing the main turning points and periods in Canadian social housing policy. Based on Greg Suttor's timeline, this thesis splits it into three distinct eras: 1. 1949-1973 Misguided Attempts of Inclusion, 2. 1974-1993 Model of Inclusion Prime, 3. 1994-Present Invisible Models of Exclusion. Key events and characteristics are summarized for each period.

1I

III

10

2.1 1949-1973: MISGUIDED ATTEMPTS OF INCLUSION In 1949, postwar Canada was on its way to becoming the urbanized nation it is today. It was during this time that Canada started making the shift from a predominantly rural country to a predominantly urban one.4 While most cities in the United States were declining with the majority of affluent and middle class inhabitants chasing after `the American Dream' of a suburban home, Toronto triumphed against this mass decentralization movement.5 The urban context of that time was a Toronto that was socially and economically mixed, despite the lingering presence of urban housing issues such as working class slums.6 Various reasons are responsible for this natural occurrence of social mix- the late adoption of the car, reluctance to invest in expressways, and poor public transportation system made living in the inner city a necessity for most. 7 In combination with a thriving productive industry, high rates of immigration and absence of racial conflict (compared to American cities), the city of Toronto was still generally seen as an attractive place to live and its urban land was growing in demand.8 However, this new growing demand showed itself through the leading housing problem of that time- the deteriorated state of homes within the city centre.9 In 1951, 23% of urban dwellings in Toronto lacked their own bath or shower.10 This need for sanitary housing for the working-class became a growing concern for the Canadian government. The subsequent response was the start of the Canadian government's involvement in social housing and the market sector's rental apartment boom, both contributing to the clusters of post-war high-rises synonymous with the housing of this period. This was the beginning of the well-intentioned but misguided attempts at creating a more inclusive housing model within the city of Toronto. First came the public sector's early endeavours in social housing production which was offset by the private sector's rental apartment boom that started later in 1955 to collectively house a wide social spectrum of users.11 The first Canadian public housing projects of the 1950's, which includes Toronto's controversial Regent Park, are a result of the slum clearance mentality present at that time. However, the modest volumes of early public housing during this decade only accounted for approximately 1%-2% of total housing production.12 These numbers were not enough to meet the overwhelming housing needs to make a systematic difference for those in need, as social housing still provided better quality homes than most down market rental units, at less than half the rent.13 This slum clearance mindset initiated during the 1950's would continue to take the lead in the 1960's- the beginning of the "social housing prime."14
Figure 5: Annual Canadian Social Housing Commitments 1954-2011 In the 1960's, production rose tenfolds to levels sustained for thirty years. The rise and fall reflected Canada's efforts in creating an inclusive environment for vulnerable populations through public sector housing to supplement market housing.

11

As illustrated in Figure 5, there was a significant turning point in social housing commitment evident in the mid 1960's.15 Annual production of social housing expanded ten-fold in the mid-1960's with much of the early social housing initiatives consisting of the now-contentious public housing project variety. This public "urban renewal" movement was a derivative of the private sector's rental apartment boom and was meant to serve a social integration agenda.16 From the start, the strategy was to scatter and integrate public housing with the rapid private rental production to achieve social inclusion.17 During this time, there was a larger mix of housing stock available from both the private and public sector to accommodate a larger variety of household types, budgets, and needs.18 Together, private rentals and social housing development was meant to evenly disperse the working poor from their isolated slum neighbourhoods to areas where other people were living in the pursuit of an accommodating and inclusive city.19 Despite the initial good intentions of inclusivity through the provision of social housing in correlation with the private apartment rentals, this ideology eventually proved to be non-conducive to diverse socially inclusive communities that the planners and designers were hoping for.20 Unfortunately, while the approach of this era involved a significant element of social inclusion in the broader city sense, it failed to consider the finer grain micro-scale of the resulting housing projects and apartment neighbourhoods. Back then the guiding idea was that inner-city housing needed more order and structure, hence the controversial implementation of separation of uses.21 Thus, the archetype of this era were the mega blocks separated from its urban context. While the homes were clustered around courts with an aim to provide an inclusive space where different people were able to meet and interact, the reality was that the height, volume and density of the high-rises built were foreign to surrounding existing neighbourhoods. The segregated street alignments, inferior materials and institutional architectural vocabularies did little to help these collective housing projects, both private and public, to naturally integrate into their surrounding context and a sense of urban isolation permeated through these "projects" and apartment neighbourhoods. Instead, the separation that existed between affluent neighbourhoods and less affluent ones left the early social housing efforts of the Canadian government and the private sector's apartment communities to turn into segregated clusters of deepening poverty and stigmatization.22 Given the multitude of criticisms that the public and private collective housing decisions of this era garnered, there is a general opinion that the misguided planning and design intentions eventually failed these projects. Architect, and scholar John C. Bacher criticizes architecture's role in this situation by writing that "housing in Canada [at that time] was visually designed to affirm that it was inferior accommodation intended to serve a lower-income group."23 These physical and visual attributes embedded in the early public housing projects and post-war apartment neighbourhoods ensured that the less affluent residents, generally renters, were constantly seen as "others" distinct and segregated from the more affluent home-owners. It was this misguided class-based "others" mentality, with its poorly designed neighbourhoods and buildings, that is partially to blame for the unintended result of social exclusion and the eventual place-based stigma experienced by these residents then and now.24 Unfortunately, for these reasons the public housing projects run by the government and the neglected post-war apartment neighbourhoods are now often seen in a negative light despite the well intentioned, but overall misguided attempt at urban inclusivity. However, the lessons gained from these early attempts at collective housing would eventually lead to a more successful model of inclusion in the thinking that surfaced in the 1970's.

12

2.1.1. CASE STUDY - OLD REGENT PARK
WHAT IS IT? Regent Park was one of the first social housing projects to be built in Canada. It was built in the late 1940-s and early 1950's in central Toronto and was a slum clearance initiative to create urban renewal. SUCCESSES: 1. Was an initiative to accommodate in mass those with needs that were not fulfilled through the market sector. 2. Helped alleviate the post-World War II housing shortage and unsafe working slums that was present in Toronto. FAILURES: 1. As it was a self contained neighbourhood made up of exclusively low-income housing, it led to segregation of classes and feelings of place-based stigma within the tenants. 2. Separation of uses left the inhabitants with few amenities and services to accommodate their diverse needs. 3. Few thoroughfares made the site unfriendly to pedestrians and left areas without sight lines.
^ John McNeill / The Globe and Mail, 1988, <https://www. theglobeandmail.com/news/ toronto/regent-park-a-look-backthrough-the-years-at-canadasoldest-social-housing-project/ article27612426/>.

Regent Park was one of the first social housing projects to be built in Canada, and thus fell victim to the misguided attempts of inclusion evident in early Canadian government housing described in the previous section. Built in the late 1940's and early 1950's in the eastern part of downtown Toronto, Regent Park was initially a slum clearance initiative that was aimed at redressing poverty and marginalization by drastically altering the built environment.25 The construction of Regent Park was intended to help alleviate the post-World War II housing shortage that was present in Toronto which led to unhealthy housing conditions such as lack of basic plumbing services, and overcrowding.26 Thus, the original Regent Park development was popular with local politicians and reformers because it would replace a portion of Cabbagetown, a neighbourhood of substandard single family dwellings that were labeled as "criminogenic slums".27 Though it was widely celebrated at first, the project would soon be deemed a failure by critics and the general public.28 The planning and design thinking behind the creation of Regent Park was reflective of its time. It was designed to be a modernist development and a self-contained complex of exclusively lowincome housing among expansive green spaces and little thoroughfare.29 The original designers of Regent Park envisioned a `garden city' a place where buildings sit in parklike settings, street automobile traffic has been removed, and the community is set apart from surrounding areas.30 It was an attempt at bringing certain desirable elements of suburban living into the city and eventually replaced older undesirable neighbourhoods with single-use, insular enclaves of lowincome families and wide-open spaces.31 Regent Park North, the first phase of the new neighbourhood, consisted of six square blocks of

13

roughly equal size. Each block was vaguely demarcated by dead-end driveways and sidewalks, and contained five or six low-rise apartment buildings surrounded by empty green space.32 Regent Park South was completed later in 1959. Although this portion of the neighbourhood appeared less methodical in design, it followed a similar theme with its northern counterpart and was spatially dominated by five high-rise buildings at its centre, each placed at different angles and set far back from the main roads with low-rise townhouse complexes at the perimeter.33 As in the North, there were large grassy expanses and constant dead-ends.
Figure 6: Regent Park North, 1956 In the aerial view of Regent Park North, the institutional language of the repetitive housing blocks can be seen, but also the minimal thoroughfare into the neighbourhood. The presence of Regent Park can be seen as distinct and separate from its surroundings.

boundary thoroughfare

As this mass housing experiment was initially deemed a success, dozens of public and private collective housing projects were constructed across Toronto following a similar formula over the next decade.34 Unfortunately, after Regent Park's first decade of operation it would eventually be labeled as a `degenerate slum," despite being initially proposed as the remedy to this very situation.35 An article in a 1949 trade publication on Regent Park notes that `modern, sanitary housing is the goal; parks and playgrounds, desirable as they are, beneficial as they will be, must still be a secondary consideration.'36 It was this well-intentioned but misguided thinking behind the first iteration of a more inclusive and accommodating collective housing model that led to the urban isolation and placelessness that Regent Park and similarly designed neighbourhoods experienced. As a direct result of the manner in which collective housing (including Regent Park and the privately built apartment neighbourhoods) was designed and built in the early post war era these neighbourhoods became concentrations of deepening poverty and social exclusion within Toronto. Regent Park was a planned community that was exclusively made up of low-income public housing where its form and vast expanses of grass had turned it into a space of further marginalization and community fragmentation. According to Toronto Community Housing Corporation (TCHC), bad design has resulted in the isolation of many neighborhoods and more than 7,500 residents from Toronto's downtown area.37
14

Figure 7: Regent Park South In this image of the Regent Park neighbourhood, the angled highrise clusters of Regent Park South can be seen. The spaces that surround them can be observed, and is often an abundance of surface parking and underutilized green space.

Critics often noted that the lack of streets in collective housing "superblocks", like Regent Park, made them difficult to navigate, unsafe, and isolating for residents, while also setting the area apart from the rest of the city.38 The wide-open courtyards that were once believed to be conducive to strong community connections are now believed to foster a sense of isolation and placelessness.39 These common spaces that were scattered throughout Regent Park were not clearly delineated as either public or private space, meaning residents had no sense of ownership in regards to the space. Furthermore, the clear institutional vocabulary of Regent Park did little to help the buildings blend into the surrounding neighbourhoods, enabling the place-based stigma and exclusion felt by the residents. This situation only worsened over time as the buildings aged and fell into disrepair. It was these assertions of physical exclusion, attributed to the overall design of the area, that inflated the prevailing sense of social exclusion of Regent Park in relation to the city at large. As the former CEO of TCHC Derek Ballantyne explained, `it's an island, there is an impenetrable line that you don't cross unless you live there.'40 As the costly experiment in public housing had been deemed a failure, Regent Park was already in a precarious position by the late-1960s. Over the next four decades, its problems were compounded by the neglect and marginalization of public housing that came with the neoliberal restructuring of the Canadian economy and as the effects of social exclusion became more pronounced. In the context of this thesis, Regent Park becomes a case study into the intricacies of inclusivity and provides insight into the misguided ideas of inclusion at the time. One of the main strategies used in the pursuit of a more inclusive Toronto during this period was to provide in mass basic sanitary housing. However, important secondary needs of residents such as local retail, community institutions and employment opportunities were ignored as a result of this linear focus on housing. While the city as a whole was becoming more socially mixed, looking at neighbourhoods such as Regent Park individually, it becomes clear that the city's users are grouped into homogeneous communities separated by social and economic class. Aesthetically, socially, economically, and geographically, Regent Park has attempted to suppress resident diversity and individuality through its shortsighted homogeneous thinking. What this revealed was that inclusion was addressed through a level of proximity that is criticized as too broad. The shallow and misguided ideology of this period would eventually prove to be inadequate in creating the healthy socially sustainable environments as was hoped. The eventual planned demolition of Regent Park is a testament to the importance of designing for an architecture of inclusivity and integrating as well as embracing the community's diversity not only at the broader city scale but the finer complex scales of the neighbourhood, building, and unit.
15

2.2 1974-1993: MODEL OF INCLUSION PRIME As Toronto expanded in the 1970's, the number of downtown jobs grew, commuting distances lengthened, and more young middle-class professionals were choosing to live in the central city over the suburbs displacing those who were already living within the city centre. Although nowhere near the scale of the phenomenon seen in cities today, the 1970's marked the humble beginnings of gentrification.41 Gentrification was understood at the time as a cultural shift rather than just a housing market trend. 42 Younger, alternative people were rebelling against the culturally bland postwar suburbs and instead gathered towards the exciting inner city.43 The private rental regime was collapsing in the 1970's and very little rental apartments were being built.44 Thus, the larger number of inhabitants by the early 1970's caused a tightening of low-rent supply and the housing system offered few options for low-income renters outside the rapidly deteriorating postwar apartment neighbourhoods.44 Low and moderate income renters crowded into these neighbourhoods which thereby became places of deepening poverty and stigmatization; subsidized public housing and private rental were little differentiated in the public minds. The new urban realities of the housing market were "gentrification, the arrival in Canada of condominium tenure, condo production, and the collapse of Canada's distinctive postwar privaterental production regime".46 Condominiums were then a new idea and a very small sector, whereas the lack of rental development and high rental prices were larger mainstream concerns.47 The increasing diversity of needs and simultaneous decrease in housing diversity showed a skew in the housing market. The government would again intervene in an attempt to create an inclusive city. Through the mid 1970's, the prior misguided model and a newer model of inclusion expanded in tandem to provide housing for half of the low-income renters at that time.48 However, by the end of the decade due to the failures of early public housing projects and apartment neighbourhoods, the 1960's misguided approach to inclusion ceased and instead was replaced with a finer grain model of inclusivity and accommodation that started to take shape. The origins of this finer-grain model of inclusivity and community-based mixed-income model was a result of the emerging desire to avoid mega high-rise residential developments that displaced residents and obliterated existing communities.49 Instead, there was a strong desire to preserve the distinctive built form and fine-grain social mix that was inherent to the character of the city's older and more stable neighbourhoods. The residential development industry became the focus of a considered critique about urban land and how these developments simply focused on profits which ultimately did not properly accommodate the diverse needs of its intended inhabitants.49 Alternatively, emergent ideas of collective housing rising at the time were that there should be a high level of housing diversity to adequately accommodate the variety of housing needs at costs that were more proportionate with respective household incomes. This emergent approach shifted away from government agencies developing, owning, and operating large collective housing projects that were generally for low-income households and isolated from the market sector's newly built condominiums. The new housing strategy introduced community based organizations who owned and operated non-profit or co-op housing that was integrated with market housing to create and accommodate a diverse neighbourhood. This community based housing model had a mix of tenants paying market rent and tenants with rents that were geared to their income, thus being able to accommodate economical diversity. This

16

attitude shift reflected the climate of grassroots action and thus a wave of political activism during the 1970's, spearheaded by the likes of Jane Jacobs, marked both a willingness to spend resources on housing, and a movement of creative activity that spurred new ideas about inclusive housing.51 This thinking led to the shift in the 1970's from homogeneous `housing projects' to a more successful approach of a socially diverse, community based cooperative housing model that was naturally integrated with private sector housing.52 This synthesis between market housing and nonprofit cooperatives became the standard Canadian approach to collective housing in the following decade. Canadian cities, including Toronto, were shifting away from the homogeneous socially isolating public housing projects and apartment neighbourhoods towards a more inclusive and heterogeneous socially mixed approach. The latest urban design ideas were to preserve historic buildings, enhance pedestrian environments and public spaces, identify and protect important sight lines, and maintain a functional diversity.53 The archetype housing model created during this time were neighbourhoods with a variety of buildings, tenures, units, densities, uses, and incomes. The design and intention behind this mixity allowed for the accommodation and diversity of people that lived within these areas to create a natural environment of fine-grain social inclusiveness. Neighbourhood-based organizations carried out programs for local job creation, improved services, and better housing, thereby enhancing the capacity of accommodation in needs and allowing inhabitants to alter their own circumstances on their own terms. Thus, creating a community that is able to house and cater to its diverse user base is the foundation needed to create an inclusive user-focused community.54 The decade between this 1970's turning point and that of the mid-1980's was the central peak decade of Canadian collective housing expansion. This was the time when a more nuanced and developed model of inclusion was strived for and thus the collective housing of this period reflected that design mentality. The projects produced during this prime in collective housing would remain as positive examples for those in pursuit of an accommodating housing model and an inclusive city. According to Greg Suttor in Still Renovation: A History of Canadian Social Housing Policy, it remains for many people the best model, the "quintessentially Canadian success story in collective housing."55 Comparing the housing models that were produced during this era to CABE's Principles of Inclusivity created in 2008 (offers choice, responsive, flexible, convenient, welcoming, and accommodating), the design intentions behind the collective housing models of the 1970's align with the contemporary CABE's Principles of Inclusivity. As this thesis is an exploration into the architecture of inclusivity and accommodation, this correlation between these design implementations of the past and CABE's outlining the same ideas once again in the present, implies that somehow and somewhere these ideas have become lost and need to be reiterated. The pursuits of this thesis has become relevant and necessary once again because of the years that have passed since the period of model of inclusion prime.

17

2.2.1. CASE STUDY ST. LAWRENCE
WHAT IS IT? St. Lawrence is a high density, socially mixed community in the centre of downtown Toronto, built to house and accommodate the diversity of households within the city. SUCCESSES: 1. Units are varied as some residents own their homes, others rent and some units are full-market, others are subsidized. However, you can't tell which units are which, allowing for a inclusive community. 2. Amongst a range of amenities and community services, Crombie Park acts as a centrally located social incubator within the community. 3. The planning process was open and democratic, encouraging community participation, and avoiding the closed and government imposed approach of the past. FAILURES: 1. As half the land was already owned by the city, replication of this success seems impossible for today's circumstances and context, where urban land is more scarce and thereby expensive.
^ Sam Javanrough, 2015, <http://www.jamiiesplanade.org/ file/The_Esplanade.html>.

Starting from the late 1970's, a new type of inclusive collective housing strategy appeared. The non-profit cooperative housing that was jointly financed by both the public and private sectors were operated independently from the earlier crime prone housing projects and apartment neighbourhoods.56 They were typically smaller in scale and geared towards a mix of income levels and housing needs. The St. Lawrence Neighbourhood was a project that came out of this new discourse on collective housing. St Lawrence, and similar neighbourhoods came to represent the most stable, accommodating and socially integrated type of collective housing to date.57 Originally 44 acres of previously industrial and underutilized land, St. Lawrence was built on land that was half owned by the City of Toronto with the remainder belonging to small factory or warehouse owners.58 Through a municipally developed endeavour it was sensitively transformed into an inclusive mixedhousing, mixed-income and mixed-use community. Since it was completed, this neighbourhood has been looked upon as a prime example of social inclusion housing done right. St. Lawrence is a high-density mid-rise district that was organized along the existing street grid. Within the St. Lawrence residential development, there are about 25,000 inhabitants spread among the 12 housing cooperatives, half a dozen government housing complexes and more than three dozen condominiums.59 A true testament to the success in creating a desirable community through social inclusion is the large (2,300 plus) waiting list for market-priced units in the nonprofit buildings within the neighbourhood.60 Unfortunately, this desirability meant that the cooperatives and subsidized housing generally have close waiting lists.61 This success achieved by designing the neighbourhood with a fine-grain level of inclusion and accommodation was essential in creating

18

the stable neighbourhood with the low turnover rates seen today. Furthermore, it has allowed for different residents, over longer periods of time and continuous interaction, to form more meaningful relationships with one another to create a genuine community environment. By emphasizing inclusivity through accommodation of social mix within St Lawrence, designers did not seek to impose social engineering, but provided an opportunity for a full range of social groups to peacefully co-exist within the neighbourhood. Despite having a mix of both market rate and subsidized housing, the two were designed to be visually cohesive to absolve any stigma that may be attached to subsidized housing. Thus, tenure types were divided by 39% consisting of condominium apartments, 30% being non-profit co-operatives, 27% were private non-profit, and 4% being ownership townhouses.62
Figure 8: St. Lawrence Aeriel View Aerial View of the St. Lawrence neighbourhood. The scale and streets of the neighbourhood can be seen to align with the surrounding areas.

st. lawrence neighbourhood

Figure 9: St. Lawrence Housing Diversity View showing the different types, tenures, and scales of the housing to create the housing diversity that exists within St. Lawrence.

condo condo condo

co-op

apts. TCH co-op private TCH TCH TCH co-op co-op co-op TCH TCH private

condo

co-op

TCH

condo

TCH + private

apts.
private

This strategic planning for a wide range of housing types, tenures and sizes meant St. Lawrence neighbourhood could accommodate a larger variety of households. This also meant that while some residents may own their homes, others were renting, while some units were full-market prices, others were subsidized and while some may live with smaller families, larger families could be accommodated too.63 Beyond the broad mix of housing types and tenures there were also a range of amenities and community services that accommodated the needs of the community beyond housing. Through the mix of use, these secondary functions which included a centrally located park with a basketball court, park, and a community garden, acted as inclusive public spaces that functioned as social incubators for the surrounding community.64 The conception of St Lawrence included an open and democratic planning process with the likes of Jane Jacobs and the general public helping to facilitate decisions that reflected the complexities of neighbourhood dynamics and to ensure a user-focused design.65 This user-focused approach to the site plan and building form, in conjunction with the goal of developing an accommodating socially mixed neighbourhood helped to create a human-centric community.66 In learning from their past mistakes and listening to the community, one of the changes that made the model

19

of inclusion that the St. Lawrence neighbourhood followed successful was to naturally graft the community within the dynamic neighbourhoods that surrounded it. The buildings are aligned along roads to encourage street related activity and to create a continuous street front.67 The numerous developers and architects involved ensured that the St. Lawrence neighbourhood retained the character, circulation and scale of the surrounding buildings allowing it to integrate seamlessly into the existing fabric of Toronto.68
Figure 10: St. Lawrence Social Incubator: David Crombie Park Photo depicting the centrally located David Crombie Park, which acts as a public social incubator for within the community but also the surrounding areas.

It was this inclusive planning direction that allowed for the area to avoid developing into either an exclusively wealthy community, that was accessible to only certain high-income groups, or an area with a "housing project" or typical apartment neighbourhood atmosphere with a predominantly low-income demographic. This egalitarian approach to housing for both income brackets broke down the stigma of inclusive collective housing that came from the earlier misguided housing models. David Crombie, the mayor of Toronto at the time when St. Lawrence took shape described the initiative as "it was done in the city, by the city and for the city."69 Dave Leblanc, deems it "the best example of a mixed-income, mixed-use, pedestrian-friendly, sensitively scaled, densely populated community ever built in the province", an opinion that is shared with many Canadians.70 The St Lawrence neighbourhood is a case study looking into a project that is over 30 years old but still provides a level of successful and ethical integration that is reflective of the neighbourhood's architecture of inclusivity and accommodation of not only economic, but more importantly in the context of this thesis, social diversities. Through the neighbourhood's respectful consideration of residents' social differences such as household size, household type, housing preferences, age, and culture, St Lawrence was able to provide a large range of housing and public amenities to be inclusive of the individual needs of unique households. Instead of suppressing the diversity within the area, the design of the neighbourhood embraced and built on it to create a stable and healthy community representative of the strength of social mix. This thesis aims to explore this achievement in being a more inclusive community by accommodating for a range of social differences and how it can be translated in contemporary times on a smaller scale through a building that responds to user diversity, much like St Lawrence did.

20

2.3 1994-PRESENT: INVISIBLE MODELS OF EXCLUSION Despite the success of the emergent inclusive housing models of the 1970's and 1980's, the presence of the public sector in the collective housing market became almost non-existent once the neo-liberalism of the 1990's began to take shape. As the early 1990's brought severe recession and an extreme economic squeeze, the balance tilted toward restraining and then cutting social spending and thereby accommodating fewer inhabitants of Toronto than before.71 Thus, the mid 1990's brought the end of the Canadian social housing production prime that lasted for the last three decades.72 As available public funds became increasingly scarce and majority of the past investments in early social housing proved to be expensive failures, the general population started to doubt the public sector's effectiveness when it came to urban residential development.73 The public sector was still desperate to improve the urban core and correct past mistakes with their newer inclusive model of community based housing to create more neighbourhoods similar to St. Lawrence, but unfortunately had run out of resources to do so.74 Change was still needed, and the people with the capital and supplies required to create this change were the private condominium developers.75 The government endorsed private residential development but envisioned control through a public entity to uphold public interests.76 This collective housing reform permanently and thoroughly changed the trajectory of Toronto's development and left the city to operate and grow under an entirely new paradigm.77 The early 1990's recession was the first since before social housing production started in the 1950's that did not see any augmented social housing production.78 The 1990's turning point involved fundamental changes in the way low-income housing issues were thought about, talked about, and addressed. The collective housing projects, both public and private, built prior to the 1990's were increasingly characterized as being a waste of precious resources while also failing to "solve" the problem of accommodating the diversity of housing needs.79 For solutions it looked not to the proactive alternative of mixed housing developments that was emerging in the 1970s, but instead relied on "filtering" through the market. This led to the gradual decline in quality of older housing within apartment clusters, and the associated turnover of older neighbourhoods to poorer households. There was a disconnect between the social needs or concerns of these communities and the economic ones of the government. Thus, the sense of urban isolation and place based stigma that is felt through these clusters of deepening poverty are a result of the invisible models of exclusivity that came from the devolution and neo-liberalist agenda of this decade. Unfortunately, this resulted in residential development ignoring a portion of Toronto's citizens and their diverse housing needs. While the cooperative sector was seen as a success story by housing scholars and activists, public sentiment generally did not differentiate cooperatives from traditional collective housing complexes and the entire collective housing sector became even more marginalized as a result.80 Generally, there was rising stigma and negative sentiment surrounding collective housing, with both the past public housing projects and private rental apartment neighbourhoods. Developers started to mount a campaign against public collective housing, which they saw as taking market share and having privileged access to public resources.81 Thus, this campaign sparked a discourse about apartment rentals and public collective housing as being expensive, ill targeted and failing to solve the needs of lower-income households.82 To justify the upcoming condominium boom,

21

the developers categorized any issues with lack of housing diversity as a resource and social class problem, rather than a problem with the trajectory of residential development and its inability to accommodate the full spectrum of needs that existed within the city. As market-oriented assumptions about housing prevailed in Canada, and the government decided to "get out of the housing business," almost immediately, Toronto was overwhelmed with private condominium development proposals.83 The public sector found that they were often caught between the desires of the private developers and the needs of city's residents on the matter of high-rise residential condominiums.84 Despite public opinion erring on the side that developers were simply capitalists in search of profits and their creations were nothing more than infringements on the greater good, the public sector was still inclined to permit future developments.85 The condominium construction boom ensued, one that we are still seeing today, and the inner city was transformed into an exclusive affluent place, with its accompanying amenities and services, which attracted those living in the suburbs that could afford the transition. Thus marked the unfaltering mass gentrification of the inner city. As we entered the 2000's, a limited number of programs for housing that accommodated those with housing needs that were being ignored by condominium designers emerged, amounting to a modest re-engagement in rentals by Canada's federal and provincial governments.86 The post2000 re-engagement avoided any restoration of the capacity, scale of activity, and prioritization that the decisions of the 1990's dismantled. Across Canada only about 8000 new subsidized units were funded annually, somewhat under half the average volume of the thirty-year prime.87 Furthermore, they were less income targeted, thereby less accommodating than before, despite the need for subsidized housing becoming more urgent. The post-2000 initiatives softened but did not reverse the fundamental changes of 1990's devolution and retrenchment. There was no revival in the thinking and ideas of inclusion that animated the thirty-year prime and the fundamental intention of sustaining a housing model that is able to accommodate the increasing diversity within Toronto. Despite these modest attempts at reviving the more accommodating mixed model of the social housing prime, the new paradigm that emerged in the beginnings of the 1990's is essentially what remains today. Both the demand for urban land and the constant private condominium development projects in Toronto never stopped or even slowed. In spite of the futile attempts and ongoing experiments at re-inventing itself, contemporary Toronto is not what city designers had hoped for with their dreams of a truly diverse and inclusive metropolis, but rather the aftermath of repeated compromises between the public and the private sectors with the latter often coming out as the winner.88 The accumulative effects of each compromise led to the unplanned mass private gentrification of the inner city happening today.89 The tendency for urban architecture to be planned for specific sites or areas in response to development proposals that seek to maximize profits rather than designing for the overall diverse needs of the city is the cause of the socioeconomic turmoil that has resulted from years of enduring invisible models of exclusivity that is prevalent in contemporary society.90

22

2.3.1. CASE STUDY - CITYPLACE
WHAT IS IT? CityPlace is a giant developer-led condominium neighbourhood comprising of over two dozen high and mid-rise towers. SUCCESSES: 1. Used land that was formerly industrial to create urgently needed housing in the inner city without demolishing existing communities. FAILURES: 1. Limited housing diversity as the neighbourhood is generally comprised of condominium towers with tiny studios and one-bedrooms inside. 2. Neighbourhood is geographically isolated from the surrounding neighbourhoods and does little to integrate itself with its context. 3. Despite its geographical isolation, there is a lack of vital services within the area resulting in the residents not being fully serviced but with few restaurants, bars, and independent stores CItyPlace give outsiders little reason to venture inside. 4. High number of investors buying and leasing out units leads to a transient population and low ownership numbers could result in a transient population and lack of upkeep.
^ Chris Kowal, 2013, <http:// www.christopherkowal.com/ wp-content/uploads/2013/01/17. jpg>.

CityPlace, a giant developer-led condominium neighbourhood, has come to embody the type of city growth and mass gentrification that our contemporary neo-liberal society created. Comprising of over two dozen high and mid-rise towers, once completed the neighbourhood will be home to over 18,000 city residents.91 Similar to the other high-rises that have resulted from Toronto's current condominium boom, the homogeneous towers at CityPlace are full of small uniform units designed to maximize profits and are generally aimed exclusively at young professionals. According to Christopher Hume, when it comes to condominiums, the critical factor is neither architecture nor planning, but price.92 This fixation on economic values is a hindrance to social values and minimizes the ability of housing to fully accommodate the spectrum of households that exist. This prioritization of profits over accommodation of socio-economic diversity make CityPlace and similarly designed neighbourhoods socially exclusive to only those who fit into the developer's idea of the ideal tenants. This exclusive designing is evident in the unit sizes and types available. Perpetuating the atmosphere of social exclusivity, CityPlace consists of mostly tiny studios, onebedroom and one bedroom plus den units aimed at young professionals with units averaging 708 square feet.93 This means that there are not enough larger units to accommodate the needs of families or untraditional households who may have housing needs outside the "norm" that is being reinforced by condominium developers.94 In the newer portion of CityPlace, only 10% of the units will have more than two bedrooms, while the early condominiums built to the east have an even fewer number of family-oriented units.95 It does not help that a generous portion of the units are simply real estate investments by foreign

23

investors or local homeowners with multiple properties. These small units are then rented out to a generally younger rental crowd of singles and childless couples who are willing to trade square footage and ignore certain individual needs for a chance to live in the inner city. However, the ownership structure of these buildings, with too many renters and not enough residents who own their homes, is causing a strain in the formation of a community atmosphere. As most of the building occupants are young renters, generally they are not as committed in the care of the units or buildings compared to longer term owners. The end result has ultimately diluted the developments with little to no pride of ownership and no sense of long-term community.96 The transient nature of CityPlace means it is no more than a temporary place where people live until something better comes along. A survey commissioned in 2011 by city councilor Adam Vaughan, who represented the area in which most of CityPlace is located, found that only 128 children lived in the nearly 5,000 units that have been completed at the time, and most of those are younger than preschool age.97 "What we found," Vaughan says, "is that if you have a second child, you move. If your kids are ready for school, you move. People don't see themselves raising a family in the neighbourhood."98 With the average stay being less than 2 ½ years, it is this transient atmosphere that contributes to the lack of commitment, an essential element to a healthy neighbourhood.99
Figure 11: CityPlace's Newton Condominiums: Typical Floorplan Typical floor plan of Newton Condominiums to be built within the CityPlace neighbourhood at 80 Queens Wharf Road. The floor plan depicts the skewed unit diversity with 75% of the units being one bedroom units, 17% being two bedroom units, and only 8% being three bedroom units.

928 SQ FT

577 SQ FT

560 SQ FT

577 SQ FT

736 SQ FT

525 SQ FT 756 SQ FT 650 SQ FT 535 SQ FT 507 SQ FT 537 SQ FT 570 SQ FT

one bedroom unit two bedroom unit three bedroom unit corridor

Given this high turnover rate and such a dense population in a relatively small area, the buildings are starting to show their wear and tear despite the buildings being constructed fairly recently. Edward Keenan says the lack of building upkeep is also a result of the skewed ownership structure and lack of housing diversity. He claims that when units are owned by investors, both the landlords and tenants are aligned against the idea of upkeeping the property.100 Tenants, he says, view themselves as transients with little reason to care about their home or community beyond the few years that they live there, while investors typically want to maximize their profit by putting as little money into the property as possible.101 It does not help that the original workmanship and quality of majority of the buildings are overall poor. This is perhaps due to carelessness on the contractor's part or through intentional actions to cut building costs and construction time.102 CityPlace, currently has three condominium boards who are suing the developer for problems that consist of black mold in communal areas, water seeping behind the window walls, leaky sprinklers and a defective ventilation system and negligent placement of the rooftop HVAC unit, making it

24

inaccessible for repairs.103 All of these aforementioned problems are a direct result of a neoliberal mentality in regards to city growth that is more concerned about the bottom line than the diversity in physical and social needs of city residents. Another problem going beyond the building is that despite its proximity to Toronto's downtown, CityPlace is still fairly isolated due to the fact that is it bounded by rail lines to the north, a hardto-access stretch of Bathurst on the west, and the Gardiner on the south.104 Critics often cite the project's isolation as a hindrance to the conception of a vibrant community.105 CityPlace consists solely of residential condominium towers with limited secondary services available, thereby people are not drawn into the neighbourhood unless they live there and those who do live there need to travel out to get their secondary needs accommodated. CityPlace is becoming a "city within a city," similar to the mentality of "suburbia within the city" that Regent Park was modeled after, minus the clusters of courtyards.106 However, the fundamental overlaps between the two neighbourhoods such as the urban isolation, and residential homogeneity have many fearing that CityPlace would eventually befall the same fate as Regent Park. Despite CityPlace being more modern, the lack of housing diversity and thereby accommodation of user diversity, has made the neighbourhood a vulnerable one. Recently, there has been more attempts at making CityPlace more inclusive and accommodating to a variety of households. Toronto Community Housing built a high rise geared towards larger low and moderate income families that contains more three, four and five-bedroom apartments to accommodate them. However, due to its sole isolated existence amongst the mass accumulations of condominiums that surround it, there is an pronounced animosity and stigma attached to the only subsidized building in CityPlace.107 Furthermore, the stigmatizing "not in my backyard" mentality is present as seen from their neighbours protesting the decision to implement subsidized housing in the area.108 This situation where the marginalization of a small population within this neighbourhood could have been avoided if the developers had adopted a model of inclusion similar to the last case study, the St. Lawrence neighbourhood from the beginning, instead of fulfilling the status quo of a homogeneous urbanism with its invisible models of exclusivity embedded in its very nature. The belief is that in a few years, once the CityPlace condominiums deteriorate further and no longer feel like the cutting edge in urban design, the development will no longer seem to the households that are currently moving in.109 Instead the young condo-dwelling crowd would move to a more desirable or trendy area to be replaced with less affluent households, similar to what happened in apartment neighbourhoods in the previous decades.110 "There's no way CityPlace won't be a ghetto in 20 years," says The Grid's real-estate columnist David Fleming, a Toronto Realtor himself.111 A common comparison is the older tower neighbourhoods of the past like St. James Town that was also originally meant to serve the housing needs of young city residents but instead has become a case study for poverty, de-accommodation, and disconnection from society.112 Although the fate of CityPlace cannot be certain, in the context of this thesis it remains as a case studying contemporary approaches and results of urban growth and residential development that aligns with the unsustainable status quo of our time and circumstance. It provides insight into the dilemmas and challenges that stem from not designing for social inclusivity and accommodation of user diversity but rather the prioritization of economic over social factors that are ultimately non-conducive to the pursuit of a socially sustainable user-focused city.

25

ENDNOTES
1 2

Greg Suttor, Still Renovating: A History of Canadian Social Housing Policy, (Montreal: McGill-Queen's Press, 2016) 5. Suttor, 5. 3 Richard White, Planning Toronto: The Planners, The Plans, Their Legacies, 1940-80, (Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 2016) 13. 4 Ibid., 20. 5 Ibid., 13. 6 Ibid., 22. 7 Ibid., 13. 8 Ibid., 16. 9 Ibid., 22. 10 Suttor, 28. 11 Ibid., 8. 12 Ibid., 6. 13 Ibid., 5. 14 Ibid., 3. 15 Ibid., 10. 16 Ibid., 70. 17 Ibid. 18 Ibid., 51. 19 Ibid., 46. 20 White, 138. 21 Ibid., 137. 22 Suttor, 71. 23 Alex Bozikovic, Jay Pitter Wants to Erase the `Spatial Shame' Surrounding Social Housing, The Globe and Mail, 2016, <http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/toronto/jay-pitter-wants-to-erase-the-spatial-shame-surrounding-social-housing/ article30112307/>. 24 Alex Bozikovic. 25 Ryan James, From "Slum Clearance" to "Revitalisation": Planning, Expertise, and Moral Regulation in Toronto's Regent Park, (Planning Perspectives: Vol. 25 No. 1, 2010). 69. 26 Ibid., 70. 27 Ibid. 28 Ibid., 69. 29 Ibid., 70. 30 James Dunn, Socially Mixed Public Housing Redevelopment as a De-Stigmatization Strategy in Toronto's Regent Park, (Du Bois Review: Vol. 9 No. 1, 2012). 96. 31 James, 71. 32 Ibid., 72. 33 Ibid. 34 Ibid. 35 Ibid. 36 Ibid., 74. 37 Martine August, Challenging the Rhetoric of Stigmatization: The Benefits of Concentrated Poverty in Toronto's Regent Park, (Environment and Planning: Vol. 46, 2014). 1319. 38 Dunn, 99. 39 James, 72. 40 August, 1319. 41 Suttor, 82. 42 Ibid., 89. 43 Ibid., 82. 44 Ibid., 71. 45 Ibid., 82. 46 Ibid., 79. 47 Ibid., 82. 48 Ibid. 49 Ibid. 50 Ibid.

26

51 52

Ibid., 97. Ibid., 76. 53 White, 104. 54 Suttor, 82. 55 Ibid., 76. 56 Lorinc, 40. 57 Ibid. 58 David Hulchanski, Planning New Urban Neighbourhoods: Lessons from Toronto's St. Lawrence Neighbourhood, (Canadian Planning Issues: Vol. 28, 1990). 3. 59 David Hayes, Housing Co-op Still Thriving 30 Years Later. The Star, 2009, <http://www.thestar.com/life/health_wellness/2009/11/14/housing_coop_still_thriving_30_years_later.html>. 60 Regent Park Collaborative Team, Lessons from St. Larence for the Regent Park Redevelopment Process, 2003, 5. < http://preservedstories.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/Lessons_from_St_%2520Lawrence.pdf>. 61 Ibid., 4. 62 Ibid. 63 Ibid. 64 Hulchanski, 7. 65 Dave Leblanc, 35 Years On, St Lawrence is a Template for Urban Housing, The Globe and Mail, 2013, <http://www.theglobeandmail.com/life/home-and-garden/architecture/35-years-on-st-lawrence-is-a-template-for-urbanhousing/article8296990/>. 66 Regent Park Collaborative Team, 4. 67 Ibid. 68 Ibid. 69 Christopher Hume, Big Ideas: Learning the Lessons of St. Lawrence Neighbourhood, The Star, 2014, <https://www.thestar.com/news/gta/2014/05/03/big_ideas_learning_the_lessons_of_st_lawrence_neighbourhood.html>. 70 Leblanc. 71 Suttor, 112. 72 Ibid., 145. 73 White, 148. 74 Ibid. 75 Ibid. 76 Ibid., 149. 77 Ibid. 78 Suttor, 115. 79 Ibid. 80 Ibid., 71. 81 Suttor, 130. 82 Ibid. 83 White, 161. 84 Ibid. 85 Ibid. 86 Suttor, 151. 87 Ibid. 88 White, 323. 89 Ibid., 5. 90 Ibid., 323. 91 Kelli Karducki, The Challenge at CityPlace: Redefining Condo Life, The Globe and Mail, 2013, <http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/toronto/the-challenge-at-cityplace-redefining-condo-life/article13937109/>. 92 Christopher Hume, Are Toronto Condo Towers Slums in the Making?, Toronto Star, 2012 <https://www.thestar.com/news/gta/2012/03/20/hume_are_toronto_condo_towers_slums_in_the_making.html>. 93 Roy Bhandari, CityPlace: What Went Wrong?, 2011, <https://web.archive.org/web/20160115173742/https://www.talkcondo.com/blog/cityplace-went-wrong>. 94 Ibid. 95 Ivor Tossell, High Stakes, The Globe and Mail, 2009, <http://www.theglobeandmail.com/technology/high-stakes/article725124/?page=all>. 96 Bhandari. 97 Edward Keenan, Is CityPlace Toronto's Next Ghetto?, The Grid, 2011, <http://www.thegridto.com/life/real-estate/is-cityplace-toronto's-next-ghetto/>. 98 Ibid. 99 Hume.

27

100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111 112

Keenan. Ibid. Bhandari. Hume. Tossell. Hume. Tossell. Ibid. Ibid. Ibid. Ibid. Keenan. Ibid.

28

29

03
< Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

CHALLENGES OF INCLUSIVITY IN THE AGE OF HOMOGENEOUS URBANISM
Inclusivity is and has always been a constant dilemma for cities. Now more than ever, urban housing and development is inadequately addressing the needs of those deemed on the "outside".1 In the past, social housing supply was a necessary complement to private housing supply. One existed to appease a social need, and the other to meet market demand. However, for the previous two decades both Ontario's provincial and Toronto's municipal governments ignored the former and encouraged the latter.2 The results of this is now visible through an assortment of unsustainable social ailments such as de-accommodation of individual housing needs, unmaintainable costs of city living, overcrowding, urban sprawl, long waiting lists for subsidized housing, increasing divisions between social classes and rundown conditions of current social housing and post-war apartment neighbourhoods.3 This chapter will explore how the models of exclusivity present themselves within our contemporary society in the age of homogeneous urbanism. Homogeneous urbanism being a term used throughout this thesis to describe the monotonous nature of residential development that is unable to properly accommodate the diversity present within cities like Toronto. The second half of this chapter reveals how this model of exclusivity effects contemporary society at both the neighbourhood and building scales. A thorough understanding of both the causes and effects of the current status quo aims for an awareness into the challenges designers face in the pursuit of an architecture of inclusivity, especially one that is to be achieved through a refocus on accommodation of user diversity within our current context and circumstance.

31

3.1 PRESENCE OF EXCLUSIVITY WITHIN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY Toronto, like many other North American global cities, is a place with accelerating social, economic and ethnocultural divisions.4 More now than ever, many urban dwellers exist in parallel realities where some live a daily life of economic despair and polarized ideology, while others revel in an affluent world of economic comfort and societal detachment. Comparing 1970's Toronto to now, 25% of neighbourhoods were categorized as low-income neighbourhoods, while the number now has raised to 50% of all neighbourhoods.5 In contrast, 16% of Toronto neighbourhoods used to be classified as high income neighbourhoods, but now 21% of neighbourhoods can claim the same.6 These numbers show that neighbourhoods within Toronto are becoming increasingly divided and polarized as the middle-class shrinks and more people are struggling financially. John Lorinc claims that city residents are now simply being "thrust together by class and are segregating into rich and poor urban neighbourhoods, with the residents having less and less to do with one another as the middle-class cushion disappears".7 Furthermore, he claims this normalizing of residential deaccommodation and exclusivity within modern society is the cause of the crisis that Canada's urban centres are facing.8
Median Home Price vs Median Hourly Wage in the GTA
Figure 12: Rising House Costs, 1997-2017 While house costs are rising exponentially, wages in Toronto have only increased marginally. Thus, housing in Toronto is becoming more and more inaccessible and less accommodating for those with low or moderate incomes.

median home price median hourly wage

As unfettered market forces increasingly become the driving factor of change in regards to the development of urban housing and city growth, certain repercussions are to be expected. Despite the recent slowdown of 2017, the general trend long-term within Toronto is rising house prices, seen in Figure 12, in contrast to wages staying relatively the same. The opportunity to urban housing has become inaccessible to many whose housing needs are continually being ignored, thereby making the city a non-inclusive environment. Rapid globalization has allowed a small group of specialized people- the semi-professional and professional class to become the exclusive stakeholder in urban housing.9 They have the highest potential in terms of economic gain and thus are the ones whose needs are to be prioritized, leaving the needs of those who fall outside this demographic to be neglected. Despite urban living being a necessity for most from a convenience point of view, it is

32

becoming increasingly inaccessible for a larger group of the population due to the escalating cost of living and correlating lack of housing diversity. Within expanding and diverse cities like Toronto, it is this biased prioritization focused solely on economical factors when it comes to city growth that acts as the basis for the increasing presence of urban isolation and social exclusivity. As a result, those that are able to fit within the narrowing spectrum of people that can access contemporary city housing become an elusive, and thus exclusive, population of urban society. This left those outside this increasingly exclusionary demographic, the socially ignored residents, to be omitted from the benefits of city growth as they were deemed not to have the correct highvalued skills or knowledge. Consequently, these residents often have to look further for adequate housing that is able to accommodate their diverse needs simply because they veer from the "conventional" status quo that contemporary urban housing perpetuates. John Lorinc refers to the socially excluded residents of the city's progression towards a non-inclusive homogeneous society as the "urban underclass," these are the people whose needs are ignored and de-prioritized in this rapidly changing metropolis.10 With the continual emergence of luxury condominiums in direct contrast to the limited availability of alternative housing options, the displaced victims of the economically fixated city have little choice but to move outside the city boundaries to live in suburban pockets of concentrated poverty disconnected from the vital resources that are more present in urban centres. Thus, not only has urban housing become unavailable to them, but the opportunities to gain the necessary skills and knowledge to contribute to mainstream society becomes more distant as well. This vicious cycle would only get worse with the rate of rapid change that urban societies are experiencing. As more people fall outside of the increasingly restrictive and affluent "professional class," urban society would become more divided and exclusive. The city would belong to the professional class, while its peripheries will belong to the people outside of the exclusive demographic. Once this physical manifestation of a model of housing exclusivity becomes fully cemented within Toronto, in part through the actions or perhaps inaction of architecture, social tensions will rise and result in an unstable and volatile society. Already the increasing prevalence of key social trends such as poverty, poor health, and homelessness are the first signs of unhealthy housing development. Eventually, the future city if unchanged, would be crippled with "social ailments"11 that would lead to an unsustainable quality of life for most, if not all, of its residents. The accommodating and socially sustainable architecture that is needed to address and acknowledge the varying needs of city users is becoming less apparent, especially within inner cities. Despite the overwhelming need, the lack of genuinely inclusive housing is the manifestation of a city that has become detached to the urgent socio-economic needs of its own citizens. The city is, for the most part, seen solely as a business opportunity where those who have the power and resources to change the urban fabric choose to design it in a manner that is most economically profitable for themselves with little thought put into the overarching socio-economical implications and the diversity of users who reside there. As a result, this shallow one-dimensional approach to design exclusively for a highly specific demographic (ones that hold the capital needed so that developers can maximize capital gains) while disregarding the housing and social needs of people who happen to fall outside of the increasingly narrow demographic eventually leads to unsustainable socially exclusive economic-focused cities.

33

3.2 EFFECTS OF EXCLUSIVITY AT A NEIGHBOURHOOD SCALE Although many of the issues surrounding segregation, especially at the neighbourhood scale extends beyond the purview of design (e.g. lack of appropriate funding, poor urban planning, restrictive political frameworks, etc.), urban design can still perpetuate urban alienation. The decisions that architects make, either through their own intentions or more often through external pressures, will favour some groups (often the affluent) while disregarding others (often the poor). These exclusionary urban design choices can function as a form of regulation. "The architected urban landscape regulates, and the architecture itself is a form of regulation."12 Thus by understanding the negative effects that the model of exclusivity has on the built fabric, this would help architects utilize their tools to contribute to a built environment of inclusivity and accommodation instead. Since the neo-liberalist turning point of the 1990's, architecture as a tool of exclusivity at a neighbourhood scale still exists, albeit in a slightly different form.13 Instead of the government sanctioning and providing the architecture that regulates and isolates, it is now left to the free market. The effect of this collective detachment, which includes the government but also architectural design professionals, to the economic differences within the city landscape are described through University of Toronto sociologist David Hulchanski's Three Cities research. It has shown that over the past two generations, wealthy and poor neighbourhoods have become increasingly concentrated and isolated from one another.14 While activity in the condominium market is at best an indicator of consumer confidence, at worst it is an indicator of the city's social neglect and lack of housing diversity leading towards a non-inclusive city. As this social neglect unfolds, Toronto's neighbourhoods are splitting into three distinct areas with clear divisions that are based on income change. Illustrated in Figure 13, these divisions have only become more pronounced between 1970 to 2010. Seen in the figure's maps, the first area labeled as City #1, is a predominantly high-income area of the City of Toronto in which neighbourhood incomes have risen steadily relative to the Toronto Census Metropolitan Area (CMA) average since 1970; these neighbourhoods are generally found in the central city and close to the city's subway lines. By contrast, City #3 is a generally low-income area of Toronto, in which neighbourhood incomes have fallen substantially over the past few decades compared to the CMA average; these neighbourhoods are found mostly in the northeastern and northwestern parts of Toronto peripheries. In between these two is City #2, a mainly middle-income area, where neighbourhood incomes have remained fairly close to the CMA average since 1970. While all cities can be divided into various groupings, the important finding in Hulchanski's Three Cities research is the consistent trend over time: the three groups of neighbourhoods are changing at different rates and moving further apart making for a less socially mixed and thereby less inclusive city overall. Moreover, since the 1990's there has been a rise in housing diversity shortages and an emerging homelessness crisis.15 These problems that are widespread in cities across Canada, are reflective of the current dysfunction of the housing market leaving many without a social safety net. The socially excluded residents who often find themselves most isolated from society include recent immigrants who face a tougher time establishing themselves, the 12,600 seniors who are still on waiting lists for affordable housing in 2016, and low-income single women in Toronto who have become increasingly at risk of homelessness since the early 90's.16 These are people who have housing needs that are outside the "conventional" demands that contemporary housing is willing to accommodate, hence their diverse housing preferences continue to be neglected and
34

Figure 13: Polarizing Cities The rapid change in Toronto's neighbourhood is visible when income distribution in the city is mapped over a 40-year period. A wealthy core has displaced low-income households, pushing them to outlying locations with poor access to transit and services.

1970

1995

1980

2010

city one | high income city two | middle income city three | low income

35

invalidated.17 These social realities need to be addressed before Toronto can become the genuinely accommodating, diverse, and inclusive city it claims to be. Thus, architecture can be used as one of the mechanisms against the status quo and help create more accommodating societies. By re-evaluating existing collective housing strategies and reforming towards a residential model that is able to flex and morph to accommodate each individual households' needs and/or preferences, cities can be designed to be more cohesive, inclusive and healthier for all- not just those at the higher end of the income gap. By having fewer significant divides, cities demonstrate greater resilience against the imminent global housing crisis. The spectrum of this multi-faceted architectural issue is wide: indigenous communities, low income families losing homes, women and children suffering with long term homelessness, elders on fixed incomes that do not provide them security in their twilight years, people living with diverse individual needs who can't access accommodating housing. This housing crisis isn't simply about brick and mortar, its about the inherent human right to feel safe, comfortable and included within society and their communities. 3.3 EFFECTS OF EXCLUSIVITY AT A BUILDING SCALE As North American cities, such as Toronto, become increasingly dense, this leads to more people living in compact environments and most likely living in high-rise buildings. The Vancouver Foundation, one of the largest community foundations in the country, recently spent two years surveying residents, community leaders, and charitable organizations to determine the most pressing issue facing the city. The answer they received over and over again was urban isolation and disconnection.18 The report, Connections and Engagement: The Effect of Apartment Living on Neighbourliness, found that people living in the high rises that are predominant in global cities are increasingly living in "silos separated by culture, language, income and age" that is an unfortunate result of the inherent isolating nature of conventional homogeneous urban residential architecture.19 The design and construction of generic high-density condominiums throughout various North American cities plays a role in why more people are feeling detached and disconnected from one another. The current residential trend are condominiums that are similarly designed for maximum efficiency, with buildings getting taller and units getting smaller in the goal of maximizing profits. This economic prioritization over resident comfort and needs has led to mass housing that is consistently homogeneous and leaves residents to feel dissatisfied with their homes as units are getting smaller and high-rises are unable to properly cope with the large number of residents within.20 The sheer number of people who reside in one big residence means that, in a sense, strangers share your dwelling, at least the semi-public areas of it. This fear of strangers is what leads to fear of crime, a felt lack of social support, and the absence of community despite being in the midst of many. A large-scale study in Toronto found that high-rise apartment dwellers tended to choose friends outside the building, from school or work.21 These residents viewed their neighbours negatively and as dissimilar to themselves, except that they were approximate financial equals living in units that tend to be very similar to one another.22 What is missing is the aspect of stepping out of your front door and being engulfed in a neighbourhood with a better sense of community at a smaller and more approachable scale.
36

Instead, residents prefer to keep to themselves behind various layers of walls, privacies, and isolation. City inhabitants, specifically high-rise residents, despite having a larger number of nearby neighbours affording greater potential choice of friends and acquaintances for social support have a lower sense of neighbourliness and trust, and find it harder to make new friends within their residential community, therefore, contributing to the overall unfriendly atmosphere and sense of isolation and disconnect that is present in mass collective housing.23 Architecture has a role to play in this societal trend of isolation and disconnection. The lack of housing diversity and amount of studio apartments and one bedroom condos that are getting built compared to larger units is evident of the transient nature of urban housing. These newer developments were never designed as places where families could reside long-term in a dignified manner or for households with changing needs overtime. The rigid structure of conventional urban residential architecture does not address the evolving complex needs of the city's diverse inhabitants, especially in the age of hyper-diversity. The resulting lack of permanence amongst neighbours is detrimental to the incremental community building that happens overtime. Furthermore, the structure of high rises usually is such that one is not likely to meet residents of other floors except in elevators and lobbies, which are not ideal environments to foster any real connections. Thus, while city inhabitants may live physically close to many others, in practice they are limited to few opportunities to effectively interact with their neighbours in any meaningful manner. Jan Gehl in Cities for People, criticizes the urban high-rises as being disconnected to Earth as people above the fifth floor can no longer relate to the street level.24 By separating large numbers of people from the street, it diminishes people's participation in public spaces. We end up with a city that is based on these residential enclaves and gated communities. Many of these buildings also have extensive security systems and private amenities, adding to the sense of "vertical gated communities" or isolated "complete communities". This physical and visual disconnection to the ground plane creates a city that is detached from street life. Therefore, the feelings of exclusion that is happening at the building scale is two-fold. There is an exclusion that exists internally between residents from unit to unit, but there is also a level of segregation externally that exists between buildings and the public realm. The city becomes a mass accumulation of privacies where people are not only socially excluded from the larger society but also from one another. The unfettered market forces and the urban residential architecture that developed from these circumstances have created an urban fabric that has left its inhabitants unable to see beyond their private residences and unable to connect to one another to form a cohesive community. How can we redesign spaces and homes so that we can tackle these intricate issues of inclusivity, user-focused architecture and accommodation of diversity in a spatial manner? Spatially, housing needs to approach a point where it can connect the hyper-diverse city inhabitants and reduce the devastating effects of segregation, detachment, isolation and social exclusivity. What this would require is a residential design system that is flexible and comprehensive enough to allow each and every household an opportunity to create an urban home that is personalized and optimized to their own unique housing needs. Once there is a design ideology in place where all members of society can be accommodated for and integrated into a cohesive community, only then can a user-focused and inclusive housing model be successfully achieved within the urban societal fabric of cities like Toronto.
37

3.4 AN ARCHITECTURE OF INCLUSIVITY THROUGH THE ACCOMMODATION OF DIVERSITY "Within neighbourhoods, a broad range of housing types and price levels can bring people of diverse ages, races, and incomes into daily interaction, strengthening the personal and civic bonds essential to an authentic community".25 -Canon 13 of The Charter of New Urbanism John Lorinc claims that "in a nation of immigrants, we can only coexist in our complex urban settings if we respect one another's ways, listen to one another's ideas, and support our neighbours."26 To combat against the prevailing systems and tools that encourage social exclusivity, there needs to be a complete overhaul in the perception of certain societal norms and architecture's relation to it. To re-imagine residential development to be more inclusive, we need to get away from the ingrained single set of values that is steeped in exclusivity and class. As a society, we need to expand our narrow notions of value to be more inclusive and accommodating to become less disconnected and indifferent to the growing presence of looming societal crises. In a society that is becoming increasingly detached, architecture needs to be used as a tool to include rather than exclude. "Social mix originated in the romantic-nostalgic image of the pre-industrial rural village: a healthy, clean, environment in which strong social kinship networks exist to effect social control and enforce community norms, in which each individual has a status and role and co-exists harmoniously with the rest of the community in a state of mutual acquaintance and recognition".27 -Jacqueline A Fischer, Social Mix and Environmental Design: Exploration of a Contemporary Concept Social mixing, the idea of integrating and accommodating people with various social backgrounds (whether it is ethnicity, economic status, household type, household sizes, tenures or lifestyles) is often found at the core of contemporary socially sustainable housing developments. It is often considered the antidote to the negative effects of concentrated neighborhood poverty and segregation. The issue of social exclusivity is still present today, as cities become more diverse, yet appear to be less integrated socio-economically leading to the congregations of deepening poverty that we are told to avoid. As society progresses in the same trajectory whereby Toronto continues to be divided by socio-economic differences, the social ailments would only become worse and socially mixed housing that is inclusive and user-focused is only becoming more urgent. According to Duncan Maclennan, it is likely that up to one in ten Canadians now live in relatively poor and unmixed neighbourhoods that hold them and their children back as a result of the lack of access to services and opportunities.28 Since the time of the study (2006), this statistic has only gotten worse with the homogeneity of housing becoming more concrete, leaving few housing options for those with complex housing needs to be located where most of the services and opportunities exist.29 The appeal of social mix during this fragile environment lies within the belief that properly designed diverse housing can prevent the ills of exclusivity by creating a new housing model that is accommodating and inclusive- economically, socially, ethnically, culturally and functionally. In other words, by designing a housing system that is able to spatially morph to accommodate diversity and embrace household individuality rather than suppress it, architecture has the opportunity to provide "place diversity" and eliminate place-based identity and stigma.30 Emily Talen, who coined the term "place diversity," describes it in her book Designing for Diversity

38

as "all forms of social and economic mixing- the combination, in particular places, of people with various incomes, races, genders, ethnicities, household sizes, lifestyles, and in addition, nonresidential activities comprising different uses and functions of land.31 Additionally, Kevin Lynch in his definition of good city form, the concept of diversity is described as the quality that allow humans to become "more complex, more richly connected, more competent, acquiring and realizing new powers- intellectual, emotional, social and physical".32 According to this definition, social mix in its inherent ideologies of accommodating diversity contributes to "good city form" and allows for a new community to emerge, one that is superior to its predecessor. It is in this opinion and similar veins of thinking that social mix and its inherent inclusivity through the accommodation of diversity is often lauded to be the progressive solution of urban renewal and the chance to change the trajectory of unethical and unsustainable urban development toward a new urban order that embodies inclusivity and social sustainability.
Figure 14: Social Mix Outcomes The spatial proximity that social mix and inclusion provides allows for security, connection and the creation of social capital between socially diverse groups of residents.

1. SOCIAL MIX

2. SECURITY

3. CONNECTION

4. SOCIAL CAPITAL

This thesis will further explore these concepts that surround social mix by proposing a design system that is able to propagate and sustain it. Social mix and its associated benefits such as security, connection and social capital can be gained through the provision of architecture where households with different social backgrounds or housing needs can co-exist in the same community. However, there are certain aspects of social mix that are beyond the scope of this design thesis. This thesis proposal accepts that it cannot directly alter the material economic circumstances of households or the city as a whole, but instead focuses on how design can provide social improvements to city resident's quality of life at the level of their homes and immediate surroundings. In the end, the goal is to create an architecture of inclusivity through a user-focused housing design that is able to accommodate the needs of the widest spectrum of diverse Toronto households as possible.

39

3.4.1. CASE STUDY - REGENT PARK REVITALIZATION
WHAT IS IT? The Regent Park Revitalization is a 12-year, billion dollar plan to replace Canada's first large scale public housing complex. SUCCESSES: 1. Refers to an inclusive and social mix thinking by mixing public and market housing with retail, amenities and community services to accommodate Toronto's user diversity. FAILURES: 1. As the towers were completely demolished, the existing social connections that social housing tenants had were destroyed as the households were being re-located. 2. Once built, there would be less subsidized units within Regent Park than there were before. Not all the subsidized units were replaced, instead favoring the construction of market rate condominiums.

For the second time in the past six decades, the community of Regent Park in downtown Toronto has been leveled and drastically rebuilt. Regent Park is the result of a revival in inclusive and social mix thinking that is slowly starting to appear again within Canadian cities. Referred to as the "Regent Park Revitalization" it is a 12-year, billion-dollar plan to replace Canada's first large-scale public housing complex.33 Inspired by the success of the nearby St. Lawrence neighbourhood, the Regent Park Revitalization emulated its provision of housing diversity and abundance of retail, amenities and community services.34 Formulated by former TCHC CEO Derek Ballantyne, the idea was to get rid of the physical barriers, build amenities, create street animation and add middleclass housing to create a socially mixed and inclusive neighbourhood.35 This was to be achieved by making Regent Park look and act like any other neighbourhood in Toronto to fit in naturally with the surrounding built environment. The designers in charge of this master plan, Daniels Corporation, describe it as an "all-encompassing solution to the spectrum of problems within the original Regent Park."36 It was going to be an opportunity for residents to be part of a community that is integrated within the rest of the city and relieve the place stigmatization attached to the place they call home. Before construction started, TCHC ensured that all the subsidized housing would be replaced. The end goal is a neighbourhood consisting of 2,083 social-housing units, more than 3,000 market condominiums and 700 affordable rental units.37 What this meant was upon the completion of revitalization, there would be more than a three-fold increase in density and come with a dramatically rebalanced and altered social composition. 38 Following the footsteps behind the creation of the St. Lawrence Neighbourhood, in 2002, the City of Toronto established a democratic and inclusive participatory planning process to elicit the input

^ Nicola Betts, 2016, <https:// www.thestar.com/life/ homes/2016/05/09/5-waysregent-parks-revitalization-is-agame-changer.html>.

40

of Regent Park residents in a plan to radically transform the neighbourhood and accommodate both their needs as well as newcomer needs.39 Designed through a participatory planning process and funded by public and private investment in roughly equal proportions, the socially inclusive plan is touted as a just and practical solution to the obsolescence of the original Regent Park, while still keeping with the best interest of residents, and their neighbours.40 This ambitious plan to redress exclusivity and marginalization involved drastically altering the built environment of Regent Park. As of 2018, thirteen years into the revitalization of Regent Park, the first phase has been completed, phase two is nearing completion and phase three is still well underway.41 Beyond the destruction of all on-site buildings, all the pre-existing dead-end streets will be rerouted through the area and a new central park created to act as the main social incubator for the community.42 These changes at the neighbourhood scale are intended to accommodate the diversity of inhabitants, normalize the neighborhood's physical appearance within the larger urban context and stimulate social inclusivity, urban diversity, commercial activity, and community interaction.43 Once all five phases are completed, the new Regent Park neighbourhood will centre around a six-acre park, and consist of a mix of low and high-rise buildings and a whole spectrum of public community amenities. These buildings would be strategically arranged to provide for "a container of public open space, enclosing streets, highlighting corners, defining parks and providing eyes on the street, increasing surveillance and safety to the neighbourhood as a whole".44
Figure 15: Regent Park Redevelopment Model Model showing the scale, density and massing of what the Regent Park redevelopment would look like once all five phases are completed.

As Regent Park attracted global attention as a socio-economic experiment in public-private revitalization, the transformations proposed also garnered criticism as a veiled form of gentrification.45 Critics saw the "unslumming" of Regent Park as a step in making the neighbourhood elitist and inaccessible to the demographic who resided there before.46 As bulldozers dismantled the deteriorating buildings and familiar gathering spots, an existing community social network is erased and those residents found it difficult not to be sentimental. In interviews with long-term residents of the neighbourhood, tenants revealed that although no one liked the crime or disrepair of the old Regent Park they still valued their community.47 Tenants had deep attachments to the original Regent Park despite its reputation and enjoyed the strong sense of community that was established there over decades.48
41

These personal insights brings up the question of whether homogeneous social housing neighbourhoods can be regenerated without resorting to social cleansing. The design of Regent Park intentionally uses various architectural strategies to create an inclusive social fabric where all residents could feel at home with each other and share in their new community and the physical and social benefits generated. The main strategy that lies at the core of the Regent Park Revitalization is to design for social mix. This is demonstrated most clearly through the diversity of housing supplied. By having a large range of housing that correlate with the diversity of residents within the area, whether it be through different tenures, types, unit sizes, or spatial organizations, this opens up the possibility of more households to be appropriately accommodated for. Moreover, the success in this design decision was not only the variety in housing options that are able to address the individual needs of each household, but that it maintains a consistent aesthetic quality between all buildings so that no household would feel discriminated against due to their social differences. This egalitarian approach to residential design allows the Regent Park Revitalization to build on the existing community without stirring up feelings of exclusion or negligence. Regent Park's new masterplan also designed for social mix beyond housing. Through the provision of an assortment of secondary amenities that act as social incubators, the neighbourhood had spaces that engages with diverse aspects of identity such as culture, faith, interests, or age to create a more inclusive public realm. These specific social spaces are used to encourage more substantial integration between diverse residents by offering an opportunity for residents to recognize shared identities between one another, and act as a spatial reference for interaction. An example of how this was executed throughout the neighbourhood is the abundance of garden plots that have become integral to the design programming of every new building.49 This social activity of urban gardening has the capability to bring people of differing backgrounds together through a shared common interest. Thus, the response to gardening plots has been incredibly positive and has pushed for more spaces for connection throughout the community.50 Overtime, a greenhouse, community bake oven, soccer field, swimming pool and other community facilities were implemented to build and foster growing relationships between people of all ages, backgrounds and cultures and create a revitalized socially-inclusive environment.51 Over the course of many years, as long-term residents and newer residences share the same sidewalks, buildings and community facilities, a new community is forming. The criticisms and design responses brought up in the Regent Park Revitalization are to be looked upon to design a proposal that is able to embrace and expand upon diversity without diluting it, especially when applied in a smaller scale of a building. In the context of this thesis, the Regent Park Revitalization, despite its imperfections, acts as a reminder that an architecture of inclusivity can be achieved in our current society as long as there is a constant will to always build better communities within Toronto rather than endure the bad ones that were a result of models of exclusivity that prevailed in Canada previously. With the introduction of a more fine-grain model of inclusivity through designing for social mix and the dilution of pre-existing social problems such as lack of housing diversity and urban isolation, there is a higher likelihood that Regent Park will not carry such strong connotations as a stigmatized neighbourhood overtime as the development is completed and given time to mature into a stable community. As Hulchanski predicts "as time passes people won't know where Regent Park begins and ends." 52

42

3.4.2. CASE STUDY - QUINTA MONROY
WHAT IS IT? A government initiative for low income families where "half a house" was provided leaving the other half for residents to self-build overtime. SUCCESSES: 1. By only providing half a house, the architects can maximize their limited budget. 2. Revitalization of the neighbourhood was achieved without displacing any of the families that resided there previously or disrupting their social networks. 3. Residents can overtime build a home that is suited to their specific tastes and needs. 4. By preemptively designing for expansion, residents were able to modify their homes in a safe manner without intruding on their neighbours or blocking access to natural light. FAILURES: 1. Self-build culture while prevalent in countries like Chile, is not as commonplace in North American cities like Toronto.
^ Cristobal Palma, 2016, <https://arcspace.com/feature/ quinta-monroy/>.

Quinta Monroy is a Chilean government initiative to rehabilitate a centrally located 5000m2 site that was previously illegally occupied for over 30 years.53 Consisting of 93 different households living in unsafe and unsatisfactory housing, the goal of the renewal was to address the residents' housing concerns and needs within the limited project budget of 7500 USD per household.54 Before Elemental's work with Quinta Monroy, how this would be achieved is in one of three ways. The first method is that mid or high rise apartments would be provided to each family with a maximum area of 40-45m2.55 Due to the inadequate size afforded by the limited budget, illegal expansions and additions that compromise the interior space, public land and structural integrity of the homes would occur.56 The second strategy which consists of a series of row houses is commonly associated with overcrowding in Chile.57 The last method consists of 36m2 single family homes sitting on larger individual lots.58 While on the surface this approach appears to provide middle class suburban ideals to the urban poor, in reality these homes are often located on cheaper lands outside the city and isolated from the jobs and amenities of the city centre.59 Elemental aimed to challenge this status quo within low-income housing design while still working within the confines of the strict budget. Their solution maximizes on the unique self-construction culture of Chile and to provide a portion of a house. The intention was to provide "half of a good house" leaving the other half for residents to build and personalize on their own overtime rather than to cut corners and provide "all of a bad house."60 The architects focused on providing the households with the necessary functions of a home that would be most difficult for them to build later and leaving the remainder for residents to complete on their accord. To determine the base functions and amenities, extensive meetings and discussions with the residents were had to ensure that the final design responded to diverse users' needs in a productive and realistic manner.61 The result of this "co-design" were robust concrete structures constructed with the very basics43

Figure 16: Quinta Monroy: Section & Floor Plan Expansion Areas Top to bottom: Section, ground floor, second floor, third floor. Drawings depicting the base units provided ("half a home") and expansion areas that residents can incrementally add onto their home as their needs and/or circumstances change. Floorplans also depict example configurations within the base unit and possible expansion scenarios (shown in dashed lines).

GF

base unit expansion area

2F

3F

44

Figure 17: Quinta Monroy: Incremental User Customization Photos depicting how users end up customizing and expanding their homes over time as the spaces become inhabited. Left image shows the interior of a unit where the family has selfconstructed modifications such as adding walls, floor surfaces, furnishing and painting. Right image depicts how the expansions were added overtime. Each extension is derived from the household's individual preferences and needs.

kitchen, bathroom, a few partition walls, and an internal stair.62 Every residential unit then has the opportunity to double in size63, and users would have their own designated vacant space that they can expand, configure, and optimize overtime to accommodate their individual tastes and needs. The open-ended nature of this strategy allows for households of different social backgrounds to utilize the flexible spaces in a manner that best suits their respective circumstances. Learning from past observations of self-built communities within Chile, the design of Quinta Monroy was structured to develop incrementally and harmoniously over time. As 50% of each residential unit was to be self-constructed, the structure and massing of the base unit was left to be flexible and adaptable to allow expansion within its structure.64 The residential units were designed and constructed with inhabitants expanding their dwellings according to previously defined areas (seen in Figure 17). Thus, the provided portion acts as a necessary support framework to limit the negative effects of self-construction on the community over time. Seen in Figure 18, as the units are inhabited and personalized, the vitality of the user-focused design emerges through different internal or external finishes, space divisions and furnishings. What starts off as a series of repetitive blocks are then transformed into architectural collages that accommodates and captures the diversity of residents through a spectrum of self-chosen materials, forms, and aesthetic expressions. In the context of this thesis, while this self-build culture is prevalent in countries like Chile, is not as commonplace in North American cities like Toronto. To implement incremental change so that users can create a space that is able to accommodate their individual diverse needs in our context, a different framework would need to be in place that is not reliant on a strong self-construction background. Thus, one focus of this proposal is to delve into what this framework would consist of and how it would work to create an architecture of inclusivity through the accommodation of diversity within post-war towers. These past two case studies have been an attempt to decipher successful ideas of accommodation of user diversity. Rather than literally duplicating the models of Quinta Monroy or Regent Park, these ideas can instead be extracted and applied in a new manner through the renovation of existing housing stock to create a more socially accommodating fabric within Toronto.
45

ENDNOTES
1 2

Jay Pittal & John Lorinc, Subdivided: City Building in and Age of Hyper-Diversity, (Toronto: Coach House, 2016) 6. John Lorinc, The New City: How the Crisis in Canada's Urban Centres is Reshaping the Nation, (Toronto: Penguin Canada, 2006) 46. 3 Marwa Al-Sabouni, How Syria's Architecture Laid the Foundation for Brutal War, Syria, 2016, <https://blog.ted.com/how-syrias-buildings-laid-the-foundation-for-brutal-war-marwa-al-sabouni-at-tedsummit/>. 4 Pittal & Lorinc, 10. 5 Ibid., 259. 6 Ibid. 7 Lorinc, 12. 8 Ibid., 134. 9 Ibid., 11. 10 Ibid., 8. 11 Ibid., 9. 12 Sarah Schindler, Architectural Exclusion: Discrimination Segregation Through Physical Design of the Built Environment, (Yale Law Journal: Vol. 126 No. 6, 2015). 13 Greg Suttor, Still Renovating: A History of Canadian Social Housing Policy, (Montreal: McGill-Queen's Press, 2016) 5. 14 David Hulchanski. The Three Cities: Income Polarization Among Toronto's, Neighbourhoods, 1970-2005, (Toronto: Urban Centres University of Toronto, 2007). 15 Lorinc, 40. 16 Ibid. 17 Ibid. 18 Connections and Engagement: The Effect of Apartment Living on Neighbourliness. Vancouver Foundation Research, 2012, 1. 19 Ibid., 2. 20 Robert Gifford. The Consequences of Living in High-Rise Buildings. (Architectural Review: Vol. 50 No. 1, 2007) 3. 21 Ibid. 22 Ibid. 23 Ibid. 24 Jan Gehl, Cities for People, (Washington: Island Press, 2010). 25 Congress for the New Urbanism, The Charter of the New Urbanism, <https://www.cnu.org/who-we-are/charter-new-urbanism>. 26 Lorinc, 5. 27 Jacqueline A. Fischer, Social Mix and Environmental Design: Exploration of a Contemporary Concept, (Journal of Architectural and Planning Research: Vol. 3 No. 3, 1986) 315-326. 28 Duncan Maclennan, Mixed Communities: A Perspective from Canada, (Canadian Housing: Vol. 22 No. 3, 2006) 17. 29 Hulchanski, 9 30 Emily Talen, Design for Diversity: Exploring Socially Mixed Neighbourhoods, (London: Routledge, 2006) 234. 31 Ibid. 32 Kevin Lynch, A Theory of Good City Form, (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1981) 116. 33 Ryan James, From "Slum Clearance" to "Revitalisation": Planning, Expertise, and Moral Regulation in Toronto's Regent Park, (Planning Perspectives: Vol. 25 No. 1, 2010). 69. 34 James, 76. 35 Christopher Hume, Regent Park Brings New Life to Toronto. Toronto Star, 2012, <https://www.thestar.com/news/gta/2012/03/30/hume_regent_park_brings_new_life_to_toronto.html>. 36 James, 69. 37 Ibid. 38 Martine August, Challenging the Rhetoric of Stigmatization: The Benefits of Concentrated Poverty in Toronto's Regent Park, (Environment and Planning: Vol. 46, 2014). 1317. 39 James, 69. 40 Ibid. 41 Pittal & Lorinc, 259. 42 James, 69. 43 Ibid. 44 Ibid., 78. 45 August, 1317. 46 Ibid. 47 Ibid.

46

48 49

August, 1317. Hume. 50 Ibid. 51 Ibid. 52 John Lorinc, The New Regent Park, UofT Magazine, 2013, <http://magazine.utoronto.ca/feature/new-regent-park-toronto-community-housing-john-lorinc/>. 53 Justin W. Cook & Bryan Boyer. Designing Social Housing but Building Weath, (Helsinki: Helsinki Design Lab, 2012) 3. 54 Ibid., 9. 55 Ibid. 56 Ibid. 57 Ibid. 58 Ibid. 59 Ibid. 60 Ibid., 4. 61 Ibid., 3. 62 Ibid., 13. 63 Ibid., 16. 64 Ibid., 13.

47

04
< Vik Pahwa, 2016, <http://vikpahwa.com/tag/ st-james-town/>.

TOWER RENEWAL TO ACCOMMODATE DIVERSITY
As seen in the case studies presented in the previous chapter, the current architectural response to the scarcity of accommodating and socially inclusive housing is to demolish, displace and replace. This approach assumes that the pre-existing built environment contains nothing or little that is worth saving. However, a less drastic alternative approach exists within the ideas of `Tower Renewal.' This focus on renovation over demolition of the existing housing stock can be utilized in the pursuit of accommodating the diversity of housing needs and the restoration of inclusivity in Toronto's housing. Back in the 1960's, Toronto built more concrete towers than any other metropolis in North America outside of New York City.1 This chapter looks more deeply into the benefits that these available assets provide and the advantages of taking the Tower Renewal approach to create an architecture of social inclusivity and how post-war towers can be revitalized to accommodate the user diversity present within Toronto. Furthermore, this thesis explores the social problems that exist within these post-war neighbourhoods that resulted from years of being victim to a city following a regime of exclusivity and delves into the role architecture plays in potentially addressing these problems.

49

4.1 OPPORTUNITIES WITHIN POST-WAR TOWER NEIGHBOURHOODS More than ever, Toronto's most diverse populations is concentrated not only by neighbourhood but also by building type. Toronto has approximately 1200 older high-rise apartment buildings, constructed of concrete between 1945 and 1984 with most of these being purpose-built rental buildings.2 Today those concrete-tower communities are home to the bulk of Toronto's most diverse, but vulnerable population.3 As these post-war towers were designed following the "tower in the park" model that dominated at that time, the large open spaces present an opportunity for renewal.4 This abundance of empty space surrounding the post-war towers allows for these buildings to be revitalized. Many apartment properties are surrounded by under-used land providing an almost blank canvas where an architecture of inclusivity, whether it takes the form of housing or secondary programming, can be added. This means that new homes or community amenities can be created, in many cases without needing to build expensive infrastructure like new water pipes, sewers and electricity transmission lines.5 While some people see dilapidated, unaccommodating, antisocial buildings that should be knocked down, others see homes, fledging communities and opportunities for renovation and refurbishment. A new zoning initiative introduced by the City of Toronto has provided an opportunity to close the gap that existed between social policy and social potential within post-war tower neighbourhoods. As a response to the single-use zoning and car-dependent planning implemented in the 1960's for a different demographic, the social shift seen within these neighbourhoods required a shift towards a flexible housing framework that better responded to these diverse communities' needs. The residential apartment commercial (RAC) zoning would permit a number of small-scale commercial and community uses on apartment building sites to support these diverse areas in reaching their full economic and social potential.6 The new uses may include for example, small shops, food markets, cafes, learning centres, barbershops, doctor's offices, community centres and places of worship.7 However, this new zoning only applies to buildings of at least 100 residential units and there are size restrictions of 200 square meters for each business and the limit of 1,000 square meters of commercial uses for each apartment building to ensure the ventures stay small and prioritize the needs of the local residents before addressing external communities.8 Beyond the possibilities of adding new programming, RAC zoning also reduced the barriers to minor or more significant building alterations that change the physical forms of the existing towers, giving an opportunity to redesign the homogeneous towers to be able to better accommodate the diversity of its residents.9 Residents within these neighbourhoods have shown strong support for enhancing local opportunities through community services, small businesses, fresh food markets, education, and recreational services for seniors.10 With a new legal framework that aligns better with the spectrum of residents' needs and opportunities, this change from a prohibitive and restrictive zoning policy towards a more open and flexible framework would allow for these apartment neighbourhoods to make the incremental changes towards becoming more accommodating and socially inclusive communities. RAC zoning is a proactive response to the lack of investment, nonaccommodation and its resulting social isolation that typically permeates within these post-war neighbourhoods. From pop-up markets, to cafés, to specialized community services, the aim of the new zoning is to allow services in and to open new opportunities that were once unavailable to the residents within

50

these apartment neighbourhoods. However, despite reducing the barriers of an outdated zoning framework, others barriers still exist in the investment of revitalizing post-war tower neighbourhoods. A multitude of socio-economic, demographic, real estate capital market, site constraints, and other forces, shape and influence the viability of tower renewal in all communities.11 However, RAC zoning is the first step and provides the basis for the creation of a more socially mixed environment within apartment neighbourhoods. City-wide zoning change of this type and scale is a first for Toronto12, and opens opportunities for a diverse group of collaborators, including architects, to realize this new zoning's potential on the ground and re-imagine tower neighbourhoods in new ways to create a more accommodating and inclusive city. In Hulchanski's Three Cities research, he claims that the exclusivity of the city is not inevitable or irreversible and that these trends could be slowed or reversed by taking action and renewing the aging high-rise neighbourhoods scattered throughout Toronto.13 By refusing the fatality of demolitions, tower renewal allows for a new perspective on the current built environment, stepping away from the constantly negative view of the existing. In terms of energy and resource consumption, it is much better to reuse the existing than to demolish and rebuild. While socially, tower renewal is the less intrusive way to shape and change the neighbourhood circumstances that the residents face. The apartments are vital physical assets as they have a robust structure and existing views, but it is the social asset of a hyper-diverse population that gives these tower neighbourhoods high potential for renewal. As Anne Lacaton, an architect and advocate for tower renewal over demolition says "Preserve, don't demolish. Graft, reshape, and rework with generosity."14 It is with this mentality that this thesis pushes achieving an architecture of inclusivity through accommodating the diversity already existing in post-war neighbourhoods rather than through demolition and new construction as is the tradition today. 4.2 PROBLEMS WITHIN POST-WAR TOWER NEIGHBOURHOODS Post-war apartment neighbourhoods were originally designed to be inhabited by a predominantly homogeneous middle class society. Overtime, as they transitioned to house a more diverse demographic, problems that come from living in housing that is not able to properly accommodate or address these new set of individual needs appeared. Though these neighbourhoods had experienced changes in its social makeup, little has changed in terms of its built form to accommodate this change. Sharing the same general problems across the board, the single use zoning and car-based neighbourhood design has resulted in many of these apartment neighbourhoods to lack access to basic amenities that make for a functional neighbourhood.15 Many of these apartment neighbourhoods, which contain thousands of city residents, often do not have ready access to adequate homes, fresh food, health services, child care facilities, communal gathering spaces, community centres, cafes, pubs, or shops.16 Despite the updated RAC zoning allowing for mixed use on site, these neighbourhoods still lack interest and investment from the city and thus are unable to meet the needs and expectations of an increasingly diverse resident community with growing complex needs.17 Despite the units being larger compared to the condominium units getting built today, the apartment neighbourhoods are severely overcrowded with half of the households claiming to live in overcrowded environments.18 The financial squeeze on renters is evident, with nearly half

51

reporting difficulty paying rent each month, and one-in-four reporting that they go without other necessities in order to pay the rent.19 Other statistics show that nearly one-quarter lived in housing that is unsafe or insecure.20 Furthermore, nearly half of the residents reported buildings being in bad condition, and 27 per cent had apartments that were in poor shape.21 These numbers show that despite the density of housing in this area, the existing stock is rapidly deteriorating and inadequately addressing the needs of its current residents. Beyond the inadequate housing conditions, the public realm in apartment neighbourhoods is becoming impoverished.22 Areas that were originally envisioned as communal space around buildings have become fragmented or inaccessible. Nearly half of all the rental apartment buildings no longer have any kind of indoor common room or recreational space for tenants to use.23 These circumstances are responsible for fostering feelings of urban placelessness amongst the residents.24 John Lorinc describes urban placelessness as a result of shared open spaces such as parks, squares, public facilities like libraries, arterial roads, residential streets and exteriors of privately owned buildings becoming merely functional, rather than social settings.25 Essentially becoming places to pass through rather than to linger and experience. Lacking true gathering spaces or amenities, apartment neighbourhoods, despite being home to many, often appear deserted as residents have nowhere to go but to their inadequate units.26 Thus, the urban placelessness that permeates through these apartment neighbourhoods and felt by the residents are a concern in the pursuit of an architecture of inclusivity. This urban placelessness will lead to the weakening of social bonds between residents which hinder the chances of a community atmosphere to be formed. As neighborhoods are meant to provide benefits in terms of identity and belonging, the constant and continual de-prioritization of these residents individual needs can lead to damaging stigmatization and discrimination of residents living in post-war tower neighborhoods. As these communities evolved, the problems that emerged remain unaddressed and is leading the residents to feel socially excluded and unimportant. Ready-made solutions, which include the demolition of projects and the dispersal of residents is not the only approach available to address these tower neighbourhood problems in the pursuit of accommodating and socially inclusive communities. Through a more sensitive tower renewal initiative these neighbourhoods can be rejuvenated to create an area that promotes an architecture of inclusivity through the accommodation of the diversity that currently exists within apartment neighbourhoods. In most tower renewal cases when towers are not destroyed, they are simply given new facades and new insulation features, but in the end, the overall quality of life does not change much for the residents.27 However, architecture can shape the physical framework beyond aesthetics in a more spatial and systematic manner, which in turn influences the social infrastructure of a neighbourhood. Thus, if properly utilized, architecture can transform the remnants of a dysfunctional form of homogeneous urbanism into socially inclusive and accommodating places of inhabitation. Tower renewal initiatives seek to destigmatize the people who live in these apartment neighbourhoods by altering the way that they are perceived by outside groups, as well as to integrate them back into the city and its social networks that may grant them access to beneficial resources. Through the provision of both hard and soft infrastructure, architecture can work towards addressing the prevailing social issues present in apartment neighbourhoods and create a welcoming, equitable and inclusive user-focused community through a contemporary approach to tower renewal.

52

4.2.1. CASE STUDY - GRAND PARC DISTRICT: BLOCK G, H, I
WHAT IS IT? Lacaton & Vassal's transformation of 3 post-war towers built in the early 1960's in the Grand Parc neighbourhood of Bordeaux. SUCCESSES: 1. By choosing transformation over demolition, units could be updated without extensively disrupting or displacing the current tenants. 2. Addition of `winter gardens' was a non-disruptive strategy that gave resident's the opportunity to optimize the space to suit their needs and/or preferences. FAILURES: 1. Transformations missed the opportunity to create new spaces that could act as social incubators for the internal community within the building, but also for the external community beyond the building.

^ Phillippe Ruault, 2016, <https://www.lacatonvassal.com/ index.php?idp=80>.

Block G, H, and I, are three post-war towers built in the early 60's that have gone through a transformation designed by Lacaton and Vassal during the first phase of a renovation program of Cite du Grand Parc in Bordeaux.28 Despite housing a culturally diverse group of low to moderate income households, like many other apartment towers built during this period these aging highrises are considered ideologically outdated urban failures.29 Housing more than 4000 dwellings that have fallen victim to neglect and disrepair, this tower block was in dire need of change.30 In most cases this change often comes through the demolition of existing post-war housing stock to build new and smaller dwellings at a great expense for both the builder and the residents. Instead, Lacaton and Vassal were determined in this case to come up with an alternative proposal to save the important housing asset and the communities that live within them. Lacaton and Vassal understood that in response to the developer/condominium focused status quo, there needed to be a contemporary response that worked with the existing qualities of the site and to see them as an opportunity and strength rather than a blight to be erased. Thus, the uncommon route of transformation rather than demolition was utilized in the renewal of Block G, H, and I. What this meant was that the existing building would be renovated without making drastic interventions on the structure, cores, or floors.31 Following a strategy applied in Lacaton and Vassal's previous projects called the `Plus Method', free-standing pre-cast concrete structures were erected and attached to the facades of the existing building.32 One unit at a time, the punched windows and concrete walls were removed to be replaced with an extension that included new floor-toceiling openings with sliding glass doors that permitted access to new private winter gardens and shallow balconies.33 During this construction process, residents were not displaced and in return gained additional square footage that renewed the towers both aesthetically but also functionally.

53

1. EXISTING

Figure 18: Tower Transformation Series of diagrams depicting the transformation process. Starting with the existing conditions, then the addition of the winter garden and balconies, and upon completion, residents utilizing the new added space.

2. TRANSFORMATION

3. COMPLETION

In financial terms, the renovations cost approximately half of what constructing new apartments would have, this is not including the expense that would be required for demolishing the existing high-rises.34 Apart from the economic incentives, the primary ambition for the project focuses on creating `amazing places for all people.'35 This sentiment of inclusivity is executed within the project through the generosity of space, freedom of use, and possibility of diverse appropriation. Instead of restricting the amount of space a household is given, which is common in standard built apartments today, Lacaton and Vassal aims to provide increased space for households to utilize in a manner that best suits their individual needs. By adding the extended winter gardens and balconies onto the existing building, it gives the opportunity for each apartment to enjoy a space that is large enough to provide a fluidity of use and cater to each household's diverse housing preferences while still maintaining access to natural light. This was achieved through full height sliding glass doors replacing the original facade, and a set of reflective thermal curtains with sliding polycarbonate panels that separate the private winter garden from the balcony. This clever use of adjustable transparency through materiality act as passive low-tech devices that are easily accessible to the tenants allowing them to control and play a direct role in determining their environment. Thus, depending on the day or situation, the atmospheric qualities of the extension would shift according to the weather or the whims of its occupants. The open-ended nature of Block G, H, and I's design provides the residents with a freedom of use that is able to respond to each household's diverse circumstance. The inhabitants of each unit has the chance to choose what can be done with this additional space and the end result would inevitably demonstrate a plurality of responses derivative of its diverse creators. Depicted in

54

Figure 19: Use Diversity & Freedom Series of photographs by Phillipe Ruault showing how the addition of `winter gardens' allowed each diverse household the freedom to decide how to use the additional space to suit their unique needs or preferences.

Figure 19, photographs by Phillipe Ruault, who has collaborated with Lacaton and Vassal, reveals this multiplicity. While some use the spaces for eating or sleeping, others have filled them with various plants, lounge chairs and couches. As each household is unique, so is each photograph. The series of photographs capturing how each household chose to optimize the added space is a glimpse into the diverse and eccentric character of each apartment. Lacaton and Vassal through their transformation was able to embrace, accommodate, and exhibit this user diversity through their architectural efforts and spatial provisions. While most of the renovation efforts focused on improving households' residential units, there was some attempt at improving existing communal spaces. Inside the buildings, elevators have been installed, and shared bathrooms have been updated.36 More importantly, ground level entryways, lobbies, and community gardens have been revitalized to allow for easier use and access.37 By updating these existing shared spaces to be more inviting, it provided an improved contemporary space for different residents to interact with one another in a common space. However, beyond the building, Lacaton and Vassal did not direct their attention on addressing the broader neighbourhood. The surrounding site with its abundance of undefined green space remains a missed opportunity to add new programming to create social incubators that can engage and interact with the larger community. Despite the lack of integration with the external community, the design efforts seen by Lacaton and Vassal in this transformation of a tower housing block in Grand Parc and in similar projects within their portfolio show that transformation can go beyond being a clever method of renovation but can be worked as a system. The architects were able to relinquish control and distance themselves from the idea of seeking a form of absolute aesthetic cohesion to create iconographic architecture and instead used architecture as a tool to provide residents with the liberty to make a diverse space of their own within the architect's set of predetermined parameters. As Lacaton and Vassal emphasizes, "it is important to make buildings in which users find freedom".38 In the context of this thesis, this case study demonstrates that it is possible to use the existing post-war towers as a potential avenue to design homes that are more accommodating for a diverse group of residents to create an architecture of inclusivity.

55

4.3 RETHINKING THE "URBAN HOME" TO ACCOMMODATE THE DIVERSE COLLECTIVE As the nature and circumstances of `community' and `home' continually shifts away from the notions of inclusivity, architects and designers have the opportunity to mitigate by re-imagining the way that people live within the city. In the increasingly urban and populated society there are more obstacles, often economical, than before to provide for an architecture of inclusivity that accommodates the whole spectrum of individual needs that exists within the diverse collective of cities like Toronto. Housing has the potential to play a vital role in re-stabilizing the status quo to create a socially sustainable city as it sits on the intersection of social welfare and urban quality of life. Urban architecture, especially housing, should approach a point of inclusivity through accommodation that addresses the needs of every type of city user regardless of social, cultural or economical differences. This accommodating inclusivity achieved through the simple act of consideration for all of the city's residents would enrich the community atmosphere and work to re-imagining the way people live within their homes, their community, and their city. In the case of this thesis, it has been determined that a rethinking of the urban home is especially important for the more diverse but vulnerable populations that live within apartment neighbourhoods. These are the people that often have limited choices in choosing both the community and the home that they live in as their needs are increasingly unaddressed by many Toronto neighbourhoods. This is even more evident within the post-war towers that make up Toronto's social housing; these residents are among the most vulnerable residents within Toronto when it comes to housing stability and housing choice. The reality is that those that can make it to the top of the long wait list for subsidized housing are provided with only three options chosen from the limited available units before they have to restart their application again from the beginning.39 What this means is that often the residents who inhabit these types of buildings do not live there because their homes meet their complicated individual needs, they live there because they have limited choices to live elsewhere. This thesis proposes a radical restructuring of the conventional free-standing disconnected forms of post-war apartment towers through strategies such as the plus method, mass customization, incremental change, introducing mixed uses, and embracing rapid fabrication technologies. Thus, rather than a superficial `facelift' these design approaches allow for an urban form that can be more inclusive, adaptable and flexible; an organic urban form that can grow and shrink incrementally as household circumstances change. As the diversity of family typologies and household arrangements increased greatly in the past fifty years, there is no longer a homogeneous, standard household unit in this society of diversity. This is especially true in the context of this project, where there is a larger diversity in households found in apartment neighbourhoods, but also within households in need of subsidized housing. This intricate reality of a multiplicity of individuals within the urban collective generates a need for housing that can adapt to different privacy, space, and use requirements and the following design strategies would be explored in the following thesis project to explore how tower renewal can create an architecture that is more inclusive and accommodating. Plus Method The "Plus Method" is a strategy coined by Lacaton and Vassal in their exploration of how the addition of extra space can be used to better accommodate diversity within post-war towers. Essentially, the
56

idea is to re-clad and add onto the existing to create new spaces that each household can make their own according to what they need out of their home. This strategy gives households added value in terms of open space that they then can utilize and optimize to make their home more accommodating to their own individual diverse needs. The benefits of using the plus method is that it utilizes transformation rather than demolition to address the increasing obsolescence of post-war towers and instead rejuvenates it to better address the needs of its current residents. Thus, the plus method allows for a less intrusive strategy in rethinking the urban post-war tower home to create a home that responds to diversity and inclusivity. Illustrated in a project done by Lacaton and Vassal in Figure 20, the building was extended by grafting a free-standing structure onto the existing high-rise. The additional space referred to as "winter gardens" have been attached to the existing building and consists of an enclosed portion that opens up to a balcony. The blank space is then left to the users of the building to do as they wish, some have used them as the name implied as indoor garden spaces, others used the space to fulfill their individual needs, for example a woman turned the space into a bar as a homage to her late husband, while others choose to not use the space at all.40 While the plus method does add more usable space for each household, in the goal of this thesis to maximize the accommodation of diversity in post-war towers, the PLUS method is still too homogeneous in applying the same solution across the entirety of the building despite differences in households and thus unable to respond to each household individually.
Figure 20: Tour Bois-le-Prêtre: Plus Method Construction photos of how the plus method grafts additional space to be utilized by each individual household onto the existing tower.

Figure 21: Tour Bois-le-Prêtre: Typical Floor Plan Typical floor plan showing where the plus method strategy was utilized to add additional spaces onto the existing. .

"winter garden" addition room additions new elevators

57

Mass Customization As the diversity of family typologies and household arrangements has increased greatly in the past fifty years, there is no longer a homogeneous, standard household unit in this society of diversity. The exponential increase in cultural diversity has generated a need for housing that can adapt to different privacy, space, and use requirements. The strategy of mass customization (sometimes referred to customizable modularity) can be utilized to combat against the homogeneity of the single solution applied to all households that can be seen with Lacaton and Vassal's approach to the plus method. By proposing a solution of customizable modularity, that responds to the rigidity of the current building form, one can provide an adaptable system that organically morphs to accommodate the diversity of tenants while also responding to their individual needs in mass while maintaining a level of individualism and user choice. By designing a system that allows for mass customization, inclusivity can be achieved through actual consideration and respect of each household's individual needs and in turn accommodating them despite their differences or complexities. Rather than what is often the case with collective housing residents, where people are often thrust together by economical circumstances rather than choice, by utilizing a customizable modularity approach this provides an element of user choice to households that are often left choiceless and maximizes the potential of post-war towers to fully accommodate for diversity within them. Seen in SITE's theoretical project "Highrise of Homes", seen in Figure 22, the proposed strategy of mass customization offers the opportunity for residents to create for themselves the urban home that they need and a sense of architectural identity. This results in an urban collage where the architecture itself becomes a display of the diversity created by the residents that inhabit the space.
Figure 22: Highrise of Homes: Theoretical project by SITE, 1981 Multi-story matrix that can accommodate a vertical community of private houses, clustered in-to distinct village-like communities on each floor. The housing structure offers apartment dwellers the unique advantages of garden space and personalized architectural identity.

58

Figure 23: Half a House: Incremental Change The process of incremental growth, starting from top left and going clockwise. 1. Framework that allows for incremental change if needed. 2. Users decide they have needs that current housing does not accommodate, so they build. 3. Constructed personalized homes to accommodate the diverse household within it. .

Incremental Change The strategy of adaptability and incremental change is about the capacity of a building to accommodate effectively the evolving demands of its context and maximizing its potential to address user diversity through time. As seen with the increasing obsolesce of post-war towers, designing for change in needs over time as the demographics change is a strategy in accommodating diversity long-term. Change should be embraced and able to happen thanks to design, not despite it. By designing a structure that can adapt and prepare for any future changes rather than just the initial one would allow urban housing to last. This idea of incremental growth alongside the household contrasts greatly with the "fixity" of contemporary urban housing in which the responses to changing family sizes is to pack up and move on if the household can afford to, or suffer in inadequate housing if housing options are limited. Thus, by designing in preparation for change, when change does inevitably happen the unit can adapt to fit the user, rather than force the user to adapt to a living situation that does not suit them. This consideration of present and future needs through incremental change, change meaning both growth and shrinkage of units allowing for a certain measure of "plug in, plug out," where space can be added, removed or replaced as necessary over time, allows them to be independently adjusted or replaced without disrupting other dwellings or subsystems. This strategy of plug in and out allows for housing that can adjust to changing social needs (personal, practical or technological) and patterns (demographic, economic, or environmental) creating a long-term

59

solution to accommodating diversity and an architecture of inclusivity. An example that utilizes this strategy is Alejandro Aravena's incremental housing design "Half a House", seen in Figure 23. The first half of the design would strategically provide for all the difficult and fundamental necessities that a household would need such as partition structural and firewalls, bathroom, kitchen, stairs, roof, while the other half is left to the households to determine the usage of the space according to their needs overtime.41 The space is left for them to build, demolish and replace overtime as the household's specific needs change, allowing for the home to morph alongside the resident. Mixed Uses This strategy of mixed uses moves beyond housing and begins to address the needs of the residents outside their unit boundaries. The combination of a variety of programming or building types within the same area maximizes the potential to cater to different housing, commercial and/ or social needs that the diverse population within St. James Town may have. By introducing mixed programming such as commercial or recreational space on the ground plane, it provides an area for social interaction without disrupting the private lives of the residents. These are places for people to meet and gather without obligations or regards to social status and become inclusive social incubators for the community. Mixed-use architecture also helps to improve the accessibility of residents to activities that help to improve the daily lives of residents not possible within confines of the home alone. By not separating uses, this can also help to populate the interstitial spaces within the site to increase the liveliness of the ground plane. Another key aspect to adding mixed use is through the creation of `multi-purpose' spaces; the blank rooms have the ability to allow users to choose the possible type of activity and functions that can occur within the space that best suits their needs at the time.
Figure 24: Jan Gehl's Development of Public Life Diagram by Jan Gehl depicting the importance of different activity spaces beyond the building that are able to activate the ground plane, generate "life between buildings," and act as social incubators.

LIFE

SPACE

BUILDING

60

Rapid Fabrication Technology As the architecture industry continues to evolve and be more perceptive to contemporary technologies in digitalization, virtualization and automation, architects will have more tools at their disposal to provide innovative designs that were considered infeasible before. One advancement that is starting to be explored more architecturally are rapid fabrication technologies, which includes 3D printers, robotic arms, automated lifting systems, and other machinery that have made it easy to fabricate on demand and construct on-site.42 They provide personalization on a large scale with efficient turnover43, avoiding the current formulaic and pre-determined residential construction methods that are unable to adequately address the city's increasingly complex population. Furthermore, these technologies allow for designers to take account of the diversity and individual needs of a project and its users without critically limiting the conditions of design and resorting to monotonous homogeneity. The proposal explores how rapid fabrication technologies can be used in conjunction with the previously mentioned design strategies (plus method, mass customization, incremental change, and mixed use) to create a flexible proposal that is able to accommodate user diversity within post-war towers and respond to their individual user needs and desires. With rapid fabrication technology, variety can be achieved with little human effort to produce forms, spaces and aesthetics that users and designers could not achieve using conventional building methods.44 Adaptation of these technologies, especially 3D printing, would provide the freedom to residents to determine certain aspects of their home, either formally, materially, and/or spatially45 (Figure 26 and 27 explores these capabilities further). In conjunction with advancements in on-site construction automation (examples seen in Figure 25) the installation of the personalized fabricated homes can be accomplished on a large scale more efficiently. Modern rapid fabrication technology in the context of this thesis would allow for a more user-focused design as residents would have more opportunity in choosing how their homes can be better optimized to suit their unique wants and needs.
Figure 25: Automated On-Site Construction Examples Examples of automated on-site construction systems used overseas by different corporations. These systems are automated to be able to construct whole buildings floor by floor without the needs of human support on site and with none or minimal human support off-site.

SHIMIZU MANUFACTURING SMART SYSTEM

OBAYASHI CORPORATION ABC SYSTEM

THAI OBAYASHI CORPORATION BIG CANOPY SYSTEM

61

Figure 26: 3d Printing Capabilities Materiality Chart depicting and describing possible strength and weaknesses of different material options available within 3D printing.

BIO-PLASTICS 46
STRENGTHS: 1. Once the need for the material is done, it can even be shredded and recycled for other 3D printing projects. 2. Plastic is able to mold into unique forms, patterns and colours. WEAKNESSES: 1. No opportunity for insulation, so its usage is limited to cases where no insulation is needed or temporary structures.

SPECIALIZED CONCRETE MIXTURES 47
STRENGTHS: 1. Material allows for shell to be created, thus allowing for spray foam insulation to be created on-site without the need for additional machinery. 2. Versatility in finish, can be sanded down for a smooth finish, layers can be adjusted to be more fine or course, or pigment can be added for colour variation. WEAKNESSES: 1. Heavy material and will need support structure or reinforcement for large spans.

CONSTRUCTION WASTE + HARDENING AGENT 48
STRENGTHS: 1. Utilize recyclable waste that otherwise would go to landfills. 2. Material provides high-quality insulation and strength allowing for earthquake resistance. 3. Allows for 60% reduction on material costs, 80 percent on labor costs, and 70 percent of time compared to conventional construction methods.

62

INSULATION FOAM 49
STRENGTHS: 1. Can be used with other materials to create insulated 3D-printed environments without the need of manual labour. 2. As the material sprays and then expands, it allows for addition at a 90 degree angle as well as the conventional horizontal layer by layer method. WEAKNESSES: 1. Needs additional material such as concrete to be used as an external material.

POWDERED METAL 50
WEAKNESSES: 1. Curing oven is needed to strengthen the powered metal print, and printed objects shrink after the process. 2.Currently has only been practiced in small scales to make small components. 3. Metal printers are prohibitively expensive even for printing small scale objects, making it nonviable for housing construction.

GLASS 51
STRENGTHS: 1. Allows for windows and openings to be automated, thus eliminating the needs for window installers. 2. The printed glass can quickly start to take more organic forms and stray from the conventional flat glass window panes. WEAKNESSES: 1. The glass layers are visible affecting the opacity of the glass.

63

Figure 27: 3D Printing Capabilities Form Chart depicting and describing the forms and projects that have been achieved within the architecture industry with 3D printing.

SOM - 3D PRINTED PROTOTYPE 52
ABOUT: 1. 3D-printed panels that serve multiple purposes. In addition to acting as exterior cladding, the panels provide structural support, insulation and moisture protection. 2. All-in-one approach cuts down on construction waste and reduces material usage. 3. Expresses three-dimensional printing's ability to deploy complex, organic geometries

DUS ARCHITECTS - MOBILE EU MEETING BUILDING 53
ABOUT: 1. Faceted blue surfaces extends out to create benches. These elements were all created using 3D printers. 2. First time in the world that these kinds of "XXL 3D prints" are being shown in the public domain 3. Created using fused deposition modeling, the same form of additive manufacturing used by most household 3D printers.

DUS ARCHITECTS - URBAN CABIN 54
ABOUT: 1. Its purpose is to show how 3D printing can offer solutions for disaster relief and temporary functional housing. 2. Entirely 3D printed with black colored bio-based material, it showcases different types of facade ornament, form-optimization techniques and smart solutions for insulation and material consumption. 3. Another step in using 3D print technology to build sustainable, customizable and on-demand urban housing solutions for fast growing cities.

64

SAN FRATELLO ARCHITECTS - WALL PROTOTYPE 55
ABOUT: 1. Full scale wall prototype constructed of rapid manufactured concrete masonry units created for an exhibit that explores the capabilities of CAD (computer aided design). 3. Focused on developing methods for 3D printing using concrete for the production of long lasting performance-based components that are to be part of the construction process of buildings.

SAN FRATELLO ARCHITECTS - BLOOM 56
ABOUT: 1. A pavilion constructed from 840 unique blocks 3-D printed from portland cement. .2. The 9-foot (2.7 meter) tall pavilion is cruciform in plan, morphing as it rises to become the same cruciform shape twisted by 45 degrees. 3. On the facade of the pavilion, perforations are mapped onto the cement blocks to create a design inspired by traditional Thai flower patterns.

GENSLER - OFFICE OF THE FUTURE 57
ABOUT: 1. Only one employee was monitoring the printer at any given time. 2. Seven other employees worked on installing building components on-site, alongside ten electricians and specialists. 3. Printing took 17 days and was installed on in 2 days. Subsequent work on the building services, interiors, and landscape took approximately 3 months. 4. Labour cost was cut by more than 50% compared to conventional buildings of similar size.

65

YORKVILLE

BLOOR ST. E.
ROSEDALE

Figure 28: Site Aerial Map Aerial map of the apartment neighbourhood of St. James Town showing its boundaries of Bloor, Parliament, Wellesley and Sherbourne Street. The dense nature of the community can be seen in direct contrast to its surrounding wealthier neighbourhoods.

IAM RL PA EN

CHURCH + WELLESLEY VILLAGE

4.4 SITE SELECTION The neighbourhood of St. James Town, located within the city centre, is a prime example of a postwar tower community that contains both the opportunities and problems previously discussed in this chapter. Being the densest neighbourhood in Toronto, St. James Town, like many other apartment neighbourhoods was originally designed in the 1960's as starter homes for young, middle class residents, specifically singles and professionals who had no children and relied heavily on the car for transportation.58 However, overtime as St. James Town aged and the deteriorated post-war apartments no longer appealed to this demographic, they eventually chose to migrate and live elsewhere. St. James Town would then be inhabited by those much different from the original tenants. With this transition, there came to be a disconnect between the demographic that the neighbourhood was originally designed for and the current social make-up of St. James Town. Today, typical St. James Town residents are often people with limited incomes that have larger families and generally do not own a car; essentially the opposite of the original occupants.59 Currently consisting of approximately 64% being recent immigrants and 40% of the households classified as low-income, St. James Town is home to one of the most economically vulnerable, culturally diverse and dense populations within North America.60 As a result, these new residents who cannot afford to live in other areas that may better suit their individual set of complex diverse needs are forced to live in neighbourhoods that were not designed for them and are too rigid to accommodate without new investment or renewal. Thus, this thesis proposes an area of focus within St. James Town for further exploration to be able to renew the post-war apartment neighbourhood and accommodate residents' diverse housing needs in the pursuit of an architecture of social inclusivity for the city of Toronto.

RNE ST. SHERBOU

T. TS

ES WELL

. E. LEY ST
CABBAGETOWN

66

Figure 29: Change in Average Individual Income 1970-2005 While Toronto's core shows a significant increase in average individual income, there remains a few pockets, including St. James Town where there is a decrease. ST. JAMES TOWN
CITY #1 (increase of 20% or more) CITY #2 (increase or decrease less than 20%) CITY #3 (decrease of 20% or more)

Figure 30: Population Density of Low Income Neighbourhoods Persons per square kilometer in Census Tracts with an average individual income of less than $32,500 in 2005 (80% of the Toronto CMA average individual income). St. James Town is one of the neighbourhoods with high concentration of low-income households. ST. JAMES TOWN

HIGHER DENSITY (7174+ people per km2) MEDIUM DENSITY (3959-7173 people per km2) LOWER DENSITY (less than 3959 people per km2) census tracts that are not low income

Beyond the unique geographical circumstances of St. James Town, its deteriorating high-rise apartment towers, abundance in user diversity, lack of social cohesion and overall sense of urban isolation is consistent with other post-war tower neighbourhoods.61 Despite St. James Town's central location, there is still an obvious disconnect between it and its surrounding neighbourhoods of Yorkville, Rosedale, Church & Wellesley Village, and Cabbagetown (seen in Figure 28). Both its social and physical characteristics have isolated this diverse immigrant community from its neighbours and the broader city. Looking at Figure 29, it is evident that St. James Town is one of the very few neighbourhoods within the inner city that is considered part of Hulchanski's classification of city #3, whereby incomes since the 1970's has decreased by 20% or more.62 Surrounding St. James Town are mostly neighbourhoods which are classified as City #1, having experienced an increase of income 20% or more in the last 40 years.63 This social difference and isolation that St. James Town experiences within Toronto's urban centre is also evident in Figure 30 which looks at concentrations of poverty. St James Town is surrounded by neighbourhoods where Toronto censuses show they are not classified as low income, while St. James Town itself is categorized under the most extreme designation of concentrated poverty with 7,174 or more low-income households per square kilometre.64 Emphasizing these social differences are the physical and visual fragmentations evident between St. James Town and the

67

surrounding affluent communities. Physically, the dense clusters of residential high-rises do not fit in the with the mixed and lower density scales of the neighbourhoods surrounding it, giving St. James Town distinct boundaries that only work to pronounce the social differences that exist. This drastic socio-economic and physical differences between St. James Town and the surrounding communities often leaves the residents feeling socially isolated from the larger city perpetuating Toronto's trajectory of social exclusion.65 These intricate and complex social issues that are evident within St. James Town are a result of years of systemic neglect as neo-liberalist thinking has allowed for invisible models of exclusion to lead city growth and control areas of investment. Fortunately, government entities such as the City of Toronto within the last decade has started to partner with designers and researchers to spur a re-engagement towards models of inclusivity and accommodation especially in regards to tower renewal within apartment neighbourhoods. Looking at Figure 31, the Centre for Urban Growth and Renewal (CUGR), an entity that has been doing research for the city's Tower Renewal Project has started looking at where apartment tower clusters are located and which ones have a relatively high social need for revitalization. More importantly, CUGR started considering which of these tower neighbourhoods with high social need showed the greatest potential for tower neighbourhood renewal. In the end, CUGR listed seventeen different neighbourhoods, including St. James Town, which is the neighbourhood selected for this thesis' exploration of an architecture of inclusivity through the accommodation of diversity in post-war towers.
High Potential/ Priority for Tower Neighbourhood Renewal Largest Tower Clusters with High Social Need
1. Thorncliffe/ Flemingdon Park 2. Crescent Town 3. Scarborough Village 4. Kingston Galloway 5. Glamorgan Park 6. Sheppard/ Birchmount Corridor 7. Warden and Finch 8. Don Valley Village 9. Bathurst & Steeles 10. York U/ Jane Finch 11. Kipling Towers 12. Weston 13. Kipling Dixon 14. Kipling Eglinton 15. Eglinton Flats 16. Parkdale 17. St. James Town

tower neighbourhood with high social need large cluster with high social need cluster of 5+ apartment towers cluster of 2-4 apartment towers isolated apartment towers tower property GO transit existing rapid transit funded rapid transit parks and conservation area

Figure 31: Tower Neighbourhood Location Map Centre for Urban Growth and Renewal's mapping of Toronto's post-war apartment towers in relation to the city's transit systems. It differentiates the tower neighbourhoods with relatively high social need and potential for tower renewal.

68

Figure 32: St. James Town Site Analysis Existing Land Use From top to bottom: A. building typologies B. open space C. pedestrian circulation D. vehicular circulation.

SHERBOURNE STATION

parking garage commercial commercial res. institutional/ civic mixed use institutional TCHC high-rise residential high-rise residential mid-rise residential low-rise residential

ROSE AVENUE JUNIOR PUBLIC SCHOOL

WELLESLEY COMMUNITY CENTRE

PLAYGROUND & BASKETBALL COURT

public outdoor amenities private outdoor amenities public open space private open space

ST. JAMES TOWN WEST PARK PEDESTRIAN CONCOURSE

public sidewalks private pathways primary circulation secondary circulation tertiary circulation
BLOOR STREET
P P P P P P P P P P
P P
P

L PAR EN IAM
P

P

T ST

BLE E ECK

REE

P parking lot public routes private routes parking garage entrances primary circulation secondary circulation tertiary circulation
TRE ES ET

SH OU ERB RN

T

AREA OF FOCUS

TRE RS ET
P

P P

ES WELL

TREET LEY S

69

4.5 CONTEXT ANALYSIS - ST. JAMES TOWN Despite being proposed as one of the initial pilot sites for the City of Toronto's tower neighbourhood renewal initiative in 2001, there has been few significant changes seen since the urban renewal of St. James Town in the 1960's.66 There have been a few instances where small steps were taken to improve the community, but overall the dense apartment neighbourhood has changed little in form since its inception. This is especially true when it comes to the buildings that are homes to the neighbourhood's diverse spectrum of households. These homogeneous high rises are becoming increasingly obsolete and non-functional, unable to properly accommodate the diversity within them. Through the analysis of both the existing conditions of St. James Town as it stands today and its future proposed conditions approved by the city, a better understanding of its current and future context can be attained to reveal the opportunities of St. James Town in the pursuit of an architecture of inclusivity and accommodation of diversity through tower renewal. Currently, St. James Town consists of 19 high-rise buildings that are packed into less than a third of a square kilometer of land. This level of residential density within such an area has made St. James Town 18 times more dense than that of the City of Toronto average and the most densely populated neighbourhood in Canada.67 These towers are the source of serious concern for the St. James Town residents who call them home. Obsolescence, neglect and poor maintenance has led to poor living conditions for the residents of this community.68 Addressing deteriorating and outdated housing stock is a priority for tower renewal, however one of the key difficulties in implementing neighbourhood wide improvements and changes is that most of the land and buildings are privately owned by different corporations who are often unwilling to allocate expenses for tower renewal.69 Only four out of the eighteen high-rises are publicly owned by the Toronto Community Housing Corporation (TCHC). Referring to Figure 32a, the outlined area contains two publicly owned buildings, 325 and 375 Bleecker Street, which will be used as this thesis' area of focus in addressing and designing the tower renewal efforts needed to create a more inclusive and accommodating Toronto. While St. James Town mostly consists of high-rise residential towers, sporadically scattered throughout the neighbourhood are a few exceptions. For example, there are a handful of small family-owned businesses found on the ground floor of the few low-rise homes that still exist within the neighbourhood. Additional small-scale retail can also be found on the ground floor of a couple high-rise towers as well. The only large-scale retail is the presence of a Food Basics, the only grocery store within the neighbourhood and thus the main source in accommodating the food needs of the community. Within the community there also exists a few institutional and civic buildings that are vital to St. James Town residents. These important landmarks include the Sherbourne Station transit hub, Rose Avenue Public School and the Wellesley Community Centre, which all act as built social hubs for the community. The Wellesley Community Centre is the only significant project initiated by the City of Toronto to renew the area and has now become one of the few vital social incubators for the community. The community centre offers a variety of programming such as a library, gymnasium and drop-in programs to accommodate the residents' needs beyond housing.70 Looking at Figure 32b and Figure 32d, it is evident that the buildings within the neighbourhood occupy a small portion of land compared to the land that is dedicated to open green spaces, private vehicular routes and parking lots. Despite the large amount of dedicated outdoor space, there

70

are few defined amenities that exist within the neighbourhood. Of the limited outdoor amenities that do exist, majority of them are fenced off and available only to the tenants of its respective adjacent building. In most cases, the outdoor amenities are either abandoned outdoor pools or tennis courts which are remnants of a St. James Town that no longer coincide with the activities and needs of current St. James Town's residents. Public outdoor amenities are almost non-existent with the only exception being a small children's playground in St. James West Park. The lack of public outdoor amenities to act as social incubators for the neighbourhood is detrimental to the creation of an active pedestrian realm on the ground level. This absence of activity has left the large open spaces surrounding St. James Town's postwar towers to become underutilized and unwatched stretches of land that are often prime spots for criminal activities. As is, these large undefined open outdoor spaces are a wasted opportunity, but if they were to be rejuvenated these spaces have the potential to become important social spaces that can activate the pedestrian and public realm for both internal and external communities to create a more integrated St. James Town. As St. James Town was originally designed for the automobile to be the main mode of transportation rather than walking, there are patterns and habits that have formed within both modes of transportation as a result of this initial decision. While the perimeter of St. James town is heavily trafficked by cars and public transit, vehicular circulation within St. James Town is predominantly limited to local traffic accessing the residential buildings. Excluding the usage of St. James Avenue, the only east-west corridor route to extend past St. James Town borders, there is limited reason for external vehicular circulation to penetrate the neighbourhood. This lack of public roadways and vehicular thoroughfares isolates it from it surrounding neighbourhoods physically and perpetuates the visually distinct place-based stigma felt by the residents.
Figure 33: St. James Town Photographs Starting from top left, and going clockwise. A. Typical cluster of apartment high-rises B. Fenced off outdoor tennis court C. Pedestrian concourse D. Small family-owned businesses

71

Most residents in St. James Town claim that walking is their main mode of transportation as most households do not have access to a car.71 Illustrated in Figure 32c and 32d Sherbourne Street is the main circulation artery both for drivers and pedestrians as it leads to other amenity rich areas outside of St. James Town. While sharing Sherbourne Street as a main artery for circulation, pedestrian circulation within St. James Town follow drastically different patterns compared to vehicular circulation. Beyond the main pedestrian circulation path along Sherbourne and towards it, local pedestrian circulation is more concentrated around important civic or institutional buildings. Within the neighbourhood, St. James Town residents are often walking to the nearby school, community centre, subway station, or grocery store which are all mostly concentrated on the western portion of St. James Town, closer to the main road of Sherbourne. The eastern portion of the neighbourhood and beyond consists mainly of residential buildings with few amenities, therefore it confines itself to the presence of pedestrians who tend to live in that area. Within the neighbourhood there is a pedestrian concourse by the Food Basics that acts as the main pedestrian spine of the neighbourhood. It is constantly active as people take this path to get to their main source for groceries and thus is populated even in the winter.72 Despite this, residents generally find it difficult to get around without taking shortcuts through unpaved paths and across parking lots due to the lack of public streets, fragmented sidewalks and limited crosswalks.73 At night, residents often have to change their walking routes and take inefficient routes to their destination as these shortcuts are generally inadequately lit or supervised and residents feel unsafe walking through the dark expanses. This heavy reliance on informal walking routes that cross privately owned land can be interpreted as an indication that the formal routes that currently exist within the neighbourhood do not directly connect people to the places they need to go. This disconnect between the current built environment and the current needs of St. James Town is a testament to the high social need for tower renewal to reinvigorate the community and create room for a stable, more accommodating architecture to take form within St. James Town. Recently, there has been a slight surge in investment in the area as new proposals are put forward for city approval and some building construction is already underway. Although most of the projects are still within their early stages, they still provide insight into the future circumstances of St. James Town and perhaps reveal new opportunities that come with this renewed interest in St.
1. North St. James Town Redevelopment 2. Glen Road Streetscaping 3. Sherbourne/Howard Tower 4. 545-565 Sherbourne 5. Wellesley Community Centre Pool
Figure 34: Future Developments Future proposed developments within St. James Town in proximity to the area of focus.

1 3

1 2

1

4

5

72

James Town. The largest development proposal is already underway as construction breaks ground on the northern strip of St. James Town that was previously occupied by a few single-family homes and an abundant amount of green space (refer to Figure 36). The proposal focuses on four new condo towers ranging from 46-56 storeys high with townhouses interspersed.74 Despite the excessive height and increase in density to an already dense neighbourhood, the condominiums and townhouses would add new housing options in a neighbourhood that consists solely of apartment rentals. Consisting of mostly one-bedroom and bachelor units, the condominiums would be inaccessible and non-viable for the larger low-income households which make up the majority of the neighbourhood. Therefore, this development would attract people with moderate incomes and homeowners into the neighbourhood encouraging a greater socioeconomic mix and perhaps further investment into the neighbourhood to create a more inclusive neighbourhood overall. Along with the condominiums, the North St. James Town development would connect Bloor Street with the neighbourhood and add new retail at grade externally along the borders of St. James Town and but also internally within the neighbourhood along Howard Street.75 Furthermore, despite the proposal eliminating a large portion of open green space within the neighbourhood, its replacing the large expanse with a more defined human-scaled parkette along Howard Street.76
Figure 35: Future Developments Images Starting from top left, and going clockwise. A. North St. James Town development showing new retail at grade B. Howard Parkette C. Sherbourne Howard mixeduse rental tower and renovated St. James West Park D. Sherbourne Street mixed use rental tower E. Bleecker Street townhouses F. Wellesley Community Centre Pool

73

While the condominiums appear to be misaligned with the housing needs of current residents, fortunately, there are examples of development proposals within St. James Town that take a more mixed approach to housing that may better accommodate the diverse needs of current St. James Town residents. Already well underway, the redevelopment of 545-565 Sherbourne will include new densities, uses, and rental options through a 43-storey rental tower with retail at grade and new townhouses along Bleecker Street.77 Furthermore, the proposal includes the replacement of a new grocery store and the demolition of the previous overpass that spans across Earl Street, opening access into the neighbourhood from Sherbourne Street.78 Similarly, there is another 58-storey mixed-use rental tower that is being proposed at Sherbourne and Howard Street, but also includes park improvements to the adjacent St. James Town Park, a vital public social space within the community.79 Beyond residential developments, there are smaller proposals that attempt to provide community facilities and places needed to increase the formation of an inclusive inter-connected community within the neighbourhood. Firstly, a smaller community initiative was also proposed to re-do the streetscaping on Glen Road, a local neighbourhood pedestrian route that leads towards tunnels to Bloor Street and into Sherbourne Station.80 The initiative looks at not only to beautify the street but also to make it more accessible and safe for the community. Another initiative, the Wellesley Community Centre Pool, was part of the original plan for the community centre built in 2005, but due to the lack of funding the portion was put on hold.81 Funding has been recently approved, and its addition to the existing Wellesley Community Centre would add a new facility that is publicly accessible to all and operational all-year round, expanding the current roster of much needed community amenities.82 This would allow for the Wellesley Community Centre to accommodate for more people and activities and draw in people from within St James Town and surrounding communities. The addition of Wellesley Community Centre Pool would cement the existing community centre's role as a social and cultural hub of the neighbourhood. Despite these small but important community-focused proposals, the new residential proposals are still overwhelming the neighbourhood. With the increase in density and limited increase in community facilities, the new residents of St. James Town would be relying on the strained facilities that exist within and in the surrounding neighbourhoods to accommodate them. Furthermore, majority of the developments consist of demolishing existing low-rises and constructing new high rises on the same property. While this may renew the neighbourhood by adding some retail, new housing stock and new residents, it does little in regards to tower renewal to address the urgent housing problems faced by current residents. Furthermore, as illustrated in Figure 33 most of the proposals are focused on the periphery of the neighbourhood, close to Sherbourne Street and often engaging with surrounding neighbourhoods more so than the existing internal neighbourhood of St. James Town leaving the interiors of St. James Town remaining physically unchanged. If an architecture of inclusivity is to be achieved, there needs to be an initiative to address both the external and internal community in a genuine and integrative manner.

74

ENDNOTES
1

Edward Keenan, Is CityPlace Toronto's Next Ghetto?, The Grid, 2011, <http://www.thegridto.com/life/real-estate/is-cityplace-toronto's-next-ghetto/>. 2 Anna Paperny, Toronto Increasingly Becoming A City of Vertical Poverty, The Globe and Mail, 2012, <http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/toronto/toronto-increasingly-becoming-a-city-of-vertical-poverty/article562782/.>. 3 United Way Toronto, Vertical Poverty: Poverty by Postal Code 2, 2011, 3. <https://www.unitedwaytyr.com/document.doc?id=89>. 4 Christopher Hume, Are Toronto Condo Towers Slums in the Making?, Toronto Star, 2012 <https://www.thestar.com/news/gta/2012/03/20/hume_are_toronto_condo_towers_slums_in_the_making.html>. 5 ERA, Tower Renewal: Opportunities Book, 2010, 6. <www.towerrenewal.com/tower-renewal-opportunities-book/.>. 6 City of Toronto, Apartment Neighbourhood Opportunities, 2014, <http://www1.toronto.ca/wps/portal/contentonly?vgnextoid=0ebf562c381c4410VgnVCM10000071d60f89RCRD>. 7 Ibid. 8 Ibid. 9 Centre of Urban Growth and Renewal, Strong Neighbourhoods and Complete Communities: A New Approach to Zoning for Apartment Neighbourhoods, 2012, 5. <http://cugr.ca/pdf/Apartment_Zoning.pdf>. 10 Ibid. 11 Ibid., 2. 12 Apartment Neighbourhood Opportunities. 13 Hulchanski, 15. 14 Denis Bocquet. More Space, More Light, More Green: A New Vision of Social Housing,Speech, 2014, 245. 15 ERA, 36. 16 Ibid. 17 Ibid. 18 United Way, 48. 19 Ibid. 20 Ibid. 21 Ibid. 22 ERA, 36. 23 United Way, 14. 24 Lorinc, 59. 25 Ibid., 56. 26 ERA, 36. 27 Bocquet, 36. 28 Lacaton + Vassal, Transformation of 530 Dwellings, block G, H, I, District of the Grand Parc, 2016, <https://www.lacatonvassal.com/index.php?idp=80#>. 29 David Huber, Lacaton & Vassal Have Pioneered a Strategy got Saving France's Social Housing, 2016 <http://www.metropolismag.com/ideas/preservation/lacaton-vassal-pioneered-strategy-saving-france-social-housing/>. 30 Lacaton + Vassal. 31 Ibid. 32 Huber. 33 Ibid. 34 Ibid. 35 Dincan Baker-Brown, Reworking Beats Rebuilding Every Time, (RIBA Journal: 2017), <https://www.ribaj.com/intelligence/lacaton-and-vassal-reduce-materials-resources-closed-loop-circular-economy>. 36 Huber. 37 Lacaton + Vassal. 38 Baker-Brown. 39 Housing Connections, Frequently Asked Questions, 2016, <https://www.housingconnections.ca/Applicants/FAQs.asp.>. 40 Anne-Marie Fevre, Tour Bois-Le-Pretre: A Healthy Rebirth, Liberation Magazine, 2012, <http://next.liberation.fr/design/2012/02/06/tour-bois-le-pretre-une-saine-renaissance_793785>. 41 Aravena Alejandro. Elemental: Incremental Housing and Participatory Design Manual, (Hatje Cantz, 2012) 5. 42 Thomas Bock and Thomas Linner. Site Automation: Automated/Robotic On-Site Factories, (Cambridge University Press, 2016) 13. 43 Wanda Dye. Mass Customization in Architecture: Heterogeneity in the Making, (ACSA Annual Meeting , vol. 92, Mar. 2004) 216.

75

44 45

Ibid., 215. Ibid. 46 Tyler Koslow. 3D Printed House, 2017, <https://all3dp.com/1/3d-printed-house-homes-buildings-3d-printing-construction/>. 47 Ibid. 48 Ibid. 49 Ibid. 50 Hod Lipson & Melba Kurman, Fabricated: The New World of 3D Printing, (Wiley: 2013) 54. 51 F. Kotz et al. Three-Dimensional Printing of Transparent Fused Silica Glass, (Nature: Vol. 544, 2017) 337-339. 52 Koslow. 53 DUS Architects, Europe Building, 2015, <http://houseofdus.com/project/europe-building/>. 54 Koslow. 55 San Fratello Architects, Emerging Objects, 2015, <http://www.rael-sanfratello.com/?p=1344>. 56 Koslow. 57 Ibid. 58 Paul Hess & Jane Farrow, Walkability in Toronto's Apartment Neighbourhoods: Report on St. James Town Walkability, 2009, 4. <http://janeswalk.org/files/8114/5331/6149/Walkability_Full_Report.pdf>. 59 Ibid. 60 Matt Kanter, St. James Town Research into Action: Improving Living Conditions for SJT Residents, Wellesley Institute, 2009, 3. <http://www.wellesleyinstitute.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/Policy-Brief-20091101-Improving-Living-Conditions-for-SJTResidents.pdf>. 61 Ibid. 62 Hulchanski, 2. 63 Ibid. 64 Ibid., 16. 65 Kanter, 3. 66 Hess & Farrow, 5. 67 Hulchanski, 2. 68 Ibid. 69 Ibid. 70 Kanter, 4. 71 Hess & Farrow, 4. 72 Ibid., 14. 73 Ibid. 74 City of Toronto, St. James Town Community Improvement Plan, 2015, 10. <https://www1.toronto.ca/city_of_toronto/city_planning/community_planning/files/pdf/stjamestown-public-meeting-presjune10.pdf>. 75 Ibid. 76 Ibid. 77 Ibid., 12. 78 Ibid. 79 Ibid., 8. 80 Ibid., 15. 81 Ibid., 9. 82 Ibid.

76

77

05
< Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

THESIS PROJECT - 325 & 375 BLEECKER STREET
The private condominium developments that are currently dominating the city act as symbols of de-accommodation, division, and privacy in an increasingly homogeneous built environment. Instead, a tower renewal proposal can be utilized to create vibrant urban places of living able to accommodate the city's growing diversity to encourage a breakdown of the existing exclusivities that fuel isolation, detachment and indifference within the city. This would create an urban form and system that embraces the identities and individual needs of the unique users that make up the complex urban fabric of metropolitan areas. Instead of de-prioritizing those with needs that fall outside of the market regulated ideals, everyone should have equal opportunity to urban housing that can accommodate diversity and individualism. Therefore, by creating an architecture of inclusivity through the accommodation of existing diversity within the neglected post-war neighbourhoods, its residents will finally have the affordance to city homes and communities that can be utilized and optimized to their respective needs. This act of consideration will culminate to create a socially inclusive urban environment where different people can live, interact, engage, and thrive with one another through an architecture of inclusivity. User-focused cities happen by design. Intentional design and provision of inclusive and accommodating infrastructure, programs and services can provide for the needs of all city residents in an equitable and socially sustainable manner. By designing for the diverse populations within St. James Town whose needs are often de-prioritized in the rapidly growing city, this thesis aims to foster a more inclusive city that appropriately reflects the needs and challenges of as many of Toronto's residents as possible, not only those who are economically privileged and thereby fit within the neo-liberalist market's status quo. This chapter focuses on a series of architectural strategies that could bridge the existing gaps within St. James Town to revitalize the neighbourhood to meet the evolving needs of the current and future resident communities moving forward. This design proposal assumes a partnership with Toronto Community Housing to introduce an architectural intervention on their property of 325 and 375 Bleecker Street. Thus, this project would be seen as the starting point in utilizing tower renewal as a mechanism in rethinking an architecture of inclusivity that addresses the diverse needs of the urban collective within St. James Town to create a more socially sustainable Toronto.

79

HOW ARD S TREET

Figure 36: 325 & 375 Bleecker St. Existing Site Plan 1: 1500 Existing site plan of the area of focus. Dashed lines show the fences that are present on the site. On site amenities include a child's playground and a basketball court.

ST. JAMES TOWN WEST PARK 375 BLEECKER

SHERBOURNE STREET FUTURE DEVELOPMENT FUTURE DEVELOPMENT

ST. JAMES AVENUE

BLEECKER STREET 200 WELLESLEY 325 BLEECKER 275 BLEECKER

80

5.1 AREA OF FOCUS ­ 325 & 375 BLEECKER STREET Due to the nature and scope of this thesis, rather than exploring the neighbourhood in its entirety in a superficial manner, an area of focus of 325 & 375 Bleecker Street has been chosen as the portion to be explored in further detail. The existing conditions of the site can be seen in Figure 37 and shown in a dashed box in Figures 31 and 32 from the previous chapter. This site was chosen as its location provides an opportunity as the starting point in revitalizing St. James Town towards an architecture of inclusivity and exploring strategies in accommodating diversity through tower renewal. By allowing for 325 & 375 Bleecker Street to form a hub for the community it takes advantage of its proximity to Sherbourne Street and St. James Town West Park to draw people from outside the neighbourhood into St. James Town's boundaries. Moreover, it would transform Bleecker Street beyond its current role of a pedestrian route towards Sherbourne Station into a vibrant neighbourhood social incubator where both the internal members of the neighbourhood and external members of surrounding neighbourhoods can co-exist within the same space. Thus, this area of focus can become a catalyst for change by reinforcing an architecture of inclusivity that integrates the accommodation of its internal residents that it houses with the needs of the external community as well.
Figure 37: 325 & 375 Bleecker St. Existing On-Site Conditions Diagram showing the two buildings within the area of focus and points of interest that exist on-site.

375 BLEECKER ST. STAIRS TO PARKING CHILDREN'S PLAYGROUND BASKETBALL COURT 325 BLEECKER ST.

PARKING GARAGE RAMP STAIRS TO PARKING

BLE

ECK

ER

STR E

ET

81

Figure 38: Toronto Community Housing Resident Demographics Statistics from TCHC showing the diverse and complex needs of those currently living within the system.

As with all Toronto Community Housing buildings, the residents of 325 and 375 Bleecker come from many different backgrounds with a diversity in age, language, mental and physical ability, religion, ethnicity and race.1 The statistics seen in Figure 38 show a clearer picture into the diversity of residents that reside within TCHC's subsidized housing. In total only 4% of Toronto's citizens live in social housing, but this 4% contains many vulnerable tenants who have specific complex needs.2 Compared to the averages of Toronto, TCHC houses a higher percentage of seniors, single parent families, victims of abuse, terminally ill residents, people with physical/mental disabilities and troubled youth.3 Unfortunately, the current built infrastructure of Toronto's social housing is unable to accommodate for those with more complex housing needs who are becoming a dominant presence in the social fabric of buildings like 325 and 375 Bleecker Street. As the majority of social housing was built during the social housing prime between the 50's and 80's, its design was based on the idea of housing low and moderate income families and seniors who were able to live more independently.4 While this demographic stills exists within the system, it has expanded and evolved. The diversity of residents has grown and therefore the divergence of needs has also increased, making outdated buildings like 325 and 375 Bleecker Street unable to adequately acclimate to this new reality. While current residents maintain the fact that they are happy, they also profess their dissatisfaction with TCHC housing conditions and the amenities provided.5 The aim of this thesis proposal is to address this resident dissatisfaction and to properly identify and articulate users' needs in order to create an architecture of inclusivity within post-war towers. The following design proposal will achieve this by considering the complicated individual needs of this particular subset of Toronto's residents and designing a flexible system that can morph to accommodate for this spectrum of diversity as it is currently and as it may change in the future. By examining the current building as it stands, a better understanding of the site could be gained before embarking on the pursuit of renewing the two high-rises to better accommodate the complex and intricate needs of the diverse residents that inhabit them. Both 325 and 375 Bleecker Street were built in the mid 1970's along with the other high-rise towers that were a part of the renewal of St. James Town. The two buildings within the area of focus are part of a set of four social housing high-rises within the neighbourhood. While 325 and 375 Bleecker Street are part of the block that is north of St. James Avenue, the remaining two social housing apartments (275 Bleecker Street & 200 Wellesley Street) are to the south, as shown in the site plan in Figure 36. 325 and 375 Bleecker Street were designed to be identical to one another, however there remains slight differences between the two. Although both buildings are solely composed of rent geared to

82

income units, the former has 326 total units, while the latter has an extra unit on the ground floor adding up to 327 total units. While both buildings are 24 storeys tall, comparing the differences between Figure 40 and 41, 325 Bleecker Street has a basement and a sub-basement where resident facilities, storage, and parking can be found. As seen in Figure 37, parking access is near the 325 Bleecker portion of the site and extends towards the mid-point of 375 Bleecker Street. Spanning over two levels, the underground parking contains 580 parking spots and is available to both tenants and non-tenants.6 The parking can be accessed from inside the buildings but also have exterior outdoor access indicated in Figure 37. In addition, there are a small gathering of ground level parking spots available for short term visitor parking to the east of 325 Bleecker Street. Recently, the site has been chosen as one of a handful of pilot sites that are to be a part of the Tower Renewal initiative supported by the City of Toronto. Since then, there has been a few small-scale renovations to improve the quality of life within the area. Majority of the renovations focused on the exterior areas of the buildings such as the renovation of the existing amenities including the basketball court and playground on site. While these renovations are a step in the right direction, this thesis proposes a larger-scale proposal that explores the idea of tower renewal to further accommodate diversity and explore how this can be achieved architecturally. 5.2 EXISTING CONDITIONS - 325 & 375 BLEECKER STREET Starting with 325 Bleecker Street, by looking at its existing sections, floorplans and analyzing the units available to tenants, seen in Figure 39-44, one can understand the strengths and weaknesses but more importantly the opportunities that are present within the building as the basis in creating an inclusive urban home that is able to accommodate the personalized needs of those within it. As mentioned before, 325 Bleecker Street is part of a four building stretch of social housing high-rises. However, 325 Bleecker can be seen as the main hub among the four, as there is more area allotted to communal facilities to service residents of all four buildings. Acting as the centre hub of the four social housing high-rises, 325 Bleecker Street has services and amenities that are not found within the other buildings. Unlike the basements of its neighbours, which consist of storage, mechanical, and parking, 325 Bleecker is unique in the fact that there are numerous spaces dedicated as underground recreational rooms. Some of the rooms are specifically outfitted to be television lounges or play rooms while others are left to be multipurpose spaces. In the sub-basement, there is a doubleheight gymnasium and swimming pool that is available to the social housing tenants of St. James Town. However, as these spaces are below ground with limited natural light and dim artificial lighting, residents are often reluctant to use these provided amenities due to safety concerns. These neglected and under-utilized underground amenities can be looked as an opportunity for renewal and as potential spaces that can take on the role of social incubators for the residents within the building but also for those that live beyond the property boundaries. On the ground floor, a handful of recreational rooms are available for tenant usage. As these spaces have access to natural light, these rooms are more popular than the ones below ground and occasionally would host large events by building management such as holiday parties for the residents. More frequently these rooms are occupied by specific community programs, such

83

as workshops and activities that include afternoon tea and meditation by organizations like the Sunshine Centre for Seniors or Crime Stoppers. Also found on the ground floor is a Toronto Community Housing office that helps the residents with not only their day-to-day housing issues, but also with providing employment assistance to the tenants. While these events and services are vital to the internal community within the building of 325 Bleecker Street, there remains a missed opportunity to open up to the wider community. Looking at the building, the amount of space allotted for resident facilities is relatively small compared to the space allotted for residential units. Looking at Figure 39, the ground floor, basement and sub-basement of 325 Bleecker Street are all unique floors with the remaining 23 floors being copies of the same typical floor plan seen in Figure 40. This typical floor plan is shared with 375 Bleecker Street, seen in Figure 41 although there are slight variances between the two ground floors. 375 Bleecker Street does not have below ground floors, meaning that there are less resident facility spaces compared to 325. Furthermore, this means that most of the storage space is located on the ground floor of the building. Within the few recreational rooms that exist within 375 Bleecker Street, events and workshops are provided by organizations such as St. Jamestown Youth Centre, TDSB ESL, and Sunshine Centre for Seniors. As there is no Toronto Community Housing office within 375 Bleecker Street, in its place is an extra two-bedroom unit on the ground floor. Comparing the unit allocation and types between 325 and 375 Bleecker (seen in figure 43 and 44 respectively) it can be observed that there is a lot of overlap. One of the main differences is that the three-bedroom unit on the ground floor within the buildings have slightly different configurations when it comes to where the bedrooms, bathrooms and closets are. Beyond this and the extra twobedroom unit on the ground floor of 375 Bleecker Street, the rest of the unit types and allocations are identical between the two. Thus, henceforth when referring to the residential "typical" floors or units in this thesis, unless specified, it is to be assumed that it is applicable to both buildings. Within each building there are 10 unit variations. However, of these 10 variations there are only 7 that are truly distinct from one another, the remaining three are the same unit but are the ground level equivalent without a balcony. Each unit can be seen in Figure 43, and 44 with its respective type, area, floor, unit number, and unit locations. Generally, the smaller units are closer to the centre of the buildings, and the larger units fill in the corners of the building. These units can range from bachelor units up to three-bedroom units. With the exception of the ground floor units, each unit on the typical residential floor has its own balcony. However, despite the equality when it comes to balconies, the distribution of each unit type is not evenly divided across the building. Rather, the building is composed of 63% one-bedroom units, 30% two bedroom units and 7% three-bedroom units. As there is only one bachelor unit in the building, the percentage of bachelor units is essentially negligible. This skewed breakdown, with a larger number of smaller units and a drastically reduced number of larger units do not align with the current diverse demographics of St. James Town where there is a large concentration of larger non-traditional households and families. Meanwhile, comparing the breakdown of unit sizes with the need being shown through Toronto's social housing waitlists there are some alignments but also some contradictions. According to Housing Connection's latest Quarterly Activity Report (1st Quarter 2016), of the 658 households they could house during that period, only 48 households were for three-bedroom units, 5 households for four-bedroom units, and 1 household for a five-bedroom unit.7 This was not a
84

result of a lack of need but rather a lack of availability for these larger units. Wait times indicate that with approximately 100,000 people on the waitlist for subsidized housing, those who need larger units, such as three or four bedroom units, on average must wait the longest, anywhere from 10-12 years.8 This inability of current high-rises, especially social housing high-rises to be able to accommodate the diversity of needs that exist within Toronto would need to be addressed in this thesis proposal in rethinking the urban home through tower renewal to create a housing model that is more inclusive. In the context of 325 & 375 Bleecker Street, the limited housing diversity that currently exists within the building is not enough to comfortably accommodate those that call the buildings home, making the buildings increasingly obsolete. Despite the slight amount of unit variation that exists within these buildings, there is still not enough housing diversity to accommodate the diverse needs of each unique individual household that live in 325 and 375 Bleecker Street. To achieve an architecture of inclusivity that is more accommodating than conventional urban housing, the new inclusive urban home needs to break away from the rigidity and homogeneity that is present in 325 & 375 Bleecker Street and the many buildings like it, both old and new. The urgency for units that are able to house those whose needs have become de-prioritized overtime, and whose needs fall outside the current unhealthy status quo calls for an architectural response that has its own inherent flexibility to accommodate for the diversity amongst households to cater to both their current and future needs.
Figure 39: 325 Bleecker St. Existing Conditions: Section 1:600 Section showing the existing conditions of the building. 24 above ground levels can be seen with the top 23 floors being a repeated "typical floor" and an atypical ground floor. 325 Bleecker Street also has two below ground levels that hold amenities such as a swimming pool and gymnasium amongst the parking and storage.

TYPICAL FLOOR

units communal facilities parking circulation

GROUND FLOOR BASEMENT SUB-BASEMENT

85

73

Figure 40: 325 Bleecker St. Existing Conditions: Floor Plans 1:600 From top to bottom: typical floor, ground floor, basement, sub-basement.

1

2

1

2

1

7

3

4

5

6

6

2 recreational room 2 garbage room 3 laundry room 5 mechanical 7 washroom 8 mail room 4 general storage 1

11 2 1 9 7 2 78 10 7 1 1

administration 6

women's changeroom 10 1 gymnasium 12 parking 11

men's changeroom 9

swimming pool 13

11 1 1 1 13 1 1 1 12 7 1 7 1 1 1 7 7 1 1 1 bachelor unit one bedroom unit two bedroom unit three bedroom unit resident facilities circulation

86

Figure 41: 375 Bleecker St. Existing Conditions: Floor Plans 1:600 From top to bottom: typical floor, ground floor.

63

1 general storage 3 garbage room 4 mail room 5 laundry room 6 mechanical

2 recreational room

bachelor unit one bedroom unit two bedroom unit three bedroom unit resident facilities circulation

1

2

2

2

2 6 2

3

4

5

1

2

Figure 42: 375 Bleecker St. Existing Condition: Section 1:600 Section showing the existing conditions of the building. 24 above ground levels can be seen with the top 23 floors being a repeated "typical floor" and an atypical ground floor.

TYPICAL FLOOR

units circulation

GROUND FLOOR

87

BACHELOR UNIT 38 M2 GROUND FLOOR 1 UNITS TOTAL

Figure 43: 325 Bleecker St. Existing Unit Types and Distribution 1:300 Information on the existing unit types within the building and their location within it.

ONE BEDROOM UNIT 68 M2 TYPICAL FLOOR 184 UNITS TOTAL

ONE BEDROOM UNIT 72 M2 TYPICAL FLOOR 23 UNITS TOTAL

TWO BEDROOM UNIT 80 M2 GROUND FLOOR 1 UNITS TOTAL

TWO BEDROOM UNIT 88 M2 TYPICAL FLOOR 23 UNITS TOTAL

88

unit allocation kitchen washroom storage bedroom balcony living / dining

TWO BEDROOM UNIT 75 M2 GROUND FLOOR 1 UNITS TOTAL

TWO BEDROOM UNIT 83 M2 TYPICAL FLOOR 46 UNITS TOTAL

TWO BEDROOM UNIT 83 M2 TYPICAL FLOOR 23 UNITS TOTAL

THREE BEDROOM UNIT 96 M2 GROUND FLOOR 1 UNITS TOTAL

THREE BEDROOM UNIT 102 M2 GROUND FLOOR 23 UNITS TOTAL

89

BACHELOR UNIT 38 M2 GROUND FLOOR 1 UNITS TOTAL

Figure 44: 375 Bleecker St. Existing Unit Types and Distribution 1:300 Information on the existing unit types within the building and their location within it.

ONE BEDROOM UNIT 68 M2 TYPICAL FLOOR 184 UNITS TOTAL

ONE BEDROOM UNIT 72 M2 TYPICAL FLOOR 23 UNITS TOTAL

TWO BEDROOM UNIT 80 M2 GROUND FLOOR 2 UNITS TOTAL

TWO BEDROOM UNIT 88 M2 TYPICAL FLOOR 23 UNITS TOTAL

90

unit allocation kitchen washroom storage bedroom balcony living / dining

TWO BEDROOM UNIT 75 M2 GROUND FLOOR 1 UNITS TOTAL

TWO BEDROOM UNIT 83 M2 TYPICAL FLOOR 46 UNITS TOTAL

TWO BEDROOM UNIT 83 M2 TYPICAL FLOOR 23 UNITS TOTAL

THREE BEDROOM UNIT 94 M2 GROUND FLOOR 1 UNITS TOTAL

THREE BEDROOM UNIT 102 M2 GROUND FLOOR 23 UNITS TOTAL

91

5.3 325 & 375 BLEECKER STREET - DESIGN PROPOSAL
Considering the aforementioned design strategies of the plus method, mass customization, incremental change, mixed use, and rapid fabrication technologies, main design interventions were determined (refer to Figure 46). The first intervention is taking the existing building and re-cladding the facade. Re-cladding the existing post-war tower would rejuvenate the envelope and provide an opportunity to propose a cladding system in which residents can manipulate certain elements based on their individual needs and to express their individuality aesthetically. Furthermore, the new facade would act as the base in which the second intervention, addition, would be attached to. Extensions would be added on the east and west facades of the high-rise. This added space would allow for households to expand beyond their existing confines to inhabit a new space that they are able to customize, utilize, and optimize according to their diverse personal needs and/or preferences. The third intervention of incremental change addresses the previous idea but in a temporal manner. By designing the extensions so that they could be added, removed or replaced overtime, this maximizes the accommodation of household needs and/ or preferences even as they evolve. The last design intervention moves away from the residential unit to address the diversity of needs of the residents beyond housing. Ground plane activation looks to add supporting programming and infrastructure that addresses the spectrum of social needs that exists within the building but also within the external community to create an inclusive space. All of these design interventions work together in various aspects to maximize the previously homogeneous building's capacity to accommodate it's residents despite of each household's intricate differences. By designing to embrace difference and diversity rather than suppress it, this thesis proposal aims to create an architecture of inclusivity which would be further explored in the sections to follow.
Figure 45: Massing Conceptual Model Site model depicting the existing building, and how the residents are being accommodated for through new space creation. The multi-coloured collage seen on the facade conceptually represents the user-focused design intervention that acknowledges and embraces user diversity within the context of existing post-war towers. Model built at 1:500 scale.

92

Figure 46: Main Design Interventions Overview of the main design interventions undertaken in this thesis' design proposal.

EXISTING

1. RE-CLADDING

2. ADDITION

3. INCREMENTAL CHANGE

4. GROUND PLANE ACTIVATION

93

DESIGN INTERVENTION I RE-CLADDING
The first design intervention for 325 and 375 Bleecker Street involves a high level of re-cladding the existing buildings. Beyond the outdated aesthetic of the original facade, functionally there was also little reason against an external update. The original cladding system left little control to the residents as they were unable to open windows to gain access to fresh air or have an integrated system allowing them to control the amount of light that penetrated their unit. Thus the main goal of this design intervention is to provide a base cladding system that would allow households an opportunity to manipulate certain aspects of their own homes, such as temperature, air circulation, daylighting and shading, to respond to each household's individual needs and desires. As a response this thesis proposes a multi-layered cladding system in which certain elements have a level of customizability that is able to address user diversity. The inner-most layer of the proposed cladding system is a series of transparent glass panels where the top portion of each panel contains a folding window. Users are then able to open and close their windows and control the degree in which this happens to gain access to fresh air or a cool breeze and bridge the gap between the interior and exterior environment. The outer layer consists of a series of folding wood screens with maneuverable blinds that allow households to control the level of privacy but also the amount of sunlight that is able to penetrate the space. Thus, depending on the season, circumstances, or personal preferences of each household, different atmospheric conditions could be achieved by manipulating various features that are built into the proposed facade to best accommodate the diversity that exists within 325 and 375 Bleecker Street. As seen in Figure 47, this spectrum of variability is also expressed aesthetically as each household has the opportunity to play with their facade to achieve different results functionally, which would in turn affect the building's outward appearance.

94

Figure 47: 325 & 375 Bleecker Street: Re-Cladding General Overview Overview of the area of focus depicting the proposed recladding design.

95

EXISTING FACADE

Figure 48: Proposed Re-cladding System 1:100 Layers of the proposed recladding system shown on a typical residential unit within 325 and 375 Bleecker Street. Diagram depicts the existing unit where the interiors are left unchanged, the removal of the existing facade, and the addition of the two new layers: the window panel with an operable folding window, and an external operable folding wood screen.

EXISTING UNIT

PROPOSED FACADE

PROPOSED SHADING SYSTEM

96

Figure 49: Variability of Proposed Re-cladding System 1:150 Diagram depicting the various elements and phases that can be manipulated by the user to control the amount of fresh air, privacy, and sunlight available to the internal residential unit. The variables of the window panel and the secondary screen can be mix and matched to create the best environment to accommodate the needs of different households.

1. FULLY CLOSED WINDOW PANEL

2. 1/3 OPENED WINDOW PANEL

3. 2/3 OPENED WINDOW PANEL

4. FULLY OPENED WINDOW PANEL

1. FULLY CLOSED WOOD SCREENS

2. 1/3 OPENED WOOD SCREENS

3. 2/3 OPENED WOOD SCREENS

4. FULLY OPENED WOOD SCREENS

97

Figure 50: Existing Typical Partial Floorplan + Elevation 1:100 Partial floorplan and corresponding elevation with the original facade, showing the amount of natural light that is able to penetrate the building, and shadows cast. Time shown is 4:00PM summer solstice.

98

Figure 51: Proposed Typical Partial Floorplan + Elevation 1:100 Partial floorplan and corresponding elevation with the proposed facade, showing the amount of natural light that is able to penetrate the building, and shadows cast. Proposed facade allows for more light to penetrate the space while maintaining a level of control for the household.

99

DESIGN INTERVENTION II ADDITION
The second design intervention for 325 and 375 Bleecker Streets involves a designated addition area on both the eastern and western facades of the existing building. By proposing the design strategy of an addition, this allows a transformation of an increasingly obsolete building without the disruptive and wasteful nature of demolition. The purpose of this additional space is to allow for each and every household to expand beyond their existing rigid confines to inhabit a new flexible space that they are able to customize, utilize, and optimize according to their own diverse personal needs and or/preferences. Thus, each household would then have the opportunity to individualize and change their home environment to better accommodate themselves and to address the housing needs that could not be resolved before with the homogeneous nature of the existing building. This thesis' design proposes a new system with its corresponding physical framework to execute an addition that is able to morph to accommodate its users as needed by the household. A free-standing steel frame is attached onto the re-cladded facades of the existing high-rise. By separating the structure component from the addition component it would allow for the added units to be more adaptable as they can be added or removed as needed by each household individually without massively disrupting neighbouring units. Furthermore, in line with the goal of this design intention, the units that would make up the addition would embrace and take advantage of the benefits that certain rapid prototyping technologies such as 3D printing and automation can provide when it comes to mass customization and architectural personalization. As a result these design interventions provide the basis for a comprehensive system that is more user-focused in regards to respecting and accomodating the diversity of differences between each distinct household to create a more inclusive residential environment overall.

100

Figure 52: 325 & 375 Bleecker Street: Addition General Overview Overview of the area of focus depicting the proposed addition.

101

OPEN HALF SIZE MODULE

Figure 53: Proposed Addition System 1:250 Layers of the proposed addition system shown on a typical residential section of 325 and 375 Bleecker Street. Diagram depicts the existing building where the interiors are left unchanged, the re-cladded exterior facade, the attached structural steel frame, and the full or half addition modules (image depicted at maximum capacity) that are to be slotted into the external structure.

ENCLOSED HALF SIZE MODULE

3M 3M

EXISTING BUILDING WITH RE-CLADDED FACADE

3M 3M

STEEL FRAME STRUCTURE

ADDITION MODULES

OPEN FULL SIZE MODULE

ENCLOSED FULL SIZE MODULE

102

Figure 54: Addition Sunlight Study Wall Section: 1:200 Axonometric: 1:100 Series of axonometrics and wall sections comparing the existing form with various extension lengths to examine the functionality of the additional space in comparison to the amount of light that is able to penetrate the existing unit and neighbouring units.

SUMMER SUN

WINTER SUN

1.5M

EXISTING BUILDING 1.5M EXTENSION Original buildings already had a 1.5M extension consisting of external balconies that extend beyond the exterior face of the residential unit.

winter daylighting summer daylighting background daylighting chosen condition

2M 3M 2M

PROPOSED BUILDING 2M EXTENSION Removal of existing balconies and allowing for a 2M extension would minimally increase usable space with options to the space to be kept open or enclose. Due to the limited space, full functionality of addition module is restricted.

3M 3M 3M

PROPOSED BUILDING 3M EXTENSION Integrating a 3M extension would moderately increase usable space while maintaining daylight within units. Volume of this extension allows for efficient but versatile functions. (Refer to appendix for more examples of possible internal functions).

4M 3M 4M

PROPOSED BUILDING 4M EXTENSION Integrating a 4M extension would drastically increase usable space to maximize functional versatility, however this would be achieved at the expense of eliminating sufficient daylighting within surrounding units.

103

PARTIAL TRANSPARENT VOLUME A half solid and half transparent volume allows for light to penetrate through the unit and into the unit below. However, structural glass floors are expensive and would provide a limited sense of privacy for the household.

COVERED GLASS VOLUME Fully transparent volume with a semi-covered layer utilizes 3D printed technology to create a patter that allows light to filter through the unit to the one below while maintaining a level of privacy. However the, structural glass floors remain prohibitively expensive. STAGGERED VOLUME By staggering the volumes to be slightly above floor level, light is able to penetrate into the unit below. However as the addition modules are staggered, there would need to be steps within the existing unit, thereby making the addition inconvenient to access and thereby noninclusive. SUBTRACTED VOLUME Following the sun angles, a portion of the volume is subtracted to still allow light into the unit below. However, as that portion is no longer flat, creative interior form-making with 3D-printing is required to maximize functionality of space.

104

< Figure 55: Addition Sunlight Study II Wall Section: 1:200 Axonometric: 1:100 Series of axonometrics and wall sections comparing the various strategies and resulting forms that can be utilized to ensure that there is the same or higher levels of daylight within the intended unit but also the units above and below under different conditions.

winter daylighting summer daylighting background daylighting chosen condition

As illustrated in Figure 53 there are three main components within this design strategy. There is the recladded existing building that works in conjunction with the addition system, where a structural steel frame is attached. The dimensions of the steel frame (3M) is based on the existing grid of 325 and 375 Bleecker street. However it is also applicable to many similarly built post-war high-rises due to common construction methods and dimensions of underground parking spots, shear walls were often spaced at 6M or 9M, both of which are divisible by the frame's 3M. The last component are the customizable modules that are to be slotted into the structural frame allowing for households to expand their living quarters based on their own individual needs. Figure 54 and 55 explores the depth and form of the modules in relation to the main concern when it comes to extending the volume of an existing building- the access to daylight for the expanded unit and neighbouring units. The goal of the explorations in Figure 54 were to determine the depth that would allow households to utilize the increase in space in a functional and versatile manner while maintaining an efficient size to minimize shadows on surrounding units. Using this determined depth of 3M, Figure 55 looks into different strategies to manipulate the form to ensure that the level of daylight within the existing building is maintained. While all strategies are feasible depending on the context and budgets of their respective projects, for 325 and 375 Bleecker Street the subtracted form is the most ideal as it does not require overly expensive materials, and allows the addition to maintain inclusivity and accessibility to all households. The subtracted form would require creative usage of 3D-printing to maximize the functionality of the slanted portion to create spaces and/or functions that the existing units could not. FULL SIZE | ENCLOSED | EXTERIOR FULL SIZE | ENCLOSED | INTERIOR

Figure 56: Full Size Modules Customizability Options Series of axonometrics depicting the full sized addition modules, both the open and enclosed versions, then outlining the options for customizability that are available to the households to accommodate their diverse housing needs and/or preferences.

1 4 3 2 6 5

FULL SIZE | OPEN

CUSTOMIZABILITY LEGEND
1. colour + texture + materiality of 3D printed panels

1 3 6 7 5

2. amount + positioning of side windows 4 3. pattern + positioning of 3D printed shading 4. positioning + coverage of cladding system 5. space usage + layout of allotted space 6. function of slanted floor area 7. transparent railing or 3D printed wall panels

105

HALF SIZE | ENCLOSED

HALF SIZE | OPEN

1 6 5 2 3,4 2

Figure 57: Full Size Modules Customizability Options Series of axonometrics depicting the half sized addition modules, both the open and enclosed versions, then outlining the options for customizability that are available to the households to accommodate their diverse housing needs and/or preferences.

CUSTOMIZABILITY LEGEND
1. colour + texture + materiality of 3D printed panels 2. space usage + layout of allotted space 3. amount + positioning of side windows 4. pattern + positioning of 3D printed shading 5. transparent railing or 3D printed panels 6. positioning + coverage of cladding system

One of the main goals of the addition design strategy is to accommodate user diversity within housing. Thus the proposed addition modules must have flexible variables that can be manipulated by households to choose and customize their additions to best suit their individual housing needs and/or preferences. Illustrated in figure 56 and 57, are the customizability options that would be available to tenants whether it is a full or half sized module, and if they need an enclosed or open module. Beyond having an increased amount of space for each household to use as they wish, these options would also allow for households to shape the modules' form (externally and internally) and appearance through controls over the colour, texture and materiality that is provided with 3D-printing technology. Users also have the ability to customize certain features like the amount and positioning of side windows and 3D-printed shading patterns to manage the levels of privacy, sunlight, and shadow within the volume. Thus households have the option to compose the atmosphere within addition modules. By playing around with the available customizability alternatives, each household would then have equal opportunity to create a personal addition that is created through an inclusive design process that is accommodating and considerate of their diverse housing needs. Despite the limitless freedom that can be provided through such a process, there needs to be certain restraints to insure that additions do not impede on their neighbours' right to natural light and privacy. Thus, each design proposal should have a maximum module allocation. In the proposed maximum module allocations seen in the floorplans illustrated in Figure 58 and axonometric in Figure 59, each household would have the ability to have both full sized modules and half sized modules added to their homes. However, the location of each type of module is alternated between each floor so that if one household was to add a full sized addition to their unit, the surrounding units would still have access to the same levels of daylighting as they would have before. Furthermore, to ensure that the extended residential unit also has access to natural light, the re-cladded system would remain and users can manipulate the wood screens to not only control the amount of privacy but also the amount of sunlight that is able to enter into the existing portion of the residential unit. It is important to note that the maximum is the most dense circumstance, but as it is dependent on user needs there is a possibility that this state would never be reached.

106

Figure 58: Proposed Maximum Module Allocations: Typical Floor Variant I & II 1:600 Floorplans depicting the areas in which either full or half addition modules can be slotted into the structural frame and attached to the existing building. The addition module areas shown in the diagram would be the maximum allowance for module addition. Typical floor plan variant I and variant II would be interchanged every floor to ensure an alternation of full and half module additions.

Typical Floor Variant I | Levels 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14,16, 18, 20, 22, 24

existing residential units area for full/half modules area for half modules only

Typical Floor Variant II | Levels 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19, 21, 23

Figure 59: Axonometric: Maximum Module Allocations Axonometric illustrating the proposed maximum module allocations in terms of a whole facade. It can be seen that certain areas (where the bedrooms are) contain whole columns of half modules and other areas (where living spaces are) alternate between full and half sized modules both vertically and horizontally. In total, there would be a maximum of 322 full modules, and 736 half modules that can be added, totaling 4278m2 and adding 28% more living space that is able to accommodate diverse inhabitants. Keep in mind, this number and the image seen in this figure is depicting the maximum allocation, and thus there is a possibility that this state would never be reached.

existing residential units area for full/ half modules area for half modules only

107

Figure 60: User Customizability: Module Examples A matrix depicting examples of the various iterations of the user customizable additional module system proposed. This diagram is not absolute, and the series of ellipsis throughout the illustration symbolizes the endless possibilities within each variable. These open ended variables can be manipulated, mix and matched to maximize the module's potential to best accommodate their respective users. SIZE: There are two sizes to choose from depending on the unit's allocations: full or half size module. ENCLOSED/OPEN: Households can choose if they need an enclosed (indoor) module or an open (outdoor) module. SIDE WINDOWS: While front and roof windows are a permanent fixture to ensure adequate lighting, users can choose the positioning and amount of extra openings on both sides of the module. 3D PRINTED SHADING: Users can choose the look, location, and extent of 3D printed shading patterning. Users can choose from an existing library of patterns or create their own according to their desired atmosphere, privacy, and aesthetic. 3D PRINTED FACADE: Users can choose the 3D printed finish on their module's facade. Finishes can range from smooth, lightly textured, to complex parametric patterns to control the aesthetic and tactile experience of their new space. 3D PRINTED MATERIALITY: Current 3D printing materials generally consist of a cement-based mixture or plastic-based mixture for users to choose from. As 3D printing technology advances more materials can be made available for use. MODULE COLOUR: Users can choose the colour and the amount of pigment in their 3D printed module. SPACE USAGE: With the additional space, users can choose to utilize and optimize the space to best suit their needs. Users can also choose different 3D printed functions for the slanted portion of the modules to maximize functionality. Examples to choose from are reading nook, bed platform, desk, storage/ sitting steps, child play-station, garden planter, stairs to connect units vertically, or any other suitable function.

SIZE

ENCLOSED / OPEN

...

3D PRINTED SHADING

...

...

108

SIDE WINDOWS

3D PRINTED FACADE

3D PRINTED MATERIALITY

...

MODULE COLOUR

...

SPACE USAGE

...

109

Figure 61: User Customizability: Household Addition Examples 1:200 Different household examples that are commonly found in both apartment neighbourhoods and TCHC housing. Within each household, example addition scenarios are explored based on the general needs of that demographic.. These scenarios are not absolute, but are meant to see the different addition iterations (based on the module variable of the previous figure) that different individual households may have based on their own unique set of needs and circumstances.

THE GARDENING SENIORS

half sized module enclosed no side windows no shading pattern facade pattern no. 4 plastic material colour no. 4 + full sized module open 1/2 full height wall 1/2 3D printed screen shading pattern no. 1 facade pattern no. 4 plastic material colour no. 1 planter sloped space usage

THE AT-HOME ENTREPRENEUR

full sized module enclosed 1/3 side windows shading pattern no. 7 facade pattern no. 1 concrete material colour no. 3 desk sloped space usage

110

THE GROWING FAMILY

full sized module enclosed no side windows shading pattern no. 2 & 6 facade pattern no. 2 concrete material colour no. 6 sitting steps sloped space usage + half sized module open no full height walls no shading pattern concrete material colour no. 5

THE SINGLE PARENT

full sized module enclosed full side windows shading pattern no. 3 facade pattern no. 7 3D printed rock climbing wall plastic material colour no. 1 play station sloped space usage

111

Figure 62: Partial Building Model Top photo shows a model of the design at its base state with no modules. Photo below shows how the building may look as modules are added onto the building overtime. Model is built to 1:200 scale.

112

Figure 63: 3D Printed Modules Examples Depicted in the photos are the 3D-printed prototypes of the modules that were explored by each household in Figure 61. Models were printed at 1:50 scale.

113

Figure 64: Joining Units Through Addition Modules 1:200 Wall Section:1:100 Exploration of larger household examples that are possible by using the addition modules to join units together either vertically or horizontally. Joining units together would allow for either a multigenerational unit or for separate families to set-up a co-housing arrangement while maintaining control over private / shared spaces

THE SHARED LIVING SINGLE PARENTS
+

full sized module enclosed no side windows shading pattern no. 5 facade pattern no. 6 plastic material colour no. 2 stair space usage + half sized module enclosed no side windows no shading pattern facade pattern no. 6 plastic material colour no. 2 stair space usage

To ensure that light is still able to filter through into the building, it is necessary that the stairs be 3D-printed with openings (similar to the shading patterns seen in Figure 58) while maintaining structural integrity.

114

THE MULTI-GENERATIONAL FAMILY
+ full sized module enclosed no side windows no shading pattern facade pattern no. 5 concrete material colour no. 5 seating platform space usage + full sized module enclosed no side windows no shading pattern facade pattern no. 5 concrete material colour no. 5 seating platform space usage

A horizontal connection between units allows for the home to remain accessible for users who have difficulty using stairs. This joined space can host a multitude of functions and act as the main social space for the household.

115

Figure 65: Example Typical Floor Plan 1:200 Floorplan depicts how the floor may look once individual households add modules based on their housing needs and/or preferences. Floorplan shows the households explored in previous figures and include additions of different sizes, space usage, shading, etc. Also seen in the floorplan are units that are joined together (horizontally and vertically), units which have not been expanded, expansions of lower floors and an accessible unit.

THE GROWING FAMILY
UNEXPANDED UNIT + 1 BEDROOM + 1 BALCONY

THE MULTI-GENERATIONAL FAMILY
+ + 2 CONNECTING MODULES [DINING]

THE SHARED LIVING SINGLE PARENTS
+ + 1 STAIR + 1 LANDING

116

THE GARDENING SENIORS
MODULE BELOW + 1 PATIO + 1 SUN ROOM

THE WHEELCHAIR USER

THE AT-HOME ENTREPRENEUR

THE SINGLE PARENT

+ 1 ACCESSIBLE READING NOOK

+ 1 OFFICE

+ 1 PLAY ROOM

117

Figure 66: Sectional Perspective: Typical Residential Floors Image depicting a section taken through typical residential floors of this proposal. Seen in the image are examples of how different modules would be slotted into the steel frame and attached to the existing building. Furthermore, how the modules may to be used differently by various households is demonstrated

118

119

120

Figure 67: Exterior Perspective I Perspective depicting how the building would look with the re-cladding and addition system in place.

121

DESIGN INTERVENTION III INCREMENTAL CHANGE
The third design intervention for 325 and 375 Bleecker Street is a fabrication and construction system allowing for incremental change. By designing for incremental change, the renewed buildings are able to accommodate households' current housing needs but also future ones. Changing circumstances within a household is inevitable and an adaptable design system is necessary to avoid forcing households to tolerate rigid living situations that are no longer best suited for their needs, but rather provide a home that is able to change alongside its user. Thus, each household would have the opportunity to `plug in, plug out' (add, remove, or replace) the addition modules from the previous section as necessary overtime. This long-term temporal approach to accommodating user diversity would maximize the buildings' capacity to meet the residential demands of its context, even as demographics change, and allow urban housing to delay obsolescence while maintaining an architecture of inclusivity. This thesis proposes a mobile installation centre that works in conjunction with a fabrication warehouse located off-site, both utilizing rapid fabrication technologies to create the user customized addition modules or to install, remove or replace them as necessary. The intent is to have one fabrication warehouse and mobile installation centre service multiple post-war towers. Once at the assigned location, the mobile installation centre would then be connected onto the corresponding rooftop davit system and mechanically lifted to the designated residential unit to do its appointed work. This traveling installation system would be highly automated with systems that can transport, install or remove modules as needed to allow for incremental change and accommodation of diversity in an efficient manner with minimal human effort. With this proposed mobile fabrication centre users can adjust and personalize their homes according to their changing social needs without needing to move and thus maximizes the potential of 325 and 375 Bleecker Street to address user diversity and allow for longterm stable communities to form overtime.
122

Figure 68: 325 & 375 Bleecker Street: Incremental Change General Overview Overview of the area of focus depicting the proposed mobile installation centre allowing for the addition modules to be incrementally changed.

123

PERMANENT DAVIT BASE

PORTABLE DAVIT ARM

Figure 69: Components of Proposed Incremental Change System 1:250 Diagram depicting the processes and components that are involved with the incremental change system. The transport truck is necessary to bring the mobile installation centre and necessary modules to the required site(s). It is responsible for lining up the installation centre with the portable davit arms that are installed on the roof prior to installation. These arms are mounted onto the correct davit base so that the pulleys can be connected to the mobile installation centre which is then hoisted up to add/change/remove the module at the designated location. Permanent davit bases that are installed with the free-standing frame and are required to ensure that the mobile installation centre and the portable davit arms have access to the whole span of the building.

MODULES TO BE INSTALLED

EXISTING BUILDING WITH RE-CLADDED FACADE + STRUCTURAL FRAME

ADDITION MODULE MOBILE INSTALLATION CENTRE

MOBILE INSTALLATION CENTRE TRANSPORT

124

Figure 70: Mobile Installation Centre Floorplan1:75 Floorplan of the mobile installation centre and the components that all work together to install modules onto the structural frame.

2

1

4

3

2 7 7

Figure 71: Mobile Installation Centre Section1:75 Section of the mobile installation centre and the components that all work together to install modules onto the structural frame.

5

6

2

1

3

1. Module Loading Door Access door used to load modules into the mobile installation centre either on-site or off-site at the module fabrication warehouse. 2. Module Installation Door Doors that retract once at the designated residential unit so that modules can be slotted into the structural frame. 3. Addition Module Loading Area Area where completed modules are to be held until mobile fabrication centre is in the correct spot to install the addition module. The floor and roof are mechanical moving platforms to slot the modules into the free-standing structural frame that is attached to the existing building. 4. Supplementary Module Holding Area Free space that can be used to hold an extra module or materials that need to be brought on site. 5. X-Axis Delivery System holding or loading area. A lift system to help transfer the pre-assembled addition module to the

6. Y-Axis Delivery System A lift system that is attached to a moving platform to slot the addition modules into it's designated space when the bottom moving platform cannot be used due to obstruction. 7. Davit System Mount Mount attached to the mobile installation centre that connects to the portable davit system located on the roof to allow for the centre to be hoisted up to its designated working area.

125

Figure 72: Addition Module Installation Process Overview of the steps involved in the process of adding a module onto the existing building using an on-site mobile installation centre that is to be used in conjunction with a off-site module fabrication warehouse 1. Permanent davit bases are pre-installed on all sites that implement this proposed system. Davit arms can be disassembled and assembled by workers as required so that they can be moved from site to site as required. 2. Transport truck holding the mobile installation centre and the additional modules that are to be installed that day is driven to the designated site and aligns under the unit that needs to be worked on. 3. Pulleys from the davit arms are lowered and connected to the connection site located on top of the mobile installation centre. Once the connection is secured the mobile installation centre can be hoisted up to it's designated work space. 4. Once at the designated spot aligned with the correct residential unit, the pre-assembled addition module needs to be moved by the x-axis delivery system to the module loading area. The module can be moved prior to arrival on site to be held at the loading area so that another module can be held in the supplementary holding space. 5a.Once ready, a portion of the mobile fabrication centre would open up to reveal the area that the module is to be installed. If the module is to be attached roofside, then the mechanical moving platform on the mobile installation centre's floor would slot the addition module into place within the structural frame. 5a.If the module is to be attached floorside, then the mechanical moving platform on the mobile fabrication centre's roof would lift and then slot the addition module into place within the structural frame. 6.Once the module is aligned to its correct spot, workers from the interior of the space can bolt and secure the module onto the free-standing structural frame. 7.Platforms are retracted back into the mobile installation centre which will then close up, to be hoisted back onto ground floor. 8.Pulleys are detached from the mobile installation centre and portable davit arms are disassembled 9. Once the mobile installation centre is secured onto the transport truck, it can be driven to the next designated site.

1. PORTABLE DAVIT ARM INSTALLED ONTO ROOF DAVIT BASES

2. MOBILE INSTALLATION CENTRE (MIC) IS TRANSPORTED ONTO DESIGNATED SITE

5b. TOP LIFTING & MOVING PLATFORM SLOTS ADD. MODULE INTO PLACE

6. ADDITION MODULE IS SECURED ONTO STRUCTURAL FRAME FROM INTERIOR

126

3. PULLEYS CONNECTED TO MOBILE INSTALLATION CENTRE TO HOIST UP

4. MIC ALIGNED WITH CORRECT UNIT + ADD. MODULE MOVED TO LOADING AREA

5a. BOTTOM MOVING PLATFORM SLOTS ADD. MODULE INTO PLACE

7. MOVING PLATFORM IS RETRACTED AND MIC IS LOWERED TO GROUND

8. PORTABLE DAVIT ARMS ARE DISASSEMBLED FROM DAVIT BASES

9. MIC IS TRANSPORTED TO NEXT DESIGNATED LOCATION

127

Figure 73: Incremental Change Overtime: Example Household Diagram depicting a household that has gone through different changes overtime and how the residential unit can be adapted through incremental change (addition, replacement, removal) to correspond with the changes of housing needs.

TIME

BACHELOR

MARRIED

+
EXISTING ONE-BED UNIT ADDITION + OFFICE

128

PARENTS

EMPTY NESTERS

+
REPLACEMENT - OFFICE + BEDROOM

_

REMOVAL - BEDROOM

129

130

Figure 74: Exterior Perspective II Perspective depicting the mobile installation system in the process of slotting in an addition module into the structural frame.

131

DESIGN INTERVENTION IV GROUND PLANE ACTIVATION
The last design intervention for 325 and 375 Bleecker Street is to provide ground plane activation. While the previous section of this thesis focuses on addressing the accommodation of diversity through housing, this sections starts to look at how this can be expanded beyond housing, through social activities and amenities. By designing for an activated ground plane, it provides a space not only for the residents of 325 and 375 Bleecker Street to interact with one another, but also for the general public as well without intruding on the private lives of the residents. The main goal of ground plane activation is to enrich the lives of the building's residents and general public in this apartment neighbourhood in which the public realm is often neglected. Furthermore, this would have to be achieved in conjunction with the design interventions of the previous chapters most notably, the free-standing structural frame and access for the mobile installation centre transport. This thesis proposes to create shared pedestrian walkways with controlled vehicular access when needed. As the mobile installation centre would be on-site infrequently and for short periods of time, this walkway would mainly be pedestrian thoroughfares through the site. These paths are then used to define different areas on site, and delineate spaces that are public, semi-public or private. Two buildings, a community hub and retail units would be added along Bleecker Street to create a strong street frontage and draw people onto the site. Furthermore, a variety of outdoor activities have been provided. Activities range from peaceful meditative areas- to social group interaction areas. The intent was to provide a range of activities to suit the differing preferences of users so that every person has an opportunity to engage with an outdoor space that suits their needs. All these actions work to reinvigorate the ground plane to maximize the sites potential to cater to different commercial, professional and/or social needs that the diverse population of 325 & 375 Bleecker Street have and to work to create a cohesive, inclusive and userfocused community.

132

Figure 75: 325 & 375 Bleecker Street: Ground Plane Activation General Overview Overview of the area of focus depicting the proposed mobile factory allowing for the addition modules to be incrementally changed.

133

Figure 76: Site Plan 1:1500 Site plan of the proposed area of focus showing how the ground plane would be activated with new circulation paths that create defined areas for activities and amenities that are public, semi- public and private 1. EXISTING BUILDING: Existing ground floor of 325 & 375 Bleecker Street. Ground floor consists of a handful of residential units but is mostly made up of resident amenity space, and TCHC offices. 2. COMMUNITY HUB: The proposed community hub aims to draw people into the neighbourhood from St. James West Park. The community hub is an incubator for the building's residents who often engage with informal home businesses such as smallscale catering, hair-cutting and beauty services. By providing them with a space with a community kitchen, residents can grow their businesses and share their unique skills with the community, to address their needs outside of the home. 3. RETAIL: The retail space aims to draw people into the neighbourhood from St. James West Park. 4. SHARED PEDESTRIAN PROMENADE: The shared pedestrian promenade has a dual purpose. It is the access for the mobile installation centre transport and acts as a safe pedestrian walkway through the site. Vehicular access would be managed and infrequent, thus pedestrian promenade mainly caters to pedestrians. The promenade curs through the site to define different activity spaces. The promenade closer to Bleecker Street would me more widely used by the public, while the one that is tucked away would be more widely used by the local residents. 5. PUBLIC SEATING: Public seating that is adjacent to the proposed community hub and retail. As these areas are along Bleecker Street, they are available for everyone to use and provide an opportunity for those to linger on the site to activate the ground plane. 6.SEMI-PUBLIC ACTIVITY SQUARE: This central activity square is slightly set back from Bleecker Street making is semi-public. This square host the site's more social activities. In this area are a variety of functions that encourage interaction between others and act as the site's social incubator. Activities in the square include ping-pong tables, child's playground, group seating, chess tables, giant chess and a basketball court. 7.PRIVATE QUIET MEDITATIVE SPACE: Quiet activity area for the residents of 325 and 375 who prefer a more peaceful green space. The tucked away space has a large green space that is open to activities such as yoga or meditation and has water feature, 3D printed sculptures and benches. 8.PRIVATE BBQ AREA: Barbecue area designated for use by the residents of 325 and 375 Bleecker Street. In this area there are barbecues, picnic tables, and a fire pit so that the space can be used year round and host functions from small to large, formal or informal. 9.COLLECTIVE GARDEN: Plot of land designated for the residents of 325 and 375 Bleecker Street to be gardened collectively. The garden is tended to communally with the harvest shared amongst participants to keep, give, or sell as desired. 10.GARBAGE AREA: Garbage areas are still in the same general area as the original plan and is still easily accessible from the building's garbage room.

10

7

4

1

5

2

2

3

3

3

3

5

ST. JAMES WEST PARK

8 9

ST. JAMES AVENUE

10 6 4

5 1

4

BLEECKER STREET

EARL STREET

SHERBOURNE STREET

Depicted in Figure 77 is a portion of the pedestrian promenade that is between 375 Bleecker Street and the proposed retail and community hub. As seen in Figure 76, the pedestrian route eventually connects back alongside the public realm of Bleecker Street's sidewalk. This intentional weaving of the passage attempts to passively encourage pedestrians to follow the path to wander into the site and vice versa- to encourage residents of 375 and 325 Bleecker Street to forgo their usual shortcuts and walk along the public realm to activate the ground plane. Furthermore, the shared pedestrian promenade acts as a buffer between the community hub and retail from the apartment tower. This was a necessary step to ensure that the addition of new programming onto the site could be achieved without interfering with the amount of light that the ground floor of the apartment building would receive. The pedestrian pathways also work to define different areas on site- the privately owned public spaces like street facing seating, the more semipublic locations such as the playground court, and the private areas reserved for the residents of 325 and 375 Bleecker Street located deeper within the site. It also provides a designated area for the community hub and retail to open outwards during the summer months without sacrificing a strong continuous street frontage. The architectural language of the proposed community hub and retail (can be seen in Figure 77 and 79) was chosen to contrast against the aesthetic expression of the design interventions implemented on the post-war towers. The uniform look of the secondary buildings helps to separate them from the continually changing mosaic of the high-rises. This would help people unfamiliar with the site to easily determine that the community hub and retail is not part of the residences and perhaps pique their interests to engage with the spaces. As seen in Figure 78, the modules from the proposed system would still be used inside of the community hub to work as booths or stalls for the resident vendors. This provides an opportunity to upcycle the modules that have been circulated out of the system. Further alternatives on how the modules and panels can be re-used on site can be seen in the following perspectives and in Figure 80.

136

Figure 77: Pedestrian Promenade Perspective Perspective depicting the shared pedestrian walkway in front of proposed addition to the existing building.

137

Figure 78: Community Hub Perspective Perspective depicting the interior of the community hub and how the space acts as a social incubator for the community.

138

139

Figure 79: Street Frontage Perspective Perspective depicting the street frontage of Bleecker Street and access into the shared pedestrian walkways.

140

141

142

Figure 80: Outdoor Amenities Perspective Perspective depicting the pedestrian walkways behind the building and the outdoor amenities that are provided for residents.

143

144

Figure 81: Meditative Green Space Perspective Perspective depicting the pedestrian walkways behind the building and the meditative green space that is provided for residents.

145

Figure 80: Proposed Module System: Additional On-Site Uses Vignettes taken from perspectives showing how the usage of the modules and printed panels can be utilized beyond the module housing system. This provides an opportunity to upcycle unneeded modules for various on-site purposes and contribute to activating the ground plane.

COMMUNITY HUB STALLS / BOOTHS

COMMUNITY GARDEN DIVIDERS / SCREENS

146

OUTDOOR AMENITIES SEATING

MEDITATIVE GREEN SPACE PAVILLION

147

5.4 CONCLUSION: THE USER-FOCUSED CITY
This thesis has been an exploration of an inclusive city, a diverse city, an accommodating city, and ultimately a userfocused city. In Toronto, being one in a few million people can make a person feel small, forgotten, or unimportant, especially when it comes to housing. As the increasingly inaccessible and rigid nature of contemporary housing becomes more economically driven and less user-focused, these feelings of de-personalization are reinforced. Thus, this thesis' aim is to act as a statement for the one among the millions and to shift the emphasis away from the economic prioritized city towards a social user-focused city. It attempts to bring a little control and more choice to residents by allowing them to create a home that can cater to their diverse needs or preferences, even as they eventually change. While this thesis focuses on a small site as an initial exploration, the end goal is to create a system in which an architecture of inclusivity and the accommodation of diversity can happen on a larger scale throughout the city. The design interventions explored in this proposal (re-cladding, addition, incremental change, and ground plane activation) are meant to be replicable on other post-war slab towers scattered throughout Toronto to address inclusivity within the existing urban fabric. However, this does not mean that the design proposed in 325 and 375 Bleecker Street can simply be applied without consideration of specific context or circumstance. For example, regarding the design intervention of re-cladding, it is more important to create a flexible façade system that allows users to manipulate it to suit their needs than to replicate the aesthetic proposed in this thesis. Once this design intervention is carried out to a different post-war tower, depending on the site and neighbourhood, the re-cladding can take on a different aesthetic expression and character to prevent the system from becoming monotonous. Nuances to the proposed system are a potential future area of research and focus. For example, additional explorations into different post-war tower sites could open the possibility of expanding on the limitations in this present thesis such as creating a larger spectrum of module forms or neighbourhood specific amenities that are able to integrate with underground floors. The embrace of rapid fabrication technology over prefabrication within this proposal was to encourage an exploration on how these contemporary and progressive systems can provide an efficient but flexible approach to designing for user diversity. As advancements in 3D printing, automation and construction are made, these technologies could become more feasible and effective overtime, especially when it is used on multiple sites throughout the city. This may also mean that the way the modules would be installed could be further developed; the mobile installation centre could take on a different role as residents become more adept with these technologies and could independently design, fabricate, and install the modules themselves. Another aspect that could be approached differently is to be more in touch with actual residents through interviews to gain a better understanding of their wants and needs to integrate them to the proposal. This thesis and prospective future design inquiries that have developed from this work, adds to the pursuit and discourse on an architecture of inclusivity and how post-war towers can be re-utilized to accommodate Toronto's hyper-diverse residents. Every person should feel like they are an individual amongst the collective. It should not be the status quo to force people to settle for homes (and cities) that are unable to adapt to their individual needs, preferences or wants, all of which ultimately minimize the role of difference and diversity that exist with city residents. Instead, architecture that embraces and encourages user difference and diversity should become the new status quo. Thus, architects, as they design the built context, should be actively engaged in the pursuit of an accommodating and inclusive architecture that puts the users first and focuses on the importance of social sustainability. Despite its utopian hopes and extensive interventions, this thesis is a small stone in regards to this idealistic pursuit. In the end, this thesis hopes to create conversations on the worth of user-diversity. A conversation where even when it is one person amongst millions, that person is still important as they have a role to play in this new user-focused city.

148

Figure 83: The Inclusive, Accommodating and User-Focused City Perspective depicting the city as more post-war towers implement the system proposed in pursuit of an inclusive and accommodating city.

149

ENDNOTES
1

Toronto Community Housing, 2016 Annual Review, 2016, 2. <https://www.torontohousing.ca/about/annual-reports/Documents/AnnualReview2016_June16.pdf>. 2 City of Toronto, Transformative Change for TCHC, 2016, 13. <https://www1.toronto.ca/City%20Of%20Toronto/Strategic%20Communications/Mayor's%20Task%20Force%20on%20 Toronto%20Community%20Housing/Article/Task%20Force%20FINAL.pdf>. 3 Toronto Community Housing, 2. 4 Greg Suttor, Still Renovating: A History of Canadian Social Housing Policy, (Montreal: McGill-Queen's Press, 2016) 5. 5 Transformative Change for TCHC, 13. 6 Toronto Housing, Development Details, 2017. <https://www.torontohousing.ca/about/our-housing/Pages/Development-details.aspx?uid=66#>. 7 Housing Connections, Quarterly Activity Report 1st Quarter 2016, 2016, 2. <https://www.housingconnections.ca/PDF/QuarterlyReports/2016/Quarterly%20Activity%20Report%20-%20Q1%202016.pdf>. 8 Ibid.

150

151

07

APPENDICES & REFERENCES

153

APPENDIX A SUPPLEMENTARY CASE STUDIES
KITAGATA APARTMENT BUILDING
WHAT IS IT? Kitagata apartment building is part of a large scale public housing reconstruction project in Gifu City. SUCCESSES: 1. The use of the room unit as a modular building block allowed for minimizing construction waste at the design level. Room blocks are configured spatially so that the building does not appear monotonous. 2. The surrounding building are done by different architects, giving each building its own distinct style while still complimenting one another. This is important in public housing blocks as it stays away from the "institutional feel" of past social housing projects. FAILURES: 1. The three buildings that make up the complex are segregated from the community and is essentially creating an isolated gated community. 2. This new block acts as an introverted neighborhood, with public spaces that are only for the use of its inhabitants.

The Gifu City public housing block consists of four separate buildings done by different architects as seen in the site plan starting from the bottom left and going clockwise: Hawley Architects, Akiko Takahashi, diller scofidio + renfro, and SANAA.1 The buildings comes together to form an enclosed neighbourhood of solely low-income residents with the central courtyard only accessible to the inhabitants. This introverted approach to public housing has been criticized, as it ostracizes and further segregates the public housing residents to the broader community surrounding it.2

^ Japan Photo Archives, 1998, <http://www.japan-photo.de/egifu-kitagata-apartments.htm>.

Gifu City : Public Housing Block Site Plan Site Plan showing how the four buildings are arranged around a large courtyard. Netta Gaash, 2007, < http:// gifuprefecture.blogspot.ca/>.

154

In the Kitagata apartment building, SANAA used a 2.5M x 2.3M module that was based off human dimensions, to create different configurations of homes to match Japanese housing needs.3 By combining and adding these units in different arrangements, they made various unit forms which includes residences with double height spaces.4 As a high level of variation is achieved through using this module ideology, there is a larger possibility to accommodate for different lifestyles and diverse needs. As each module is the same size and height, the units can be arranged to create a socially mixed building containing households of all types and sizes. Furthermore the module method allows for a certain level of anonymity. Despite the different units being scattered throughout the building, the external appearance acts to de-emphasize the individual identity of each unit allowing for "tenure blindness."5
Unit Arrangement Diagram Diagram depicting how the modules come together and are arranged within the building. Netta Gaash, 2007, < http:// gifuprefecture.blogspot.ca/>.

Despite the apartment building consisting solely of public housing residents (meaning no mix when it comes economic status), the architects still considered and ensured that the units were varied enough to accommodate the diverse households that exist within the social housing program.6 Utilizing this more efficient modular approach while still allowing for social mix enables the design to save money on construction costs and maintain affordability for all residents and the Japanese government.7 In following with the overarching module concept, some module spaces have been used as shared outdoor spaces that penetrate through the width of the building to address for social needs that go beyond housing.8 Each apartment is provided a terrace, either shared or for private use, in an attempt to introduce as much exterior space as possible into the living areas.9 These terraces act as a transitional space between the home and the exterior realm, and is a place where the residents can make it their own and optimize the space to best suit their needs.
Social Mix Diagram Diagram depicting how the module arrangements can cater to different households. Right: Public Outdoor Spaces Diagram depicting the locations of the shared outdoor spaces. Netta Gaash, 2007, < http:// gifuprefecture.blogspot.ca/>.

155

VIA VERDE
WHAT IS IT? Via Verde is a mixed-income residential development in New York City offering a level of housing diversity and health-focused amenities to accommodate for a diversity of households and their unique individual needs. SUCCESSES: 1. Not only addressing urgent housing diversity issues, Via Verde takes on secondary social problems such as the community's health issues, caused, in part, by the lack of opportunities for exercise and healthy eating. 2. The mix of units types, tenures, and sizes is seamless. Though physically separated, they all have access to every amenity and the same entrances so that in communal spaces there is no stigma. 3. The rooftop terraces blending into the ground level courtyard allows for a balance of private public green space, but also allows the common courtyard to open up to the larger context of the neighbourhood.

Via Verde is a contemporary mixed-income development in New York City built as part of the city's efforts to revitalize the South Bronx, an extremely diverse but troubled community. The concept of the building is inspired by the existing diversity and the premise of utilizing and maximizing it to create a socially mixed environment. Grimshaw Architects, the architectural firm behind Via Verde, transformed an abandoned brownfield site into high-density collective housing that can accommodate a spectrum of housing needs that comes along with diverse socially mixed communities.10 Thus, the primary goal of the project was to provide a mix of rental and homeownership opportunities for people at a range of incomes, household types, and household sizes. In total, the project includes 222 mixed-income residential units that include a range of typessingle-level apartments in a high rise, two-level apartments in a mid-rise building, and two-level townhouses and single-level apartments in a low-rise building.11 Various strategies were used to integrate the housing types that are spatially segregated. Visually, the architectural vocabulary gives the appearance of one cohesive building. The townhouses being the most devoid of social interaction have "social stairs" as opportunities of interaction, while the midrises have larger amenity spaces, corridors and circulation cores.12 Despite the physical separation between the three densities of housing, all residents share the same entrance into the development and amenities. Thus, in communal spaces residents do not feel stigmatized based on their unit type.13 By designing three living arrangements (high-rise, mid-rise, low-rise) each with various tenure and ownership options and bridging them together to create one cohesive complex, Grimshaw Architects was able to accommodate diversity without any stigmatization of residents based on their specific needs to create effective inclusive housing.

^ David Sundberg, 2012, <https://www.archdaily. com/468660/via-verde-dattnerarchitects-grimshaw-architects/>.

156

Via Verde Housing Diversity Housing diversity was designed for by providing options for highrise, mid-rise, and low rise living each with various unit types, sizes, tenures and cost to maximize the potential to accommodate diversity. Grimshaw + Dattner Architects, 2012, <https://grimshaw.global/ projects/via-verde-the-greenway/>.

While the primary goal was to increase housing diversity and options for the group of residents' whose needs are increasingly de-prioritized in a rapidly expanding city like New York City, the secondary goal starts to address the community's heath issues. In the South Bronx area, major concerns were the rising levels of childhood asthma and obesity caused, in part, by the lack of opportunities for exercise and healthy eating previously. To address these concerns, the architects allotted for an additional 7,500 square feet of retail and community space, and 40,000 square feet of green roofs and other open space for residents to use both for enjoyment but also to provide access to fresh produce and exercise tools.14 The most prominent feature are the green roofs cascading from the top of the 20-story high-rise onto the mid-rise rooftops, and then to lowerelevation townhouse roofs wrapping around the heart of the project, the interior courtyard. The variety of amenities and public space provided through the design of Via Verde allows for the residents to utilize the spaces that best suit their secondary needs outside of housing to allow for a holistic approach to the architecture of inclusivity.
Via Verde Rooftop Amenities FL 20: COMMUNITY ROOF TERRACE The spaces on the stepped rooftop is utilized to maximize the amount of programmed outdoor space and each roof level is different to provide options to the FL 10-18: GREEN ROOFS residents and accommodate their differing preferences regarding outdoor activities. FL 7: FITNESS CENTRE Left: Grimshaw + Dattner GARDEN Architects, 2012, <https:// FL 5: grimshaw.global/projects/viaverde-the-green-way/>. VEGETABLE Right: David Sundberg, 2012, GARDEN <https://www.archdaily. com/468660/via-verde-dattnerarchitects-grimshaw-architects/>.

CHILD'S GARDEN AMPHITHEATER FL 3: PINE ORCHARD FL 4: FRUIT ORCHARD

BACKYARDS

157

Via Verde Housing Diversity The spaces on the stepped rooftop is utilized to maximize the amount of programmed outdoor space and each roof level is different to provide options to the residents and accommodate their differing preferences regarding outdoor activities. Floorplan from: Grimshaw + Dattner Architects, 2012, <https://www.archdaily. com/468660/via-verde-dattnerarchitects-grimshaw-architects>. Diagram by Author (Carol Nguyen).

highrise: 3 bedroom unit highrise: bachelor unit lowrise: 3 bedroom duplex

highrise: 2 bedroom unit midrise: 2 bedroom duplex (bottom floor)

highrise: 1 bedroom unit midrise: 2 bedroom duplex (top floor)

In the years since Via Verde was inhabited, there has been little household turnover.15 This can be perceived as a success for Via Verde's contemporary user-focused approach to social housing as turnover is often higher for conventional subsidized housing.16 Furthermore, Via Verde's low turnover rate implies that both social and market housing residents are satisfied with their residential circumstances and thus a stable community can be formed overtime. Via Verde marks a turning point in urban housing. It has achieved a difficult feat in urban housing, producing an inclusive diverse community, maintaining access to open space at a high density, and most importantly providing homes that leave a varied group of residents satisfied as their unique and individual housing needs are fulfilled. Via Verde was designed to respond to the shape of the site and its surroundings, to address the needs of residents and the larger community, and to serve as an innovative model for socially sustainable, accommodating, inclusive housing. It was also designed to be replicable, in New York and cities facing similar housing issues, however some of its singular circumstances make it difficult to directly transfer the design in other contexts. Via Verde's architectural achievements were possible due to the extensive governmental support, not only through funding, but also in terms of regulatory design exceptions. A mayoral override exempted the project from having to provide car parking to save on construction costs,17 which not only makes it non-accommodating for certain households that need parking space, but also means that the housing model cannot be replicated in neighbourhoods that have poor public infrastructure and a higher need for cars as a mode of transportation. The New York government also helped by providing the land, an underutilized brownfield site that would eventually be used to knit together important pieces of the community through the construction of Via Verde.18 Thus, despite being a good example of inclusive and accommodating architecture, these circumstances means that not all the design interventions are directly transferable to the urban fabric of Toronto. However, the contemporary intentions and responses to user diversity examined in Via Verde can still be re-interpreted through design strategies that would better relate to Toronto's context.

158

ENDNOTES
1 2

Hilary French, New Urban Housing, (London, Laurence King, 2006) 178. Ibid. 3 Ibid., 179. 4 Ibid. 5 Ibid., 180. 6 Ibid. 7 French, 179. 8 Ibid. 9 Ibid. 10 Urban Land Institute, ULI Case Studies: Via Verde (New York City, NY, 2014) 1. <http://casestudies.uli.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/98/2016/01/Via-Verde.pdf>. 11 Ibid., 5. 12 Ibid. 13 Ibid., 1. 14 Ibid., 5. 15 Ibid. 16 Ibid., 7. 17 Ibid., 5. 18 Ibid.

159

APPENDIX B DESIGN ITERATIONS

Arrangement Flexibility Diagram depicting how a modular design system can be arrange in various formations as a way to provide option and choice. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

unit a

unit b

unit c

individualistic arrangement

communal arrangement

semi communal / individualistic arrangement

Due to the modular approach to the units, they can be arranged in a multiplicity of ways to create different arrangements to offer residents options when choosing their new home. Low-income residents often have limited choice in their housing options, especially within the inner city, thus this pre-occupancy flexibility allows for a restoration of dignity when it comes to affordable housing.
Incremental Housing Adaptability Diagram depicting pre-occupancy flexibility and post-occupancy adaptability achieved internally or externally Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

OR

pre-occupancy flexibility

post-occupancy internal adaptability

post-occupancy external adaptability

Initial pre-occupancy flexibility should be able to adapt to evolving household needs incrementally either internally or externally.

160

Module Matrix Diagram depicting the different variants that can be achieved within each home function. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

variant F

outdoor stair opening + secondary stair + secondary

variant E variant D variant C variant B variant A
bedroom bedroom + bath kitchen + secondary bath + secondary

Using the 4M by 4M module, the next step was determining what home functions would fit within these 16M2 modules. The core set up of the modules were based upon the necessary components of a home: bedrooms, kitchen, and bathrooms. The remainder of the core modules have integral form changes such as stairs, openings, and outdoor functions. From these core set of modules, a multiplicity of slight variants were derived to show the full potential of versatility. The variants explored subtle changes in the secondary programming that is often more flexible, such as living, dining or study space. Furthermore, the variants touch upon slight changes in circulation patterns, user occupancy, and location of openings. Each module allows for a linear circulation through the space so that as they are arranged together in rows, an efficient and consistent circulation still exists. Standardization of the home functions allows for the units to be efficient in size and reduce fabrication, transportation, and design costs. Despite the smaller modules, by providing a module matrix and a sense of customizability within affordable housing, architects and designers can design for pre-occupancy choice and flexibility, giving options and dignity to those who are often left voiceless and choiceless in their search for affordable accommodations.

161

As developed cities like Toronto are becoming more hyper-diverse, there is a wider range of households that need to be accommodated. Despite this, the options within the inner city are not only unaffordable, but they are not acclimated to this new reality. The options in the city are often limited for larger households, such as multi-generational households, as new development tend to cater for smaller studio and one bedroom households. By utilizing a customizable modularity approach, modules can be arranged to cater to the various household configurations that exist within cities today. Typically housing units are arranged so that more communal household functions are on the first floor, while more private functions are on the second level. If its a one story arrangement, the communal functions are closer to the front entrance, while private functions are at the back. However, some of the variants within this matrix, questions this conventional approach by exploring different arrangements of both private and communal functions but also internal versus external modules to accommodate for the differing household sizes. As this framework gets implemented repeatedly or certain household patterns are consistently reinforced, the process would inherently become more streamlined, allow for higher economic efficiency as the framework increasingly becomes established and fully integrated into the development trajectory of Toronto.
Housing Arrangement Matrix Diagram depicting example housing arrangements formed from different modules combinations based on varying household sizes and needs. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

1-2 Person Unit

3-4 Person Unit

variant C

variant B 5+ Person Unit variant A

162

Household Examples Chart depicting the floorplan(s), axonometric and data for different housing arrangements that are based on various households. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

THE BACHELOR (1-2 PERSON UNIT) studio apartment 2 modules + terrace 32M2 floor area 17% smaller than average Toronto studio condominium

1F

THE COUPLE (1-2 PERSON UNIT) one bedroom apartment 2 modules + terrace 32M2 floor area 34% smaller than average Toronto one bedroom condominium

1F

THE ROOMMATES (1-2 PERSON UNIT) two bedroom apartment 3 modules 48M2 floor area 38% smaller than average Toronto two bedroom condominium

1F

163

THE SINGLE PARENT (3-4 PERSON UNIT) two bedroom apartment 4 modules + terrace 64M2 floor area 17% smaller than average Toronto two bedroom condominium

1F

THE NEW FAMILY (3-4 PERSON UNIT) one bedroom + den apartment 4 modules + 2 terraces 64M2 floor area 6% larger than average one bed + den condominium

1F

2F

THE ADULT FAMILY (3-4 PERSON UNIT) two bedroom + den apartment 5 modules + 2 terraces 80M2 floor area 12% smaller than average two bed + den condominium

1F

2F

164

THE SMALL MULTI-GENERATIONAL FAMILY (5+ PERSON UNIT) three bedroom apartment 7 modules + terrace 112M2 floor area 9% larger than average three bedroom condominium

1F

2F

THE LARGE MULTI-GENERATIONAL FAMILY (5+ PERSON UNIT) four bedroom apartment 7 modules + 2 terraces 112M2 floor area no condominium data available for comparison

1F

2F

THE OVERWHELMED COUPLE (5+ PERSON UNIT) three bedroom apartment 6 modules +terrace 96M2 floor area 6% smaller than average three bedroom condominium

1F

2F

165

Incremental Adaptability Diagram depicting incremental adaptability would allow households to add, remove or replace modules overtime as needed. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

Contemporary housing within Toronto tend to follow a conventional rigid housing model. Most condos getting built consist of studio and one bedroom apartments that don't allow for changes in households overtime. As families grow or decrease, the only option is to find another location to live. This transient approach to housing does not provide the opportunities for a community to foster within high-rises. Therefore, this model proposes a post-occupancy adaptable model that grows or shrinks incrementally overtime. By encouraging an affordable home ownership model that allows for "plug in, plug out," modules can be added, removed or replaced as necessary over time. Thus in the beginning stages of design, space should be provided to allow for future changes in form. This would provide lower-income home owners with a sense of ownership and control over their homes. By providing an affordance to adaptable affordable housing, owners gain a sense of dignity and gain an incentive to incrementally improve their homes to their changing needs.
Density Exploration Diagram depicting how the module system can take on various arrangements to create a spectrum of densities. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

low density

high density This exploration looks at how this housing framework can be utilized to densify at different scales. Each of the three density variants look at how space can be provided at the initial design stage to address the issues of incremental growth in the future. These potential areas of growth are initially implemented as external amenity space, such as terraces, balconies, or yards with the intention that the space remains functional before any module change occurs. In the density explorations with multiple units in a given area, arrangements were made up of various unit sizes to ensure that there is social mix. Smaller and larger units have to be precisely located as to allow for natural daylighting to enter the necessary rooms but also to minimize disruption to neighbouring units if there were to be module changes in the future. In addition, architectural expression was explored to match the scale and typology of the buildings.
166

Small Scale Applications Diagram depicting how the module system proposed can be implemented throughout the city in small scales applications. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

backyard addition

infill addition

rooftop addition

As the affordable housing model was intended to have diverse applications to allow for widespread implementation there is a multiplicity in how the framework can be applied. Small scale applications, such as laneway housing, additional backyard units, low scale infill projects, and renovations to add units to condominium roof tops, would have a small individual impact, but when considering these applications as a collective, they are able to create a gentle densification throughout Toronto's urban landscape.
Large Scale Applications Diagram depicting how the module system proposed can be implemented throughout the city in large scales applications. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

ground plane addition

mid-rise addition

high-rise extension

apartment block court addition

On the other hand, large scale applications have a larger impact on the existing architectural landscape but can be more difficult to implement. Various methods can include low or high density new construction on under-utilized land, such as the parks within "tower in the park" sites or infilling the empty spaces between tower blocks. Another method would include adding modules to existing buildings to create larger units that can allow more families to live within the inner city. This level of density would be more economically feasible in a time of expensive urban land.
167

Large Scale Application Potential in Post-War Apartments Map depicting all the post-war apartment towers scattered throughout Toronto. ERA Architects, Mayor's Tower Renewal Opportunities Book, Toronto, 2009, 35. <http://towerrenewal.com/ wp-content/uploads/2016/05/ Torontos-Opportunity-TorontosOpportunity-Vibrant-....pdf>.

intensification zones subway transit city 1: increasing wealth priority neighbourhoods city 3: decreasing wealth

This diagram shows all the "tower in the park" post-war apartment slabs that are prevalent all throughout Toronto. As these sites often have under-utilized parks or surface parking, each, or at least a majority, of the sites marked on this map can be considered as potential for large scale applications of the dignified affordable housing model proposed. Although majority of post-war high-rises are often found in poorer neighbourhoods, there are still a good amount that is found in rapid development zones (shown in red) that can be used as a starting point for implementation of dignified affordable housing throughout Toronto. By choosing a site to further explore the proposed framework that is within the nucleus of rapid densification, gentrification and detachment, it challenges the viability of the framework, and allows the thesis project to oppose social segregation and restore dignity and affordability in an environment where these characteristics are becoming obsolete and too often being dismissed as too difficult to achieve.
Site Location Aerial photo depicting the site location (40 Gerrard St. East) explored in this design iteration. Map Data from: Google Earth, 2017. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

covenant house 40 gerrard
GE RR AR DS TE

ryerson university

U CH

RCH

ST

168

Massing: Site Plan Diagram showing locations where the modules can be arranged and how this would define green spaces and circulation patterns. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

MCGILL ST

MCGILL ST

MCGILL ST

GERRARD ST E

GERRARD ST E

GERRARD ST E

MASSING 1

MASSING 2

MASSING 3

Massing: Axonometrics Axonometric depicting various examples of how the modules could be arranged on site. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

GE

RR

AR

GE DS TE

RR

AR

DS TE

GE

RR

AR

DS TE

MC

GIL

LS T

MC

GIL

LS T

MC

GIL

LS T

MASSING 1 167 modules approx. 45 housing units +10% site density

MASSING 2 202 modules approx. 55 housing units +12% site density

MASSING 3 224 modules approx. 65 housing units +15% site density

Massing 1: Model Massing model depicting massing arrangement 1 on the site of 40 Gerrard Street East. The unpainted wood blocks represent the residential modules, while the painted red modules represent shared facility modules. In the image on the right, the white painted blocks represent the modules added overtime. Photos and Model by Author (Carol Nguyen).

169

DESIGN ITERATION II
Module Dimensions Diagram showing how the dimensions of the module is derived from the existing shear walls of 325 and 375 Bleecker Street. Also is shows the final dimensions of the module and how the interior is broken down into 1M increments. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

6M

2.7M

3M

3M

1M

1M

By proposing a solution of customizable modularity that responds to the rigidity of the current building form, one can provide an adaptable system that organically morphs to accommodate the diversity of tenants while also responding to their individual needs. The idea behind the strategy of customizable modularity is to ultimately rethink the existing homes within 325 and 375 Bleecker Street to create a more inclusive housing model through adaptability. Inclusivity in this context being achieved through actual consideration and respect of each household's individual needs and in turn accommodating them. Rather than what is often the case with social housing tenants, where people are often thrust together by economical circumstances rather than choice, by utilizing a customizable modularity approach this provides an element of user choice to households that are often left choiceless. The 3X3X3 modules are based off the existing structural grid of 325 and 375 Bleecker Street. As most of the shear walls are placed 6 meters apart, it allows for these modules to graft or integrate themselves onto and into the existing building in an methodical manner. The module was kept square to allow for versatility when it comes to rotating or arranging the modules together. The benefit of utilizing this strategy of customizable modular adaptation for tower renewal is that the modules can be connected in a variety of configurations allowing the households the choice of module(s) that best suits their needs. By utilizing these modules to integrate new construction into and onto the unsatisfactory housing, it allows the existing housing within the area of focus to adapt to different privacy, space and use requirements.
170

Customizable Modularity Diagram showing the different customizable components of the proposed idea of using modules. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

ROOF SLAB

EXAMPLE EXTERIOR CONFIGURATION FULL PARTITION WALL + POCKET DOOR

FLOOR SLAB

2/3 PARTITION WALL + POCKET DOOR
1/3 PARTITION WALL + DOOR PARTITION WALL PANEL EXAMPLE INTERIOR CONFIGURATION

OPENING

WHEELS

EXTERIOR GLAZING EXTERIOR WALL PANEL

Individual unit facades (both walls and windows) can be coordinated in a modular arrangement allowing it to be varied while maintaining a unified appearance from the street. Thus, this idea of customizable modularity allows for the units that start as similar to one another to organically morph to be completely individual and tailored to the residents within. Eventually the building becomes an exterior aesthetic expression for the individual residents. Through customizable modularity, architects can provide inclusive and accommodating housing that adapts to fit the user rather than force the user to adapt to a living situation that does not suit them. This would result in a community where the residents are happy and satisfied as their hyper-diverse needs are reprioritized and acknowledged in this transition towards a user-focused society. Thus, instead of the unsatisfied conformity found in urban homes today, through the provision of the proper tools where people can play an active part in determining their own individual environment that responds to their specific needs and aspirations, more dynamic complete communities can emerge and enable a higher quality of life for those that live within it.
171

Module Matrix Matrix of modules that were derived with consideration of the 9M2 allotted area and categorized by the necessary functions that exist within a dwelling. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

WASH

SLEEP

172

FIXED MODULES FLEXIBLE MODULES

COOK

EAT

DWELL

OUTDOOR

173

Minimum Change Image depicting the existing tower with the new external frame structure attached. At this stage no modules have been added to depict the starting point of the proposal with the minimal amount of change. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

Maximum Level of Incremental Change Image depicting the external frame structure with the maximum allotted modules. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

174

325 & 375 Bleecker St. Proposed Changes 1:150 Typical Floor Floor plan diagrams showing unit changes, and areas where modules are to be added. Also shown is the proposed 3X3M grid, as well as the framing structure. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

Typical Floor Variant I Levels 2, 6, 10, 14, 18, 22

Typical Floor Variant II Levels 3, 7, 11, 15, 19, 23

Typical Floor Variant III Levels 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, 24

Typical Floor Variant IV Levels 5, 9, 13, 17, 21

new one bedroom unit new two bedroom unit new three bedroom unit area for whole modules area for 1/2 module unchanged

175

Example Typical Floor Plan1:200 Floor plan depicted shows how both the renovated units and units with added modules utilize the customizable modularity to create unique urban homes that are individualized to the household. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

THE RECENTLY UNEMPLOYED PARENTS

THE FORMERLY HOMELESS

THE TROUBLED YOUTH

THE RECENT IMMIGRANT

THE OVERCROWDED UNIT +2 BEDROOMS

THE NEW FAMILY + 1 PLAYROOM + 1 BEDROOM

THE ENTREPRENEUR + 1 OFFICE

THE SINGLE MOTHER + 1 PLAY ROOM +1 BALCONY

176

FIXED AREA FLEXIBLE AREA THE YOUNG COUPLE THE FIRST TIME RENTER THE WIDOWED SENIOR THE REFUGEE THE DISTANT RELATIVES

THE SPIRITUAL REFUGEE COUPLE + 1 PRAYER ROOM +1 BALCONY

THE SENIOR GARDENERS + 1 SUN ROOM + 1 BALCONY

THE MULTI-GENERATIONAL FAMILY + 1 TERRACE + 1 BEDROOM

177

FIXED

Existing Building Section Partial building section of 325 and 375 Bleecker Street showing the existing typical residential units in section. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

EXISTING

FLEXIBLE

FIXED

FLEXIBLE

Proposed Building Section Partial building section of 325 and 375 Bleecker Street showing the proposed typical residential units in section. The western half of the building is where the units would be added onto, while the eastern half of the building is where modules would be inserted into the building. Diagram also shows where the building would be left unchanged (fixed) in relation to flexible areas. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

RENOVATION

EXISTING

ADDITION

EXISTING SECTION

RENOVATION SECTION

ADDITION SECTION

Module Sections Diagram showing sections through the modules and how they fit into either the existing building or the free-standing steel frame. A close up of the modules wheels and track system is also shown. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen)

178

Example Addition Wall Section Wall section of the western half of the building that would be going through an addition process. Shown in the image are the flexible areas where modules can be inserted into the building through free-standing frame and track system. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

Example Renovation Wall Section Wall section of the eastern half of the building that would be going through a renovation process. Shown in the image are the flexible areas where modules can be inserted into the building through a floor embedded track system. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

179

Module Installation Process Series of images depicting how the process behind how the modules would be installed onto the existing building. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

1. TRANSPORT MODULES TO DESIGNATED LOADING AREA

2. RAIL CRANE ON ROOF

4. RAIL RETRACTS AND PULLS MODULE INTO PLACE

5. MODULES

180

PICKS UP MODULE FROM LOADING AREA

3. OVERCLAD PANELS REMOVED & RETRACTABLE RAILS EXTEND TO CATCH MODULES

ALIGNS WITH EXISTING BUILDING

6. SECURE IN PLACE FROM THE INSIDE

181

1

2

1

2

1

7

3

4

5

6

325 Bleecker St. Existing Conditions: Ground Plan 1:600 Ground floor plan of 375 Bleecker Street. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

6

2

1 general storage

2 recreational room

3 garbage room 4 mail room

5 laundry room

6 administration

7 mechanical

bachelor unit one bedroom unit two bedroom unit three bedroom unit resident facilities circulation
375 Bleecker St. Proposed Changes Ground Floor 1:600 Floor plan diagrams showing unit changes, and areas where retail and community facilities are to be added. Also shown is the proposed 3X3M grid. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

new bachelor unit new one bedroom unit new two bedroom unit new three bedroom unit commercial/retail community facilities unchanged

Currently, the ground floor of the buildings do little to integrate the building and its inhabitants into its surrounding context. The buildings are closed off to its surroundings, essentially making it an island that is isolated from the broader community. This lack of integration is perhaps responsible for the place-based stigma and social isolation that is felt by the social housing tenants. The building's disconnection from the public realm has led some residents to believe that this is contributing to perceived and real social divisions that exist within the neighbourhood between the social housing high-rises and the privately owned high-rises. This social stigmatization and divide needs to be addressed in this thesis' design proposal by re-activating the public realm surrounding 325 & 375 Bleecker Street to break down existing boundaries and define new spaces that are hospitable to an environment of social inclusivity devoid of social tension and place-based stigmatization. This proposal introduces mix-use to ground floor as a strategy to re-activate the public realm. The programming added would be a variety of commercial retail units and new facility amenities that can be utilized by the residents but also the broader community. Furthermore, a new "community hub" is proposed for each building. This community hub would contain spaces for workshops, and a community kitchen. However, the focus of the space would be an entrepreneurship space and incubator for the residents within the building. With its diverse and dense population, residents in high-rise apartment towers are multi-faceted and can provide goods or services that are unique and able to add to the community. Within these apartment towers, there are already home-based businesses that exist, such as small scale catering, hair dressing services, pet grooming, esthetics among a multitude of other home-based businesses. However, these businesses operate on an extremely small scale and rely on word of mouth to gain business making it hard to gain meaningful or reliable revenue. Furthermore, these businesses often fall within the grey area of legality.
182

375 Bleecker St. Existing Conditions: Floor Plans 1:600 Ground floor plan of 375 Bleecker Street. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

1

2

2

2

2 6 2

3

4

5

1

bachelor unit one bedroom unit two bedroom unit three bedroom unit resident facilities circulation

2

1 general storage

2 recreational room

3 garbage room 4 mail room

5 laundry room 6 mechanical

325 Bleecker St. Proposed Changes Ground Floor 1:600 Floor plan diagrams showing unit changes, and areas where retail and community facilities are to be added. Also shown is the proposed 3X3M grid. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

By providing a hub where these businesses can transition from an illegal and informal space, to a semi-formal space allows residents to test and grow their business in a familiar space. As their businesses grow and become more successful, self-business owners can decide to move on to a larger space either within the building if there is a formal retail unit available or elsewhere. Furthermore, as part of the community hub but also part of the internal communities that exist within 325 and 375 Bleecker Street, there would be multi-purpose facilities that can be used by residents for events or community programs and workshops but also by the entrepreneurs to teach classes related to their business. Essentially, the community hub would become an entrepreneurship incubator with a pop-up feel for those visiting as new businesses and workshops are constantly rotating through the space allowing for the space to be in constant flux and retain continual interest for the broader community. The provision of such a space would allow low-overhead, entry-level opportunities for entrepreneurs while animating the ground plane of the building to draw people from the broader communities into the building and thus encouraging social mix and engagement. Along with the community hub and its associated facilities there would also be a variety of retail options available. The introduction of new programming along the street facing façade is designed to enable social mix at both the finer grain scale of within the building but also the broader community scale allowing social capital to build and connections to form at various layers and scales. Introducing mixed-use to the Bleecker Street apartments work to create an architecture of inclusivity by accommodating more than their housing needs, but also their social needs. By providing areas for social interaction without intruding on the private lives of the residents creates democratic places for people to meet and gather without certain obligations or stigma regarding social status being placed.
183

Example Site Plan 1:750 New site plan depicts how the community hubs and retail units would interact with the public realm. Furthermore, it shows the relationship between the new residential units and the access from the exterior realm. Each unit has a half size module acting as a transition space between public and private, to clearly delineate the two. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

MODULE LOADING AREA

BLEECKER STREET

ST. JAMES WEST PARK

SHERBOURNE STREET

ST. JAMES AVENUE

MODULE LOADING AREA

BLEECKER STREET

EARL STREET

SHERBOURNE STREET

375 Bleecker Street Example Ground Floor Plan 1:200 Floor plan depicted shows various possibilities on how the units may be configured depending on the household. Furthermore it shows the layouts of the community facilities and proposed retail. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

1

1

1

1

2

3

4

5

186

residential unit 1 bar / pub 3 bank 5 cafe 2

indoor courtyard 6 community kitchen 8 laundry room 10 community hub 7

restaurant 4

multipurpose space 9

1

1

1

1

10 8 9

6 6

7

7

6

187

375 Bleecker Street Community Hub NorthSouth Section 1:125 Section cut through the community hubs and retail proposed on the ground floor. The interior courtyards can be seen. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

188

189

325 Bleecker Street Example Ground Floor Plan 1:200 Floor plan depicted shows various possibilities on how the units may be configured depending on the household. Furthermore it shows the layouts of the community facilities and proposed retail. Stairwell in the community hub is access point to the underground amenities. While the light wells in front of retail units and inside the community hub allows for natural light to penetrate through the sub floors. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

1 1

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

190

residential unit 1 TCHC office 2 small cafe 3

recreational room 11 lightwells 13 skylights 12

pharmacy 10

boutique shop 4 fruit market 6 hairdresser 5

take-out restaurant 8 bakery 9

convenience store 7

multipurpose space 16 stair to mezzanine 18 laundry room 17

community kitchen 15

community hub 14

1

1

1

1

18 15 16 16 17

13 13 13 14 14

191

325 Bleecker Street Example Basement Floor Plan 1:200 Changes include a new mezzanine to act as the threshold for external community members to utilize the change rooms for the swimming pool which are a level above the pool. The mezzanine also acts as a threshold for the internal community within 325 Bleecker Street as it also connects to the entertainment lounge below. Light wells and skylights are shown. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

5

4

192

mezzanine 1 open to below 3 parking 5 light well 2

skylight overhead 4

1

2

3 2 2

193

325 Bleecker Street Example Sub-Basement Floor Plan1:200 Changes include optimizing the double height space found in the sub-basement to create a new entertainment lounge for residents of the building while relocating the existing gym. Other changes include opening up views into the swimming pool and introduction of skylights and light wells to bring natural light into the spaces. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

5

4

194

entertainment lounge 1 gymnasium 2 light well 3 parking 5

skylight overhead 4

2

3 1 3

3

195

325 Bleecker Street: Community Hub North-South Section 1:125 Section cut through the typical residential floors, community hubs and sub-floors of 325 Bleecker Street. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

196

197

325 Bleecker Street Pool North-South Section 1:125 Section depicting the pool underneath 325 Bleecker Street and elevation of ground floor retail. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

198

199

325 Bleecker Street Community Hub East-West Section 1:125 Section depicting 325 Bleecker Street and the proposed light wells within the community hub. Furthermore, the proposed design interventions can be seen on the typical residential floors. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

200

201

Example West Elevation This elevation depicts the building at max module allowance. As the households chooses their modules and the functions vary, this diversity shows itself on the exterior of the building as modules may be of different materials or openings. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

202

203

Example East Elevation This elevation depicts the building once modules have been added overtime. As the households chooses their modules and the functions vary, this diversity shows itself on the exterior of the building as modules may be of different materials or openings. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

204

205

Images by Author (Carol Nguyen).

206

207

DESIGN ITERATION III
This thesis proposes a mobile fabrication centre that utilizes rapid fabrication technologies to both create the user customized addition modules and to install/remove or replace them as necessary for incremental change. The intent is to have one mobile fabrication centre service multiple post-war towers. Once at the assigned location, the mobile fabrication centre would then be connected onto the corresponding rooftop davit system and mechanically lifted to the designated residential unit to do its appointed work. This traveling fabrication and construction system would be highly automated with systems that can 3D print, transport, install or remove modules as needed to allow for incremental change and accommodation of diversity in an efficient and contemporary manner. With this proposed mobile fabrication centre users can adjust and personalize their homes according to their changing social needs without needing to move and thus maximizes the potential of 325 and 375 Bleecker Street to address user diversity through time allowing for long-term stable communities to form overtime.

208

325 & 375 Bleecker Street: Incremental Change General Overview Overview of the area of focus depicting the proposed mobile factory allowing for the addition modules to be incrementally changed. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

209

PERMANENT DAVIT BASE PORTABLE DAVIT ARM

Components of Proposed Incremental Change System 1:250 Diagram depicting the processes and components that are involved with the incremental change system. The transport truck is necessary to bring the mobile fabrication centre to the required site. It's responsible for lining up the fabrication centre with the portable davit arms that are installed on the roof prior to installation. These arms are mounted onto the correct davit base so that the pulleys can be connected to the mobile fabrication centre which is then hoisted up to add/change/remove the module at the designated location. Permanent davit bases that are installed with the free-standing frame and are required to ensure that the mobile fabrication centre and the portable davit arms have access to the whole span of the building. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

EXISTING BUILDING WITH RE-CLADDED FACADE + STRUCTURAL FRAME

ADDITION MODULE MOBILE FABRICATION CENTRE

MOBILE FABRICATION CENTRE TRANSPORT

210

Mobile Fabrication Centre Floorplan1:150 Overview of the area of focus depicting the proposed mobile factory allowing for the addition modules to be incrementally changed. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

1

2

3

4

6

5 9 7 2 3 8

Mobile Fabrication Centre Section1:150 Overview of the area of focus depicting the proposed mobile factory allowing for the addition modules to be incrementally changed. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen).

1

5

4 6

1. 3D Printing Support System Area designated to hold the support systems and material reservoirs that allows the robotic arm 3D printer to function. 2. Robotic Arm 3D Printer The rapid fabrication technology provides an efficient and versatile manner to create addition modules that address diverse and personal household needs. 3. Addition Module Fabrication Area Designated area for where the modules are to be printed and finished by the workers before being moved to the module holding and loading area. 4. Work Area / Module Fabrication Support Work area for the staff to do the finishing work on the printed module and hold the necessary materials to do so. 5. Staff Access Door Exit and entrance for the 1-2 workers required to finish the printed addition module. Can also be used to load materials into the mobile fabrication centre. 6. Addition Module Holding & Loading Area Area where completed modules are to be held until mobile fabrication centre is in the correct spot to install the addition module. The floor is a mechanical moving platform to slot the modules into the free-standing structural frame that is attached to the existing building. 7. X-Axis Delivery System A lift system to help carry heavy or cumbersome finishing materials to the correct spot. Also used to transfer the completed addition module to the holding & loading area. 8. Y-Axis Delivery System A lift system that is attached to a moving platform to slot the addition modules into it's designated space when the bottom moving platform cannot be used due to obstruction. 9. Davit System Mount Mount attached to the mobile fabrication centre that the portable davit system installed on the roof would be connected to allow for the workshop to be hoisted up to its designated installation working area.

211

Addition Module Installation Process Overview of the steps involved in the process of adding a module onto the existing building using the mobile fabrication centre. Image by Author (Carol Nguyen). 1. Permanent davit bases are pre-installed on all sites that implement this proposed system. Davit arms can be disassembled and assembled by workers as required so that they can be moved from site to site as required. 2. Transport truck is driven to the designated site and aligns under the unit that needs to be worked on. 3. Pulleys from the davit arms are lowered and connected to the connection site located on top of the mobile fabrication centre. Once the connection is secured the mobile fabrication centre can be hoisted up to it's designated work space. 4. Once at the designated spot aligned with the correct residential unit, the completed addition module needs to be moved by the x-axis delivery system to the module loading area. The module can be moved prior to arrival on site to be held at the loading area so that another module can be printed in the meantime. 5a.Once ready, a portion of the mobile fabrication centre would open up to reveal the area that the module is to be installed. If the module is to be attached roofside, then the mechanical moving platform on the mobile fabrication centre's floor would slot the addition module into place within the structural frame. 5a.If the module is to be attached floorside, then the mechanical moving platform on the mobile fabrication centre's roof would lift and then slot the addition module into place within the structural frame. 6.Once the module is aligned to its correct spot, workers from the interior of the space can bolt and secure the module onto the free-standing structural frame. 7.Platforms are retracted back into the mobile fabrication centre which will then close up, to be hoisted back onto ground floor. 8.Pulleys are detached from the mobile fabrication centre and portable davit arms are disassembled 9. Once the mobile transportation centre is secured onto transport truck, it can be driven to the next designated site.

1. PORTABLE DAVIT ARM INSTALLED ONTO ROOF DAVIT BASES

2. MOBILE FABRICATION CENTRE (MFC) IS TRANSPORTED ONTO DESIGNATED SITE

5b. TOP LIFTING & MOVING PLATFORM SLOTS ADD. MODULE INTO PLACE

6. ADDITION MODULE IS SECURED ONTO STRUCTURAL FRAME FROM INTERIOR

212

3. PULLEYS CONNECTED TO MOBILE FABRICATION CENTRE TO HOIST UP

4. MFC ALIGNED WITH CORRECT UNIT + ADD. MODULE MOVED TO LOADING AREA

5a. BOTTOM MOVING PLATFORM SLOTS ADD. MODULE INTO PLACE

7. MOVING PLATFORM IS RETRACTED AND MFC IS LOWERED TO GROUND

8. PORTABLE DAVIT ARMS ARE DISASSEMBLED FROM DAVIT BASES

9. MFC IS TRANSPORTED TO NEXT DESIGNATED LOCATION

213

REFERENCES
Adelman, Michelle. "Adding Small Businesses to Toronto's High-Rise Residential Towers." CBC, CBCNews, 2014, <http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/adding-small-businesses-to-toronto-s-high-rise-residentialtowers-1.2612266>. Affleck, Gavin. "Renewing the Urban Fabric: Social Housing in Montreal." Canadian Architect, IQ Business Media, 01 July 2004, <https://www.canadianarchitect.com/features/renewing-the-urban-fabric-social-housing-in-montreal/>. Al-Sabouni, Marwa. "How Syria's Architecture Laid the Foundation for Brutal War." Ted Summit, 2016, <https://blog.ted.com/how-syrias-buildings-laid-the-foundation-for-brutal-war-marwa-al-sabouni-at-tedsummit/>. Aravena, Alejandro, and Andres Iacobelli. "Elemental: Housing as an Investment Not a Social Expense." Urban Transformation. Berlin: Ruby, 2008: 344-357. Aravena, Alejandro. "Elemental: Incremental Housing and Participatory Design Manual." Stuttgart: Hatje Cantz, 2012. August, Martine. "Challenging the Rhetoric of Stigmatization: The Benefits of Concentrated Poverty in Toronto's Regent Park." Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space, vol. 46, no. 6, 2014: 1317-1333. Baker-Brown, Duncan. "Reworking Beats Rebuilding Every Time." RIBA Journal, 12 June 2017, <https://www.ribaj.com/intelligence/lacaton-and-vassal-reduce-materials-resources-closed-loop-circular-economy>. Bhandari, Roy. "CityPlace: What Went Wrong?" 2011, <http://www.theglobeandmail.com/technology/high-stakes/article725124/?page=all>. Bock, Thomas, and Thomas Linner. Site Automation: Automated/Robotic On-Site factories. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2016. Bocquet, Denis. "More Space, More Light, More Green: A New Vision of Social Housing." Speech, 2014, <https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-00998748>. Bozikovic, Alex. "Jay Pitter Wants to Erase the `Spatial Shame' Surrounding Social Housing." The Globe and Mail, 20 May 2016, <https://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/toronto/jay-pitter-wants-to-erase-the-spatial-shame-surrounding-socialhousing/article30112307/>. Briggs, Xavier De Souza. "Brown Kids in White Suburbs: Housing Mobility and the Many Faces of Social Capital." Housing Policy Debate, vol. 9, no. 1, 1998: 177-221. Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation. "Case Study 1: 30 St. Lawrence - Toronto, Ontario." 2016, <https://www.cmhc-schl.gc.ca/en/inpr/afhoce/afhoce/afhostcast/afhoid/cohode/shfa/shfa_005.cfm>.

214

Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation. "Guide to Co-op Housing." CMHC, Summer 2014, <https://www.cmhc-schl.gc.ca/en/co/buho/gucoho/index.cfm>. Centre of Urban Growth and Renewal. "Strong Neighbourhoods and Complete Communities: A New Approach to Zoning for Apartment Neighbourhoods." 2014, <http://cugr.ca/pdf/Apartment_Zoning.pdf>. Chartered Association of Building Engineers. "Inclusion by Design: Equality, Diversity and the Built Environment." 2008, <https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/sites/default/files/asset/document/inclusion-by-design.pdf>. Chaskin, Robert J., and Mark L. Joseph. Integrating the Inner City: The Promise and Perils of Mixed-income Public Housing Transformation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015. City of Toronto. "Coat of Arms and City Motto." 1998-2017, <http://www1.toronto.ca/wps/portal/contentonly?vgnextoid=6fd87aac783a1410VgnVCM10000071d60f89RCRD&vgnextchannel=83574d3dab5f1410VgnVCM10000071d60f89RCRD>. City of Toronto. "St. James Town Community Improvement Plan." 2015, <https://www1.toronto.ca/City%20Of%20Toronto/City%20Planning/Community%20Planning/Files/pdf/S/SJT%20June25-2015%20-%20St%20James%20Town%20-%20Public%20Meeting.pdf>. Congress for the New Urbanism. "The Charter of the New Urbanism." CNU, 07 Aug. 2015, <https://www.cnu.org/who-we-are/charter-new-urbanism>. Connections and Engagement. "The Effect of Apartment Living on Neighbourliness." Vancouver Foundation, July 2012, <https://www.vancouverfoundation.ca/about-us/publications/connections-and-engagement-reports/connectionsengagement-closer-look-effect>. Cook, Justin W., and Bryan Boyer. Designing Social Housing but Building Wealth. Helsinki: Helsinki Design Lab, 2012. De Boer, Alex. "In Vancouver, Thinking New Ways of Housing." The Tyee, 05 July 2016, <https://thetyee.ca/News/2016/07/05/Vancouver-New-Ways-of-Housing/>. Duncan, Jane. "Is Inclusive Design Achievable?" RIBA Journal, 2016, <https://www.ribaj.com/culture/is-inclusive-design-achievable>. Dunn, James R. "Socially Mixed Public Housing Redevelopment as a De-Stigmatization Strategy in Toronto's Regent Park." Du Bois Review, vol. 9, no. 1, 2012: 87-105. Durrett, Chuck. "Achieving Affordability with Cohousing." Communities, vol. 158, Mar. 2014: 24-28. Dye, Wanda. "Mass Customization in Architecture: Heterogeneity in the Making." ACSA Annual Meeting, vol. 92, Mar. 2004: 215­229.

215

DUS Architects. "Europe Building." 2015, <http://houseofdus.com/project/europe-building/>. Ferrow, Jane, and Paul Hess. "Walkability in Toronto's Apartment Neighbourhoods: Report on St. James Town Walkability." 2009, <http://janeswalk.org/files/1614/5331/6188/St_James_Town_Walkability_Report.pdf>. Frederik Kotz et al. "Three-Dimensional Printing of Transparent Fused Silica Glass", Nature, vol. 544, April 2017: 337-339. French, Hilary. New Urban Housing. London: Laurence King Publishing, 2006. Fèvre, Anne-Marie. "Tour Bois-Le-Prêtre, Une Saine Renaissance." Libération.Fr, Libération Magazine, 7 Feb. 2012, <http://next.liberation.fr/design/2012/02/06/tour-bois-le-pretre-une-saine-renaissance_793785>. Gehl, Jan. Cities for People. Washington, DC: Island Press, 2010. Gifford, Robert. "The Consequences of Living in High-Rise Buildings." Architectural Science Review, vol. 50, no.1, 2007: 2-17. Hayes, David. "Housing Co-op Still Thriving 30 Years Later." The Star, 2009, <https://www.thestar.com/life/health_wellness/2009/11/14/housing_coop_still_thriving_30_years_later.html>. Healey, Courtney. "Back to the Future." Canadian Architect, IQ Business Media, 01 Jan. 2015, <https://www.canadianarchitect.com/features/union-street-ecoheritage/>. Housing Connections. "Applicants / Frequently Asked Questions." 2016, <https://www.housingconnections.ca/Applicants/faqs.asp>. Housing Connections. "Quarterly Activity Report 1st Quarter 2016." 2016, <https://www.housingconnections.ca/PDF/QuarterlyReports/2016/Quarterly%20Activity%20Report%20-%20Q1%20 2016.pdf>. Huber, David. "Lacaton & Vassal Have Pioneered a Strategy got Saving France's Social Housing." Metropolis Magazine, Jan. 2016, <http://www.metropolismag.com/ideas/preservation/lacaton-vassal-pioneered-strategy-saving-france-social-housing/>. Hulchanski, David. "The Three Cities: Income Polarization Among Toronto's, Neighbourhoods, 1970-2005." Cities Centre, Toronto, University of Toronto Press, 2007, <http://www.urbancentre.utoronto.ca/pdfs/curp/tnrn/Three-Cities-Within-Toronto-2010-Final.pdf>. Hulchanski, David. "Planning New Urban Neighbourhoods: Lessons from Toronto's St. Lawrence Neighbourhood." School of Community and Regional Planning, University of British Columbia, 1993, <http://www.chs.ubc.ca/archives/files/CHS0013.PDF>. Hume, Christopher. "Are Toronto Condo Towers Slums in the Making?" Toronto Star, 2012, <https://www.thestar.com/news/gta/2012/03/20/hume_are_toronto_condo_towers_slums_in_the_making.html>.

216

Hume, Christopher. "Regent Park Brings New Life to Toronto." Toronto Star, 2012, <https://www.thestar.com/news/gta/2012/03/30/hume_regent_park_brings_new_life_to_toronto.html?>. Hume, Christopher. "Big Ideas: Learning the Lessons of St. Lawrence Neighbourhood." The Star, 2014, <https://www.thestar.com/news/gta/2014/05/03/big_ideas_learning_the_lessons_of_st_lawrence_neighbourhood. html>. Jacobs, Jane. The Death and Life of Great American Cities. New York: Random House, 1961. James, Ryan K . "From `Slum Clearance' to `Revitalisation': Planning Expertise, and Moral Regulation in Toronto's Regent Park." Planning Perspectives, vol. 25, no.1, 2010: 69-86. Kanter, Matt. "St. James Town Research into Action: Improving Living Conditions for SJT Residents." Wellesley Institute, 2009, <http://www.wellesleyinstitute.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/Policy-Brief-20091101-Improving-Living-Conditionsfor-SJT-Residents.pdf>. Keenan, Edward. "Is CityPlace Toronto's Next Ghetto?" The Grid, 2011, <http://www.thegridto.com/life/real-estate/is-cityplace-toronto's-next-ghetto/>. Kesik, Ted, and Ivan Saleff. "Tower Renewal Guidelines: For the Comprehensive Retrofit of Multi-Unit Residential Buildings in Cold Climate." Daniels Faculty of Architecture, Landscape, and Design, University of Toronto, 2009, <https://www1.toronto.ca/city_of_toronto/social_development_finance__administration/files/pdf/towerrenewal-guide. pdf>. Koolhaas, Rem. Delirious New York: A Retroactive Manifesto for Manhattan. New York: Monacelli Press, 1994. Korducki, Kelli. "The Challenge at CityPlace: Redefining Condo Life." The Globe and Mail, 2013, <https://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/toronto/the-challenge-at-cityplace-redefining-condo-life/article13937109/>. Koslow, Tyler. "3D Printed House." All3DP, July 2017, <https://all3dp.com/1/3d-printed-house-homes-buildings-3d-printing-construction/>. Lacaton & Vassal. "Transformation of 530 Dwellings, Block G, H, I, District of the Grand Parc." 2016, <https://www.lacatonvassal.com/index.php?idp=80>. Leblanc, Daniel. ", 35 Years On, St Lawrence is a Template for Urban Housing." The Globe and Mail, 2013, <https://www.theglobeandmail.com/life/home-and-garden/architecture/35-years-on-st-lawrence-is-a-template-forurban-housing/article8296990/>. Lipson, Hod, and Melba Kurman. Fabricated: The New World of 3D printing. New Jersey: Wiley, 2013. Lorinc, John. The New City: How the Crisis in Canada's Urban Centres Is Reshaping the Nation. Toronto: Penguin Canada, 2006.

217

Lorinc, John. "The New Regent Park." UofT Magazine, 2013, <http://magazine.utoronto.ca/feature/new-regent-park-toronto-community-housing-john-lorinc/>. Lorinc, John, and Jay Pitter, eds. Subdivided: City-building in an Age of Hyper-diversity. Toronto: Coach House Books, 2016. Lynch, Kevin. A Theory of Good City Form. Cambridge: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press, 1984. Maclennon, Duncan. "Mixed Communities: A Perspective from Canada." Canadian Housing, vol. 22, no. 3, 2006: 17-21. Marcus, Clare Cooper and Wendy Sarkissian. Housing as If People Mattered: Site Design Guidelines for Medium-density Family Housing. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986. McClelland, Michael, Kristen Steine, and Graeme Stewart. "Tower Renewal: Opportunities Book." City of Toronto, 2008, <www.towerrenewal.com/tower-renewal-opportunities-book/.>. McClelland, Michael, Graeme Stewart, and Asrai Ord. "Reassessing the Recent Past: Tower Neighbourhood Renewal in Toronto." Journal of Preservation Technology, vol. 42, no. 2, 2011: 9-14. Michaels, Walter Benn. The Trouble with Diversity: How We Learned to Love Identity and Ignore Inequality. New York: Metropolitan Press, 2006. Paperny, Anna Mehler. "Toronto Increasingly Becoming A City of Vertical Poverty." The Globe and Mail, 2012, <https://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/toronto/toronto-increasingly-becoming-a-city-of-vertical-poverty/ article562782/>. Pitter, Jay. "Designing Dignified Social Housing." Subdivided: City Building in and Age of Hyper-Diversity, Toronto: Coach House Books, 2016: 154-171. Pitter, Jay. "A Visit to the Social Housing Community of My Childhood." NOW Toronto, 5 June 2016, <https://nowtoronto.com/news/a-visit-to-the-social-housing-community-of-my-youth/>. Pitter, Jay. "New Visions for Social Housing." Canadian Architect, IQ Business Media, 14 Nov. 2016, <https://www.canadianarchitect.com/features/new-visions-social-housing/>. Rael San Fratello Architects. "Emerging Objects." Rael San Fratello, 2012, <www.rael-sanfratello.com/?p=1344.>. Regent Park Collaborative Team. "Lessons from St. Lawrence for the Regent Park Redevelopment Process." 2003, <http://preservedstories.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/Lessons_from_St_%2520Lawrence.pdf>. Schindler, Sarah. "Architectural Exclusion: Discrimination Segregation Through Physical Design of the Built Environment." Yale Law Journal, vol. 124, no. 6, 2015: 165-188. Schneider, Tatjana, and Jeremy Till. Flexible Housing. Abingdon: Routledge, 2007.

218

Statistics Canada. "Study: A Look at Immigration, Ethnocultural Diversity, and Languages in Canada up to 2036, 2011 to 2036." 25 Jan. 2017, <http://www.statcan.gc.ca/daily-quotidien/170125/dq170125b-eng.htm>. Suttor, Greg. Still Renovating: A History of Canadian Social Housing Policy. Montreal: McGill-Queen's Press, 2016. Talen, Emily. "The Social Goals of New Urbanism." Housing Policy Debate, vol. 13, no. 1, 2002: 165-188. Talen, Emily. Design for Diversity: Exploring Socially Mixed Neighborhoods. Oxford: Architectural Press, 2008. TD Economics. "GTA Housing Boom Masks Growing Structural Challenges." 19 Jan. 2015, <https://www.td.com/document/PDF/economics/special/GTA_Housing.pdf>. Tossell, Ivor. "High Stakes." The Globe and Mail, 01 Sept. 2007, <https://www.theglobeandmail.com/technology/high-stakes/article725124/ >. United Way Toronto. "Vertical Poverty: Poverty by Postal Code," United Way, 2011, <https://www.unitedwaytyr.com/document.doc?id=89>. Urban Land Institute. "Via Verde | ULI Case Studies." 2014, <https://casestudies.uli.org/via-verde/>. Vischer, Jacqueline. "Social Mix and Environmental Design: Exploration of a Contemporary Concept." Journal of Architectural and Planning Research, vol. 3, no. 4, 1986: 315-326. Vischer, Jacqueline. "The Complexity of Designing for Social Mix: An Evaluation of Site-Planning Principles." Journal of Architectural and Planning Research, vol. 3, no. 1, 1986: 15-31. White, Richard. Planning Toronto: The Planners, the Plans, Their Legacies, 1940-80. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 2015. Wolfe, Jeanne M. "Canadian Housing Policy In The Nineties." Housing Studies, vol. 13, no. 1, 1998: 121­134. Young, Leslie. "140,000 Canadian Families are Waiting for Housing." Toronto Star, 2015, <https://globalnews.ca/news/2268505/140000-canadian-families-are-waiting-for-housing-heres-what-the-parties-planto-do/>.

219

