  
                                 

  

EXPLORING ISLAMOPHOBIA IN LAND USE REGULATIONS: THE CASE OF THE CITY OF MISSISSAUGA     by:     Aaliya Khan   Bachelor of Arts in Political Science and Communication Studies, Hons, York University, 2015   

  A Major Research Paper   presented to Ryerson University     in partial fulfilment of the   requirements for the degree of   Master of Planning in the program of   Urban Development     Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2018 
© Aaliya Khan, 2018                                 

 

 

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION     
I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this Major Research Paper (MRP). This is a true copy of  the MRP, including any required final revisions.     I authorize Ryerson University to lend this MRP to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of  scholarly research.     I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this MRP by photocopying or by other means, in  total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.     I understand that my MRP may be made electronically available to the public.    

                                

i     

   

   

ABSTRACT 
EXPLORING ISLAMOPHOBIA IN LAND USE REGULATIONS: THE CASE OF THE CITY OF  MISSISSAUGA  Master of Planning, 2018  Aaliya Khan  Master of Planning in the Program of Urban Development, Ryerson University 
  Building community spaces is important for immigrant communities: it helps transform  the sterility of an unfamiliar new city into home. Muslims have historically sought to make  cities their own by building mosques that have served spiritual, social and symbolic functions  as architectural sites. This essay examines what the interplay between settlement of  newcomers and new types of land use applications and what it tells readers about municipal  gaps in addressing the question of "difference" in Canada using the City of Mississauga as a  case study. It starts with a review of the history and context of mosque building in Canada,  follows up by examining land use policies in Mississauga, and then looks at controversial  mosque development issues by examining official city and provincial documents including one  Human Rights Complaint. This paper wraps up by presenting recommendations for  municipalities to better navigate the question of difference through policy and praxis.    Keywords: Islamophobia, landuse planning, urban planning, racism, exclusion,  xenophobia, Mississauga, public policy   

ii     

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS     
   
I would like to begin by thanking Dr. Zhixi Cecilia Zhuang for guiding this paper from the 

moment it was an undeveloped idea to its completion, providing thoughtful feedback, stimulating me  with encouragement and pushing me to think in complex ways about the subject matter to finally put  together this Major Research Paper. I would also like to thank Jay Pitter not only for providing  professional advice regarding how to best frame and structure the essay, but for giving me insight on  how to make critical theory more accessible and applicable to the practice of planning. On a personal  level, I would like to thank Jay for reigniting my passion for this topic, making the writing process  enjoyable and for overall helping build a more cohesive, interesting and meaningful argument.     I would also like to thank my father, Farooq Khan for reviewing my paper on several occasions  and helping me identify areas of improvement before every major submission and my mother, Inayat  Khan for her neverending supply of encouragement. Finally, I would like to recognize Mariam Ahmad,  Johannah May Black, Sarah Hassanein and Sumaiyya Khan for their endless support in writing this paper  and completing my Master in Planning degree.     The time and commitment you have all demonstrated in the name of introducing topics that  challenge the boundaries of planning theory and practice is necessary to help (literally) build cities that  are more welcoming, more engaging and more beautiful.         This major research paper is dedicated to all the women of color in academia who strive to challenge  dominant knowledge production methods and "agreed upon knowledge".  

    

        

iii     

TABLE OF CONTENTS  
AUTHOR'S DECLARATION ................................................................................................................ i  ABSTRACT  ........................................................................................................................................ ii  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS .................................................................................................................. iii  LIST OF FIGURES ..............................................................................................................................vi  I.    INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................... 1 

2. LITERATURE REVIEW ................................................................................................................... 4  A.  Context: Development History of Mosques .............................................................................. 4  i. The History of Muslims in the GTA and Canada .......................................................................... 4  ii. The History of Mosques in the GTA ............................................................................................ 6  iii. The challenge: Examining difference through a colonial lens ................................................... 8  iv. Systemic Racism and Islamophobia in Canada .......................................................................... 9  B. Public Policy and Religion ......................................................................................................... 10  C. The Importance of Religious Institutions  .................................................................................. 12  D. Challenges faced by Religious Institutions ............................................................................... 13  i. Broad Institutional Challenges ................................................................................................... 13  ii. Challenges at the Municipal Level ............................................................................................ 17  3.  METHOD ................................................................................................................................... 19 

iv     

4. MISSISSAUGA: POLICY REVIEW AND ANALYSIS ........................................................................ 19  A. Overarching Principles .............................................................................................................. 20  C. Built Form ................................................................................................................................. 24  D. Summary on Policy Findings: .................................................................................................... 25  5. CASE STUDIES: IDENTIFYING WHERE POLICY FALLS SHORT ..................................................... 25  a.    The Opportunity: examining the Aga Khan Museum as a successful example of a 

Religious Institution .................................................................................................................... 26  B. Case Studies: challenges faced by Mosque Builders in Mississauga ........................................ 27  i. The Case of the Meadowvale Islamic Centre  ......................................................................... 28  ii. The Case of ISNA's Friday Prayer Parking Exemption Hours ................................................ 30  iii. The Case of Masjid Al Farooq ............................................................................................... 32  6. ANALYSIS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ....................................................................................... 34  References .................................................................................................................................... 39            

v     

  

LIST OF FIGURES  
Figure 1: "Allah hu akbar" or God is Great painted on window of Former High Park Presbyterian Church that served   as the Jami Masjid for several  years............................................................................................................................................7   Figure 2: Stop the Mosque  Flyer.................................................................................................................................................30   Figure 3: Masjid al Farooq, Mississauga,  Canada.....................................................................................................................34  

     
           

vi     

   I.   

   

INTRODUCTION   

Building Community Spaces is important for immigrant communities: it helps transform  the sterility of an unfamiliar new city into home. Muslims have historically sought to make  cities their own by building mosques that have served profound spiritual, social and symbolic  architectural functions. In the "war on terror era" following September 11, 2006, civic debates  pertaining to the Muslim presence in the West have been complicated by public uneasiness  about whether Muslims belong in The West. If they do belong, what is the extent to which  they should take up physical and symbolic space? In this essay, physical space refers to land,  structures, and the built environment, and symbolic space refers to what the space represents  through architecture, design and permitted use.     The topic of belonging is naturally a topic about landuse because even semantically,  we belong "here" or "there": mosques not only provide a "place" for communities to worship  and access social services, they convey important cultural and religious meanings through  architectural details, and building use as explored by Agrawal (2008), Qadeer and Chaudhary  (2000) and Syed (2015). The following essay unpacks what belonging in the city of Mississauga  means in three parts: first, the essay examines the history and context of mosque  development in Canada, second it looks at land use policies in Mississauga, and finally case  studies examining moments of tension between mosque builders and the municipality are  presented in official municipal and provincial documents. Documents are then analyzed by  juxtaposing them to the literature review and media articles. In the conclusion, 

1     

recommendations are presented to begin to remedy the gaps in planning policies and  practices identified in the essay.     Upon examining and analyzing the literature and official municipal and provincial  documents, themes that emerge are that within the current context, landuse regulations are  being secularized because churches in the GTA no longer serve functional purposes. Religion in  public policy is thus poorly defined and it is conflated with race, culture and ethnicity.    Consequently, the ways in which religion complicates planning decisions are poorly  represented in public policy and planning decisions. Even within existing multicultural policies,  the lack of representation of religious minorities' results in exclusion at an institutional level.  Minority places of worship are identified by Agrawal (2009) as mosques, Hindu temples,  Buddhist temples and Sikh Gurdwaras. Minority places of worship can be contrasted to the  now underutilized historical churches that were built in the 1700s and 1800s and onwards by  European settlers in Canada referenced above. However, an important nuance to keep in mind  is that while authors like Bradamat and Seljak (2008) identify the church as a key driver of  Aboriginal colonialism and institutionalized European domination, authors like Smith (1996)  identify that churches also served as sites of resistance, for example, Black Churches were  integral to mobilize people during the Civil Rights Movement. The same nuance can be applied  to mosques: the interactions that they have with communities and institutions mean that  different mosques have different, often heavily politicized relationships with municipalities  and communities. As such no two mosques will tell the same story.    

2     

The subject matter of the paper is complex because situating implicit bias and as the  case studies will reveal, some instances outright Islamophobia identified in the case studies  within landuse policies is an exercise of abstracting attitudinal issues in perceivably clearcut  policies and watertight, technical practices. It is a particularly complex exercise because  Mississauga is home to quite a few mosques, illustrating that in many instances, exchanges  between the city and its Muslim population have resulted in the successful completion of  mosques as community hubs and spiritual centers. The essay examines landuse policies;  however, city planning is a naturally interdisciplinary process, therefore while the focus is  narrow, the analysis spills over into the different layers of citybuilding and public policy. The  same can be said about the geographical scope: Mississauga is a product of ongoing settler  colonialism and immigration meaning that the development of the city itself has necessarily  meant the historical and ongoing erasure of its original inhabitants, the Mississaugas of the  New Credit by "immigrants" or settlers from all over the world. As such, the presented analysis  can be used to assess other cities that are characterized by similar historical trajectories. While  the aspiration behind this essay is to justify transforming municipal landuse policies and  practices in Mississauga, it can be used as a framework to justify transforming policies and  practices in other professional realms.          

3     

2. LITERATURE REVIEW    
    The literature review section of this essay attempts to contextualize the research by 

looking at what existing studies say about planning for "difference", public policy and  religion, the importance of religious institutions, and challenges faced by religious  institutions.      

A.  Context: Development History of Mosques   
i. The History of Muslims in the GTA and Canada   
The first Muslims in the Americas were enslaved West Africans, who were forcefully  displaced, carrying the first traceable practices and ideologies connected to Islam into the  subcontinent between 1530 and 1850 (Yousif, 1992). It is important to note that current  understandings of Muslims in Canada center the South Asian or Middle Eastern Muslim  immigrant as vehicles of Islam. These understandings present a gap in historical  understandings of how deeply embedded Islam is in North American history and the period  within which knowledge transfer relating to the cultural traditions of Islam began. It was not  until 1930, collective worship and social functions of mosques existed in the private realm. In  1930, the first formal mosque was built in Edmonton, Alberta. In 1992, the Muslim community  in Canada was concentrated in Ontario, Quebec, British Columbia and Alberta (1992).     To refocus the history of Muslims in Mississauga into a contemporary context, some  statistics are presented to give the reader an idea of what the population looks like today: In  

4     

2011, the NHS survey identified that 3.2% of the population in Canada identified as Muslim   (Statistics Canada, 011). 7.7% of the population in the GTA is Muslim (Statistics Canada, 2011).   

9.4% of the population in Peel Region selfidentifies as Muslim, most of whom belong to the  South Asian Community at large (Statistics Canada, 2011).      According to Kazemipur (2008), a significant number of Muslim immigrants come from  areas that have been particularly prone to long and violent conflicts in South Asia and the  Middle East (p.73). However, Muslims have historically chosen to settle in Canada to seek  educational opportunities, to escape political alienation in their ancestral lands, to access  economic advantage, to join kin and friends in Canada and to enjoy freedom of faith.  According to Vezina and Houle (2017), South Asian and Middle Eastern immigrants have  chosen Ontario, Quebec and Alberta particularly because these provinces have established  social networks: new immigrants chose these areas because of the presence of familial ties or  friendship.    To avoid homogenizing Muslims in Canada, it is important to identify that the Muslim  community in Canada have emigrated from different places in the world for different  reasons.  Fleeing war was a key driver of Muslim immigration to Canada, for example, in the  1980s, Lebanese refugees escaping the Civil War fled to Canada. In the 1990s, Somali  Muslims and Bosnian Muslims also came to Canada to escape the Civil War and the breakup  of the Former Yugoslavia (Yousif, 1992). Kazemipur (2008) made similar observations,  indicating that most Muslims immigrating to Canada are escaping violence in their home  countries today.     5     

   

Varying historical trajectories into Canada necessarily mean that some groups have 

more economic leverage than others, giving them more social and political leverage. An  example of the impact of varying historical trajectories is explored in Murdie's study (2010)  which explores how Somali immigrants and Polish immigrants experienced different "housing  careers" over two decades. The Polish group had established networks in Canada and  consequently could access social services more easily. However, because the Somali group was  fleeing civil war, they had to start from scratch, making them less likely to end up owning  homes. In another example of varying experiences within the Muslim Community, Mussa  (2017) criticized the lack of representation of Black Muslim voices in a conference in Ottawa  that sought to bring the Muslim community together and engage in dialogue regarding  contemporary issues affecting Muslims. Mussa (2017) noted that their exclusion led to a  regeneration of an exclusive and discriminatory community.        The differences in the histories of Muslims mean that they experience land use 

regulations in different ways: when approaching municipalities, they come to the table with  varying levels of access to legal counsel, social capital and economic resources, all of which are  factors that impact their interactions with municipalities.    

ii. The History of Mosques in the GTA    
    According to Qadeer and Chaudhary (2000), it was not until 1961 that the Muslim 

population was sizeable enough to establish a formal place of worship for Muslims on Dundas  Street into Toronto's first mosque, the Jami Mosque. By 1980, only four mosques had been 

6     

established and between 1980 and 1990, ten new mosques were established. Between 1990  and 2000, another six mosques were built.    The first mosque in the GTA was a converted warehouse on Dundas Street in Toronto   (Bradburn). Over the next decade, the Muslim community in Toronto grew from 400 to 5000  people. The congregation that was serviced by that location naturally outgrew the facility,  and in    1969, King Faisal of Saudi Arabia helped purchase the High Park Presbyterian Church to serve as  Jami Masjid, which still served as the only mosque in Toronto during that time. Internal conflict  fragmented the congregation, making families seek other facilities to worship in, and in the 70s  and 80s mosque development increased exponentially in the GTA because of inward migratory  patterns of Muslims fleeing violence across East Africa, South Asia and the Balkans (Bradburn).    

   
Figure 1. "Allah hu akbar" or God is Great painted on window of Former High Park Presbyterian Church that served as  the Jami Masjid for several years, Toronto, Canada, From Architectonic Toronto & Cities by M. Gebresselasie, 2011,    http://architectonicto.blogspot.ca/2011/01/jamimosque.html   

7     

The first mosque in Mississauga was built in 1987: Masjid al Farooq. The mosque is now  located on the same site, but the neighborhood has grown into a residential area with a  sizeable population of Muslim homeowners and renters (Masjid al Farooq, 2017).    According to an online tool called Salatomatic used to find mosques and Islamic  Schools in different cities across the world, there are 239 mosques in the Greater Toronto  Area. 37 of these mosques are in Mississauga according to data most recently revised in 2018.  This figure will serve as an estimate in this paper.   

iii. The challenge: Examining difference through a colonial lens   
             Sandercock (2000) examines urban planning policies and practices in Australia, finding  that racial "difference" is glossed over because the idea that municipalities are inherently  neutral exists. He investigates where racialized people fall in relation to the status quo in  planning policies and practices. Sandercock (2000) identifies that racial differences exist in  Australia because of the history of the settler colonization of Aboriginal Australians, and the  following inward migration of communities who were also colonized by European nations in  the "Global South" today. These differences therefore became more pronounced because of  the rise of civil society rooted in the 1960s and 1970s.  However, a reflection in policy was  lacking because municipalities considered themselves neutral.  As such, the importance of  representing indigenous groups, ethnic minorities and other marginalized bodies in planning  policies in Australia became more pronounced.     The settlercolonial history of Australia is similar to the history of Canada, as is the  migration of people to Australia from countries still navigating the Historical impetus of   8     

European colonialism in "the Global South".     Sandercock's (2000) critiques of existing land use policies in Australia ring relevant to  the City of Mississauga because Mississauga is also Indigenous land with a significant immigrant  population.    

iv. Systemic Racism and Islamophobia in Canada     
    To define the broader issue that rationalizes the identified challenges faced by mosque 

developers in Canada, systemic racism and Islamophobia are defined and contextualized.      Systemic racism is defined as     "The policies and practices entrenched in established institutions, which result in the  exclusion or promotion of designated groups. It differs from overt discrimination in that  no individual intent is necessary." (Calgary Anti Racism Education, 2017, para 5)    Garner and Selod (2014) state that Islamophobia is a form of racism because Muslims  across the existing spectrum of racial and ethnic identities are racialized or excluded in  organized overt or covert ways. Garner and Selod (2014) note that Muslims are racialized  through ideology, historical power relations and discrimination at both interpersonal and  structural levels.  They also note that a historical lens into Islamophobia in the West would  confirm Islamophobia exacerbated after 9/11.         WilkinsLaflamme (2018) examines Islamophobia in Canada and confirms that after 

911, Islamophobia spiked. She notes that the "intentional exclusion of Muslims is the product  of public laws and policies". She identifies that discriminatory media coverage and conflicts 

9     

surrounding places of worship are normalized as "usual suspects" of discrimination: often they  are not identifiable by individuals (para 9  10).         Systemic racism and Islamophobia are defined here to name the key issue being 

examined and to avoid the risk of falling into a racially neutral discussion.    

B. Public Policy and Religion   
    To situate the challenge of lacking policy representation in Canadian terms, Bradamat  

(2008) attempts to answer the question of how religion is framed by existing laws and policies  in Canada. He looks into whether there is evidence to substantiate that policymakers are  interested in religious perspectives on public policy. He begins by introducing the   "secularization hypothesis" which is the idea that as society becomes more modern, it rejects  religious ideologies because it is becoming more "rational". He (2008) then rejects the  secularization hypothesis, drawing onto the events of 911 and a general context of migratory  exchanges that are continually transforming Canada, and bringing in different populations who  access "new ethnic religious places of worship" (p. 124). Bradamat (2008) identifies that  religion is mentioned in high level federal legal document such as the Constitution, the Charter  of Rights and Freedoms in addition to the Criminal Code which apply to provincial and  municipal policies.     However, regarding federal targeted projects that tackle the question of religion,  Bradamat (2008) identified that only 19 of the 546 government projects regarding  multiculturalism related to religion directly. Of these 19 projects, only 6 were designed to 

10     

address the effects of September 11. According to Bradamat's (2008) assessment, religion is  poorly represented in public policy.      Gale (2008) identifies that religion is also a cavity in planning policy in the UK. He  believes it is a limitation because poor understandings exist regarding the distinctions and  relationships between race, religion and culture in public policy. He further believes that this  institutionalized ignorance is problematic because faith groups mobilize religious identity to  situate themselves in the city through religious institutions. Gale's (2008) findings indicate that  it is important for municipalities to understand how religion binds communities and potentially  impacts space outside questions of race and ethnicity, while simultaneously acknowledging  that these layers of identity can exist in tandem.     Gale's findings are important because they highlight a gap in planning policy in Canada  considering that much of the literature examined in this paper conflate planning for religious  minorities with planning for racial minorities.     To localize Gale's (2008) findings, Kazemipur (2014) notes that migratory patterns have  meant that Muslim immigrants have brought religion to Canada alongside their cultural  practices. He notes that different cultural communities practice Islam differently. However, he  also emphasizes that where fragmentation exists along ethnic lines, Canadian Muslims have  used religion as a binding identity that individuals have used to build community.    
             Relating to both religion and public policy in Canada, Germain (2014) examines an important  document regarding religious representation in public policy: the Bouchard Taylor Commission. The   

11     

Commission notably examine religion as a facet of identity that is not inherently partnered with culture  The Commission is a document that Quebec funded to explore policies and practices that allow  communities to come up with solutions when universal standards exclude religious groups. Germain's  finding was that while the Commission itself looked at various instances of conflict between faithbased  communities and policies, it glossed over places of worship from a spatial perspective    

C. The Importance of Religious Institutions   
             To justify a critique of existing policies regarding religious institutions, a good starting  point is to identify their purposes in a pluralistic society. Agrawal (2008) examined the role of  places of worship in either helping or hindering "neighborliness". He did so by examining four  organically evolved faithbased neighborhoods in the GTA that varied across religious  affiliation, history and socioeconomic class. Agrawal (2008) found that at the bare minimum,  religious institutions are unthreatening. The neighborhoods he examined were stable and that  the presence of religious institutions neither localized friendship or intimacy, nor does religion  polarize or isolate neighborhoods along religious or cultural lines.                 Syed (2016) identifies the importance of religious architecture in providing symbolic  spaces that represent belonging for new immigrants. She notes that    In periods of immigration, churches, mosques and temples have served as much more  than just religious and spiritual centers. They have become points of reference for  newcomers, affirming their presence as they confront otherness. These places can  provide a space of belonging and a reminder of the old on new streets (p.66).   

12     

She cites Sikh and Christian leaders who identified the importance of distinctive minority  religious institutions. One example she draws upon regarding a notably historically  marginalized group is the example of the MethodistEpiscopal Church served as a symbol of  home for African American refugees escaping slavery in the 1840s.                 To complete the picture, Rajaram (2015) notes that places of worship offer social  services that benefit communities. He (2015) notes that they are particularly important service  hubs for lower income people as they provide free meals, homeless shelters, educational  programs, daycare, senior homes and immigration services.        The literature identifies that the two major functions of places of worship are that they 

provide social services and the latter is that as physical structures, they fulfil a symbolic  purpose by providing familiarity and belonging.    

D. Challenges faced by Religious Institutions   
i. Broad Institutional Challenges   
The importance of examining institutional challenges in this paper is to understand  high level problems that might complicate landuse planning for mosques. Hackworth and  Gullickson (2013) examine the impacts of secularization on space due to a declining Christian  population, and Hackworth and Stein (2012) study the tension between industrial uses and  places for worship respectively. Germain and Gagnon (2003) are also referenced because they  look at the impacts of secularization on municipal policies.    

13     

It is important to distinguish that Bradamat (2008) rejects the idea that society is  secularizing but Germain and Gagnon (2013) illustrate that policy attempts to secularize space.   Read together, Hackworth and Gullickson (2013) simply identify that policies do not necessarily  represent  the  population  because  Bradamat  (2008)  notes  that  Canadian  society  is  not  secularizing due to the immigration of religious minorities.     It is also important to identify that secularization entails the desanctification of  churches as a precedent to the lack of representation of minority places of worship:   secularization is not a process that deliberately excludes minority religions because public  policy is inherently insidious. It does so subvertly because of an existing tension: Churches are  no longer being built or being used at the same frequency, therefore policies and practices  have transformed to reflect the same. At the same time, however, immigration has brought  populations to Canada who have presented a demand for mosques, Hindu and Buddhist  temples and Sikh Gurdwaras. This is why representation in policy is key.                  To substantiate their hypothesis that landuse regulations are secularizing, Hackworth  and Gullickson (2013) examine 33 cases of church redevelopment into residential and  mixeduse facilities. They find that out of the 33 cases, 5 churches were demolished entirely for  redevelopment. In 17 cases, the façades of the churches were maintained but the use of the  buildings were changed to residential: and the remaining 16 had mixed functions and forms  that did not relate to church use.     What does church redevelopment have to do with new mosque developments?   Hackworth and Gullicksons (2013) provide evidence that land use regulations are beginning to  14     

be characterized by a trend of secularization, a trend that naturally complicates the question  of mosque development given that mosques are not secular spaces.     In their (2013) essay, secularization is found to be a consequence churches in Toronto  no longer serving functional purposes. A policy tool that complicates the referent  secularization is heritage regulations.  The friction between heritage regulations and the  development of churches represents a perceived friction between developing for the future  and holding onto architecture that represents the past.     Within a citybuilding context, the secularization hypothesis might suggest that as the  city modernizes, religious architecture does not serve a function. Within the context of the  Churches examined, Hackworth and Gullickson (2013) identify that Christian, European  religious architecture is underutilized. Contrarily, Qadeer and Chaudhary (2000) and Agrawal  (2009) emphasize that demand for minority places of worship is a concurrent theme in the  GTA.     The question of whether cities are secularizing because established European  communities no longer need places of worship at the expense of new immigrant populations is   raised.                  Hackworth and Stein (2012) look at another type of economic development in relation  to places of worship: industrial development. Their analysis draws a connection between  secularization and economic development. They (2012) identify that places of worship are not  included in industrial development plans. They identify that the Muslim community has faced  resistance developing mosques in residential areas. Because of this resistance, they attempt to  15     

locate places of worship in employment areas. What exacerbates the tension between  industrial areas and religious groups is that a consistent zoning designation does not exist  across the GTA for places of worship. Therefore, the question of whether industrial growth  and secularization work in tandem comes up: are emerging religious institutions are  antithetical to economic development? Do current communities hold an underlying belief that  emerging religious institutions are antithetical to economic development? If so, is there room  for planning policy to address the challenge?                   Hackworth and Stein (2012) note that places of worship are exempt from property  taxes. Agrawal (2008) notes that within a political context of government cutbacks, the social  services that places of worship provide should be recognized. Qadeer and Chaudhary (2000)  argue that religious institutions are exempt from property taxes because they fulfil a social  need. This argument complicates the underlying tension between places of worship and  religious institutions, raising the question of how the economic value social services rendered  by places of worship are measured in relation to industrial or residential development,  particularly within a context of secularization.                  Harvey (2008) critiques citybuilding in general, noting that "from their very inception,  cities have arisen through the geographical and social concentrations of a surplus product [and  that] Urbanization has always been...a class phenomenon of some sort" (p.38).         To tie this section together, two broad contextual themes that complicate mosque 

building in Canada are the secularization of landuse policy and existing tensions between  planning for profit and planning for people.     16     

ii. Challenges at the Municipal Level   
At the municipal level, Germain and Gagnon (2003) examine the discussion around   Eruvs in Quebec. Eruvs are metal wires hung on electric poles that serve as symbolic   "doorways" that expand the private realm during Passover. Eruvs serve this purpose because  during passover, Hasidic Jews are prohibited to leave their homes during passover. While  these wires are barely visible and nonhazardous to humans and animals, because Quebec is  "secularizing", a public discussion at the municipal level came up regarding the religious  encroachment of public space.   
 Again, the question of whose human rights and land use needs are prioritized in public  discussions is raised. Furthermore, the implications of such discussions are in land use policy and  practices are raised.   

To narrow into challenges at the neighborhood scale, Germain and Gagnon (2003)  identify hurdles faced by minority religious groups who have tried to build places of worship in  communities with notable opposition among locals. They (2003) examine cases where local  dynamic hindered the growth of Hasidic Synagogues in Montreal. Secularization comes up  again because of Montreal's attempts to secularize their landuse policies. In a case study they  looked at in Outremont, the Hasidic community attempted to rezone an industrial building to  use it as a synagogue. They (2003) note that the Frenchmajority Community's response at the  very beginning of the conversation was to set a volatile, tense tone that prevented the  community from making any progress on that site, forcing them to move their facility.   
Agrawal (2009) cites case studies where tensions between municipalities and religious  institutions in some instances even resulted in cases in the Ontario Municipal Board (OMB). One 

17     

example is the case of the Nanaskar Satang Sabha Gurdwara where hostile opponents complained that  congregators loitered in the adjacent park (p.2). Arguably, the purpose of a park is "loitering".                 Challenges identified in this section are more institutional in nature as they are rooted in  decisions at the local government level: Issues identified include exclusive policies, cultural insensitivity  and incompatibilities rooted in procedural decision making in addition to the more political challenge of  abstracting exclusive land use practices from technical problems. Both these issues are premised on  overt or covert exclusion at different scales. Case studies examined serve as precedents for case studies  examined below, illustrating that municipal policy exclusion and difficulty abstracting exclusive land use  practices from practical decision making does not exist in a vacuum across the GTA, and as identified  above, these challenges exist across Canada and the Westatlarge.     

                             

18     

  

3.  METHOD   
    The next part of the essay looks at context regarding mosque development by drawing 

onto a Mississaugaspecific policy scan is laid out. Then, case studies are examined that  illustrate that while multicultural policies exist, their functionality in addressing existing  xenophobia at the municipal level and beyond can be expanded. The analysis raises questions  about their effectiveness in navigating a unique challenge: an opportunity exists to transform  the planning landscape and culture. Recommendations are made at the end of the paper to  explore this opportunity.         Sources referenced used are municipal land use policies, City of Mississauga Meeting 

Minutes, an Ontario human rights complaint and news articles.         The City of Mississauga was picked specifically because according to 2016 Census Data, 

more than half of the population (53%) is immigrant and close to 60% of the population are  considered visible minorities (Statistics Canada, 2016).                 

4. MISSISSAUGA: POLICY REVIEW AND ANALYSIS   
    Inclusive policies are integral to support programming that facilitates inclusive cities 

and to formally address existing challenges. A scan of policies in Mississauga indicates that  19     

while gaps exist policies when it comes to religious accommodations, these gaps can be  remedied to improve the representation of religious groups in landuse regulations. The  following Policy Review outlines existing policies and identifies some of the gaps:    

A. Overarching Principles   
i. Official Plan         In the Introduction (2015) of its Official Plan, the City of Mississauga envisions a city 

"where people chose to be", that is, a city that generally adheres to principles of connectivity,  pluralism and safety. The O.P aspires for Mississauga to inspire the world as a dynamic and  beautiful global city that facilitates creativity and innovation and provides safe and connected  communities. Additionally, the Introduction of the Official Plan notes that the planning process  aspires to provide space for culture and diversity (p. 3).     The Introduction of the Official Plan also references "incorporating places of worship"  in its strategic goals (p.3). In terms of overarching goals, the Official Plan has not only provided  space in policy for the development of places of worship, it has represented support for this  community imperative in writing.           ii. Peel Regional Official Plan     Mississauga is a lowertier municipality. It is subject to the Peel Region Official Plan  (2016). In terms of making space for matters of religious pluralism, the plan identifies that its  purposes are to "provide a holistic approach to planning through an overarching sustainable  20     

development framework" (p.17). Such a framework would integrate targeted goals that are  environmental, social, economic and cultural.    The framework is to "recognize the importance of protecting and enriching the natural  and cultural heritage of Peel Region" (p. 17). In terms of developing mosques as part of a more  inclusive regional initiative, the scope of the Peel Region Plan is definitely broader and  subjective to the interpretation of the cities within Peel's jurisdiction.     The Peel Region Official Plan does not refer to places of worship but identifies  enriching the natural and cultural heritage of Peel raising a question of whether religious  development can fall under furthering the cultural heritage of Peel. From the Great Mosque of  Touba in Senegal to the Emperor's Mosque in Bosnia, Islamic architecture has enriched the  landscape and brought incredible social value value to cities across the globe Agrawal (2008)  and Maghfoor and Chaudhary (2000) have identified that minority places of worship serve an  important purpose in Canada.     In the Promoting Collaboration Section (2015) of the Official Plan, the City further  notes within the Official Plan that it envisions itself as a champion of complete communities,  meeting the daytoday needs of people throughout all stages of their life through, housing  choices, employment opportunities, commercial opportunities, social and institutional venues  (City of Mississauga, 2015, 2).     The city believes that community Infrastructure is a vital part of complete communities   

21     

(p2). Two needs that community infrastructure can meet are the spiritual and social needs.  Places of worship provide resources to meet these needs. Representing the social value of  places of worship as service providers is necessary.    iii. Mississauga Cultural Master Plan      Interestingly, Mississauga has a Culture Master Plan (2009), which is noteworthy because 

Buyaridi (2003) identifies Culture Master Plans as an opportunity for diverse groups to raise  awareness and find spaces for their fears, concerns interests and values. Mississauga's Culture  Plan does not make any references to religion, perhaps because it embodies secular values and  focuses on culture as an economic generator and approaches the question of culture from an  arts and innovation perspective.       Here, Gale (2008) and Sandercock's (2000) observation about the conflation of culture 

and religion becomes evident. At a high level, it is evident that diversity and culture are  represented. However, other than one mention in the Introduction of the Official Plan, there is  no further mention of religion, which is limiting given the cultural value that religious  institutions bring to the city. It is therefore possible to read religious inclusion into existing  policies, or to read them out of existing policies, depending on the practitioner's priorities.      B. Community Engagement    i. Official Plan          In the Policy Context (2015), the Official Plan draws upon the Planning Act in identifying 

that the city envisions itself as a harbinger of "planning processes that are fair by making them  22     

open, accessible, timely and efficient" (p.2). Culture, diversity and religion are referenced in  the introduction therefore openness, fairness and accessibility for religious subgroups is  presumably a given. However, presumptions do not hold the same weight as written  regulations, therefore there is room to elaborate on what these principles mean in  consultations.     In the Promoting Collaboration (2015) section of the Official Plan, the Official Plan  extensively incorporates an approach that encourages cooperations and team building  between individuals and groups who are interested in planning the city, the public, particularly  people with disabilities, and other stakeholders.      In terms of promoting community engagement, in this section, a policy rationale exists  for discussions to tackle issues of exclusion moving forward. This section of the Official Plan  further envisions developing a public participation program as part of any Official Plan Review   to:    
· · ·

increase awareness regarding the planning process    encourage public involvement in the planning process     facilitate consultation and joint planning where appropriate   

Regarding Community Planning, the City will engage the public and stakeholders in  local area review processes including local area reviews and policy formation and revision.   
 The city has also noted that it will consider Local Advisory Panels to provide input to local area  reviews where appropriate. Again, a general accommodation has been established to start conversation:  this section provides further sitespecific accommodation.   

23     

ii. The Growth Plan for the Greater Golden Horseshoe     The Official Plan also draws upon the Growth Plan for the Greater Golden Horseshoe.  The purpose of the Growth Plan is selfexplanatory: it is to manage growth through different  approaches. The document notes that when managing growth, planners should recognize the  diversity of communities and promote collaboration among all sectors including government,  private and nonprofit sectors and residents (p. 12).      A scan of this section provides representation within crossregional policies to  approach questions of developing mosques, potentially in innovative and creative ways that  "recognize the diversity of communities in the Greater Golden Horseshoe" (p. 12). Again,  interpreting "diversity" is a subjective exercise that the Planner will embark on, so whether  religious accommodation is considered remains dependent on the Planner's priorities when  reading the   policies.     
In summary, the policy stance on engagement does not incorporate targeted engagement of  religious subgroups or minority groups with the notable exception of people with disabilities. It is broad  and subject to the interpretation of planners which is limiting because minority groups experience land  use regulations in different ways.    

C. Built Form    
In the Build a Desirable Urban Form (2015) section, The Official Plan also speaks to the  importance of building an Urban Form that "respect[s] the experience, identity and character  of the surrounding context" which might limit the outward appearance of upandcoming  mosques (p2). This requirement limits the potential to build distinct mosques.     24     

An opportunity exists here to bring interest and better represent the diversity of  communities in Mississauga through built form guidelines.  Islamic architecture has brought  touristic value and visual interest to cities across the world in addition to serving as a  sanctuary to immigrants and refugees seeking familiarity.    

D. Summary on Policy Findings:    
Overall, while there is little regarding religion directly with the exception of one  mention in the Introduction of the Official Plan, the policy framework is flexible enough to  allow for the integration of religious institutions within the fabric of the city at the discretion  of practitioners.    
A major shortcoming of the policy context is that in terms of process, when it comes to  consultation and engagement, there is little direction regarding how to manage moments of tensions or   conflicts.            

5. CASE STUDIES: IDENTIFYING WHERE POLICY FALLS SHORT    
    Analyzing the policy has provided insight on opportunities to improve in addition to a 

theoretical understanding of where they fall short. However, what are the impacts of a lacking  policy? Case studies are assessed below to examine incidents that have illustrated that a lack  of policy can in fact exacerbate existing tensions.   

25     

Syed (2016) notes that "The GTA takes great pride in its multiculturalism...but under  the feelgood rhetoric about diversity lies a complicated, and oftentimes racist, conflict over  space between established residents and newcomers" (p. 6667).     In a study by the Joint Centre for Excellence for Research on Immigration and  Settlement in Toronto, researchers found that seventeen of thirtyfive GTA municipalities had  experienced at least one fight between immigrant communities and the municipal government  over proposals for mosques or temples" (Joint Centre For Excellence for Research and  Immigration and Settlement in Toronto). She notes that out of the seventeen instances,  fourteen of them had to do with landuse regulations (Joint Centre For Excellence for Research  and Immigration and Settlement in Toronto).    

a.    The Opportunity: examining the Aga Khan Museum as a successful example of a  Religious Institution    
The Aga Khan Museum is an excellent example of the cultural value that religious  institutions can bring. The Museum is a product of a supportive landuse process whereby  policies were interpreted to support its approval. This facility is noteworthy because of its  architectural significance: the museum is "inspired by a contemporary take on the Islamic  courtyard the Chahar bagh" (The Plan, 2018, para 1). "Chahar bagh" refers to the four rivers  in Paradise referenced in the Quran. The facility is noteworthy because it is a highprofile  institution that is reputed for presenting a contemporary take on Islamic architecture to  visitors, whether they be Muslim or otherwise. The building use has cultural significance and  is:    

26     

Dedicated to presenting an overview of the artistic, intellectual and scientific  contributions that Islamic civilizations have made to world heritage, the Museum is  home to galleries, exhibition spaces, classrooms, a reference library, auditorium and  restaurant (Para 1).        It draws hundreds of visitors monthly to learn about Islamic History and Civilization,  displaying artefacts from a range of places across the world: In the About Me section of their  website, they cite the Aga Khan, the leader of the Ismaili Community in stating that     The aim of the Aga Khan Museum will be to offer unique insights and new perspectives into   Islamic civilizations and the cultural threads that weave through history binding us all together.  My hope is that the Museum will also be a centre of education and of learning, and that it will  act as a catalyst for mutual understanding and tolerance"     The purpose of presenting the Aga Khan Museum as an example of a successful Islamic  architecture and cultural resource is to illustrate what supportive policy and practice can  achieve. The Aga Khan Museum is a private facility owned by a relatively wealthy, integrated   Muslim community in Canada, therefore, there are premises to critique its development.   

However, the point of introducing the facility here is to illuminate an opportunity in the realm  of possibility.    

B. Case Studies: challenges faced by Mosque Builders in Mississauga   
Tactical aspects of planning for Mosques in Mississauga appear to be flexible enough to be  able to address diversity and inclusion based on existing Policies. Opportunities for  27     

improvement have been identified, but what does a comparison of media pieces with Official  City of Mississauga Minutes illustrate regarding the relationship the City has with mosque  builders?         The following case studies illustrate the implications of the lack of representation 

identified in the literature review broadly: The case studies all fall within the past five years  and they are explored to unpack Islamophobia in planning practices when complemented by a  lack of policy representation identified in the section prior to this one.     i. The Case of the Meadowvale Islamic Centre         In September 2015, the Mississauga Planning Committee convened to discuss the 

potential development of the Meadowvale Islamic Centre, a 12000 square foot mosque that  would be located across from the Meadowvale Town Centre, a medium sized mall and  community landmark. The events leading to the application were controversial and exposed  issues that reflected the challenge of planningforminorities when hostile opposition  member.         In a CBC article (2015), a moment of such tension is highlighted. The mayor "accus[es] 

one man of "hatemongering" prior to the Planning and Development Committee approving  the development of the Meadowvale Islamic Centre on Winston Churchilll Boulevard, across  from  Meadowvale Town Centre" (CBC, para. 1). The man the mayor was reprimanding was  Kevin Johnston, author of a website called stopthemosque.ca and former mayoral candidate.      While the confrontation between the mayor and the individual were not reflected in  the minutes, issues of noise and traffic were highlighted in the City of Mississauga Minutes  28     

(2015). In addition to issues of lights, concerns regarding the function of the Minaret and  Dome, sanitation issues, maintenance of garbage and other "gray areas" that potentially mask  underlying issues of racism and xenophobia were raised.         What the minutes did not reflect was an exchange between the mayor and opponents 

of the development, where the mayor confronted opponents for producing hatespeech on a  website called stopthemosque.ca, where "[T]hey warn of increases in sexual assault,  vandalism, kidnappings, and a loss of freedom of speech should the project be approved" (CBC  News, para 8). Johnston presented issues of noise, traffic and policing, but when the website  was brought up, supporting audience members cheered (para 6). A flyer that was distributed  in the neighborhood is pictured below:    

   
Figure 2. Stop the Mosque Flyer, Mississauga, Canada. From: Is Mississauga Islamophobic? by Ashley Newport,   2015, https://www.insauga.com/ismississaugaislamophobic  

29     

   

The lack of clarity in the minutes is one way that Islamophobia has been institutionally 

ignored and left to the wayside. The other issue that becomes evident is that it is unclear  whether public officials are professionally equipped to grapple with the issue of hostile  opponents attending public meetings in large numbers. This case study resonates with case  studies examined by Germain and Gagnon (2003) where local communities in Quebec  weaponized their collective White Nationalist identity against minority religious groups.     ii. The Case of ISNA's Friday Prayer Parking Exemption Hours         In the Human Rights Legal Support Centre (2017) Annual Report for 20142015, 

another instance where land use regulations and policies fell pitifully short regarding the  question of religious accommodation took place in 2014.  In April 2014, two men asked the  Human Rights Tribunal of Ontario to back a claim that a parking restriction in the City of  Mississauga was discriminatory (Human Rights Legal Support Centre, 5).     According to the Human Rights Tribunal of Ontario brief, the applicants, Muhammad    Khalid and Salman Khalid received a parking ticket when parked on smaller street called Finfar  Street close to ISNA mosque on a Friday between 12 PM and 3 PM. The applicants did not  dispute that parking was prohibited on Finfar Court. They asserted that because the  prohibition falls at the specific time that weekly Friday prayers fall, the City was producing  discrimination because at all other times during the week, vehicle owners could park on the  street. For this reason, Khalid and Khalid sought legal counsel because they experienced the  discriminatory nature of the prohibition (Khalid v. the Corporation of the City of Mississauga,  2014).    

30     

   

The National Council of Canadian Muslims (NCCM) was approached, and after being 

briefed on the situation at hand, they requested to intervene, identifying that the prohibition  is discriminatory. They formally submitted to the Ontario Human Rights Commission that  "parking restrictions can create barriers for participation in religious activities at mosques"  (Khalid v. the Corporation of the City of Mississauga, 2014).     The NCCM was granted its request to intervene but was only permitted to provide an  oral or written statement after the proceedings. To date, the case is still pending (Khalid v. the  Corporation of the City of Mississauga, 2014).          While no definitive decision was made regarding whether the City was breaking the 

Ontario Human Rights Code, the trial itself was a product of the two applicants' engagements  with the City (Hudes, 2014). When the City was approached, it cited safety concerns in its  refusal to continue pursuing the case, illustrating that from a legal perspective, a compelling  enough case could be made regarding discrimination.         Hudes (2014) noted that the lawyer representing the City described the issue as 

"touchy", illustrating the fear of the City to engage with issues relating to religion and space  (para 18).         This case illustrates the polarizing and often jarring nature of the question of religious 

accommodation: The City's actions indicated that they did not want to engage with the topic,  while the Ontario Human Rights Tribunal gave the National Council of Canadian Muslims very  limited opportunity to engage in discussion. To date, a decision has not been made.   

31     

 iii. The Case of Masjid Al Farooq    

   

The Case of the expansion of Masjid Al Farooq is interesting for two reasons: the first is  that in the Planning and Development Committee (2014) Meeting minutes, City  representatives suggested that the expansion be moved to a more industrial area because  issues of noise and parking were cited (p.7). The second factor that is noteworthy about this  case was the public anxiety surrounding the minaret and dome size, conjuring memories of the  2009 minaret ban referendum in Sweden.         The Meeting Minutes document that the mayor "expressed concern that the question 

of discrimination comes up when there is any opposition to mosques" when concerns  identified  "applied to all places of worship" (City of Mississauga, p. 6). This excerpt is  noteworthy because it illustrates the supposed racially neutral approach to planning that  Sandercock (2000) identifies in Australia, and Lung et al (2015) identify in Canada, which is  arguably regressive because it keeps communities from engaging in dialogue with  municipalities to better frame their exchanges with religious minorities.     A significant discussion also took place regarding the appropriateness of having a dome  and minaret, echoing anxieties first covered in the media regarding a controversial minaret  ban in Switzerland.     Dodd (2015) identifies in her analysis that the ban was a consequence of mass paranoia  which came with an influx of Muslim immigration. Dodd (2015) also identifies the significance  of minarets, echoing Syed's (2016) findings that minarets serve as signifiers of place. Syed  notes   32     

that:     As a religious structure, the minaret serves primarily as a symbol: pointing heavenward  as a reminder of the presence and oneness of Allah. Given its highvisibility, the  minaret also served as a symbol to demarcate a religious haven for travelers, because  often, the mosque was the premier destination to obtain room and board. (Syed, 67)    In both the cases of the Meadowvale Islamic Centre and Masjid al Farooq, the community was  asked to scale down the dome and minaret features to better "fit the character of the  neighbourhood" (City of Mississauga, p. 6).     

    
 Figure 3: Masjid al Farooq, Mississauga, Canada. From: Insauga. By: Alan Kan, 2017.    https://www.insauga.com/mississaugacitycouncilapprovesmosqueexpansionnearstreetsville   

The cases examined above are brought to light to problematize the municipality's  anxiety around changing the character of the neighborhood to better reflect its users and  33     

break out of a tradition of sticking to relatively homogenous, arguably boring streetscapes that  reflect Western building subjectivities in a city that prides itself on pluralism and  multiculturalism. The question that Hackworth and Stein (2012) raise remains relevant,  therefore: is nuance and pluralism only encouraged if it necessarily promises economic gains  beyond the functionalities of providing a social service?       

6. ANALYSIS AND RECOMMENDATIONS    
Upon analyzing the literature, policy and case studies, it becomes evident that the  secularization of landuse policies identified by Hackworth and Gullickson (2016) are both  present in the policy scan and the case studies. One way that the secularization of landuse  policies festers is that the representation of religious interests in policy and practice is not  present because municipalities have different priorities: a reading of Hackworth and Gullickson  (2016) alongside Harvey (2008) might suggest that these priorities are more profitoriented.      Upon reflection, some implications that can be further explored by cities to better  serve minorities are as follows:     1. The importance of representing Muslims and historically marginalized people in landuse  policies such as Cultural Master Plans and Built Form Guidelines.    While Mayor Bonnie Crombie responded to hate appropriately to the incident at the Planning  and Development meeting referenced in the Meadowvale Islamic Centre case study, what  comes to light is that city officials are not always prepared for xenophobic outbursts in city  planning meetings. The unfolding of events illustrated a missed opportunity for education and  34     

relationship building to set the tone for the conversation at the beginning of the meeting. The  comments made by the mosque opponents were harmful for the Muslim community and  following the events, little initiative was taken by the city to promote healing and  understanding within the community.         Furthermore, what is telling about the Masjid al Farooq case study is that without 

representation, development opponents are supported by policies when their apprehensions  around architectures representing racial, cultural or religious difference are not challenged by  existing built form guidelines.         Representation of not only Muslims and other historically marginalized people are 

paramount to mediate moments where tensions premised in racism and xenophobia become  present, but representation also helps keep such moments at bay. To keep the process  accountable, it is also important to approach planning policy as a process and to review it  often so as to identify where it falls short.     2. The importance of employing a greater number of minorities to avoid tokenistic  decisionmaking and encourage nuanced debate to frame policies and practices     Another important consideration in organizing public meetings and making highlevel  decisions pertaining to matters that primarily affect minority groups is to have them present  in the room: in instances where xenophobic or racial tension becomes present, it is  important for public officials to be prepared.         One approach to preparedness is to have people who have experienced exclusion in 

the room and can appreciate the viewpoints presented by minority groups. In the Masjid al  Farooq case, a prevalent theme was the apprehension of public officials in providing  35     

statements. This apprehension likely had to do with a lacking in professional capacity in  addressing xenophobia. It is beneficial for public officials to have minority colleagues because  they bridge the gap between public officials and minorities. It is further beneficial for  minorities to have access to public officials who represent them because their perspectives  will because the people on the receiving end of their apprehensions will be able to better  relate with them, and for public officials to work across municipal silos and leverage the  expertise of professionals in equity and neighborhood development divisions because these  divisions address matters of urban equity and discrimination.    3. The importance of training city officials to practice planning in a manner that best  reflects an understanding that historical differentials necessarily entail power  differentials It is important to consider historical differentials when thinking about  development from the consultation period to the approval/disapproval period.  Acknowledging that city officials have different levels of knowledge on historical  differences is also an acknowledgement that city officials have different levels of  knowledge regarding the complexities of city dwellers' identities and experiences with  planning. The history of Muslims in Canada outlined at the beginning of this essay  illustrates the complex, multifaceted nature of migration, and the necessary power  differentials that come from fleeing your home country as a refugee and choosing to  settle in Mississauga because you can afford to do so. These power differentials nuance  communities' experiences with city planning because regardless of a demand for  religious institutions, aspects like language competency and access to economic assets  allow, disallow and complicate the experiences of communities when attempting to  36     

build. City Staff should be trained to be able to recognize these intersections and  differentials. They should also be trained to be able to come up with strategies to  navigate challenges that are consequences of these power differentials.  Furthermore,  drawing onto Lung et al (2015), it is important for curricula in planning schools to  incorporate meaningful and proactive conversations about historical marginalization to  prepare planners for related challenges before they begin to practice at a professional  level.      4. The importance of structuring consultations around holding space for minorities within  minority groups    Such an approach will incorporate identifying which members of minority groups are  consistently excluded in community engagements and will follow up by providing targeted  engagement methods that allow them to participate. Such engagement methods will nurture  creativity on the planner's end because they require thinking beyond the classic open house  discussion and might involve engaging with community members through technology and  phoning them to receive their input if they cannot come for public engagements, in addition to  other, creative, less orthodox, less jarring approaches to engagement.     Final Thoughts:   Ultimately, this paper is not suggesting that the city, as a homogenous entity, is  outright unfriendly to the development of minority places of worship. It is arguing that given  the historical and political context, policies and processes need to better reflect the existence,  needs and nuances of historically marginalized people that complicate landuse planning. To  reiterate the objective of the essay, such an approach applies to minorities beyond religious  37     

minorities: the paper simply focuses on Muslims because they are being increasingly racialized  through existing policies and practices.        In the introduction of this essay, planning is introduced as an interdisciplinary field, 

therefore a natural assumption in undoing legacies of exclusion in planning would also be to  engage with other fields. Some that immediately come to mind within the context of religious  exclusion are the fields of Anthropology, Politics, Education and Social Work because of the  historical, political, social and cultural implications of planning for racial difference.                                     

38     

        

References   
Agrawal, S. Kumar (2008). Faithbased Ethnic Residential Communities and Neighbourliness in  Canada. Planning Practice and Research (23). 4156.    
Aga Khan Museum (2018). About Us. Web.    

Agrawal, S. Kumar (2009). New Ethnic Places and Planning Challenges. Plan. Special Edition (9).  14.      Allen, R & Carrissa Schively Slotterback (2017). Building Immigrant Engagement Practices in    Urban Planning: The Case of Somali Refugees in the Twin Cities. Journal of Urban Affairs. p. 1 16    Bradamat, P (2008). Religion and public policy in Canada: An Itinerary. Studies in Religion/  Sciences Religieuses 37(1). 121144.    Bradamat, P. and David Seljak (2008). Christianity and Ethnicity in Canada. University of  Toronto Press.     Bradburn, J (2015). Historicist: Toronto's First Mosques. Torontoist. Web url:  https://torontoist.com/2015/11/historicisttorontosfirstmosques/      Build a Desirable Urban Form (2015). Mississauga Official Plan. 132.     Buyaridi, M (2003). The Multicultural City as Planners' Enigma. Planning Theory & Practice. 4:3.  259273.     Calgary Anti Racism Education (2017). Forms of Racism. University of British Columbia. Web.     City of Mississauga (2014, March 24). Minutes Planning and Development Committee. Planning  and Development Archive, Web.     City of Mississauga (2015, September 21). Minutes Planning and Development Committee.  Planning and Development Archive, Web.     CBC (2015). Contentious Mississauga rezoning approved at Council. Web.     Dodd, S (2015). THe Structure of Islam in Switzerland and the Effects of the Swiss Minarets  Ban. Journal of Muslim Minority Affairs. 35(1). 4264.     39     

Gagnon, J. Elizabeth & Annick Germain (2003). Minority Places of Worship and Zoning  Dilemmas in Montreal. Planning Theory and Practice (4). p. 295318.     Galabuzi, G and Cheryl Teelucksingh. "Social Cohesion, Social Exclusion, Social Capital". Region  of Peel Immigration Discussion Paper.         Gale, R (2008). Locating Religion in Urban Planning: Beyond "race" and Ethnicity? Planning,  Practice 7 Research 23(1). 1933.    Garner, S and Saher Selod (2015). The Racialization of Muslims: Empirical Studies of  Islamophobia. Critical Sociology. 41 (1). 919.     Gebresselasie, M. "Allah hu akbar" or God is Great painted on window of former High Park  Presbyterian Church that served as the Jami Masjid for several years. 2011. Architectonicto.  Web. 30 Mar 2018.       Germain, A (2014). "Religion in Public space in a Multiethnic Environment". Plan Canada,  Special Edition. 8991.    Hackworth, J. and Kirsten Stein (2012). The Collision of Faith and Economic Development in  Toronto's Inner Suburban Industrial District. Urban Affairs Review (48). 3763.     Hackworth, J and Erin Gullikson (2013). Giving new meaning to religious conversion: churches,  redevelopment and secularization in Toronto. The Canadian Geographer 57 (1). 7289.     Harris, N (2011). Discipline, Surveillance, Control: A Foucaudian Perspective on the  Enforcement of Planning Regulations. Planning Theory and Practice 12(1). Web.    Harvey, D (2008). The Right to the City. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research  (27). 939938.     Hudes, S (2014). Mississauga Parking Restriction during prayer hours discriminates against  Muslims, Rights Complaint says. National Post. Web.    Jamil, U (2011). Discrimination faced by Muslims in Ontario. Ontario Human Rights  Commission.   Web url: http://www.ohrc.on.ca/en/book/export/html/8782     Kan, A (2017). Masjid Toronto. 2017. Insauga. Web. 02 Apr 2018.     Joint Centre of Excellence for Research on Immigration and Settlement (2016). Migration,  Immigration and Social Sustainability: the Recent Toronto Experience in Context. Working  Paper.     Kazemipur, A (2014). A Story of Segmented Integration. UBC Press.     Khalid v. The Corporation of the City of Mississauga. 2014, April 4. Canadian Legal Information  Institute.    

40     

Khirfan, L, Bessma Momani and Zahra Jaffer (2012). Whose authority? Exporting Canadian  Urban Planning Expertise to Jordan and Abu Dhabi. Geoforum. 19.     Lung, A, StaceyAnne Harwood, Gerardo Francisco Sandoval and Siddhartha Sen (2015).  Teaching Equiy and Advocacy Planning in a Multicultural "Postracial world". Journal of  Planning Education and Research 35(4). 337342.     Masjid al Farooq (2017). About Us. Masjid al Toronto. Web.     Minsky, L (2018). Hate crimes against Muslims increase 253% in four years. Global News. Web.     Mississauga (2015). Introduction. Mississauga Official Plan. 111.     Mississauga (2009), Mississauga Culture Master Plan. Mississauga. 181.    Mississauga(2015). Policy Context. Mississauga Official Plan. 13    Mississauga (2015). Promote Collaboration. Mississauga Official Plan. 12    Murdie, R (2010). The Housing Careers of Polish and Somali Newcomers in Toronto's Rental  Market. Housing Studies. 423443.     Mussa, I (2017). Black Muslims in Ottawa upset over lack of diversity at Muslim conference.  CBC News. Web url:   https://www.google.ca/search?q=Black+Muslims+in+Ottawa+upset+over+lack+of+diversity+at+  Muslim+conference.&rlz=1C1CHBF_enCA770CA770&oq=Black+Muslims+in+Ottawa+upset+over   +lack+of+diversity+at+Muslim+conference.&aqs=chrome..69i57.2185j0j4&sourceid=chrome&ie  =UTF8     Newport, A. Stop the Mosque. 2015. Insauga. Web. 30 Mar 2018.    Qadeer, M and Maghfoor Chaudhary (2000). The Planning System and the Development of  Mosques in the Greater Toronto Area. Plan Canada.     Rajaram, L (2015). "Evaluating land uses in Places of Worship: A case of Hindu Temples in the  GTA." Ryerson University. 164.    Region of Peel (2016). Official Plan. Region of Peel. 1250.     Statistics Canada (2011). Religion, Immigrant Status and Period of Immigration, Age Groups  and Sex for the Population in Private Households of Canada, Provinces, Territories, Census  Metropolitan Areas and Census Agglomerations. 2011 National Household Survey. Web url:  http://www5.statcan.gc.ca/olccel/olc.action?objId=98  400X2016205&objType=46&lang=en&limit=0      Statistics Canada (2011). National Household Survey. National Household Survey. Web url:    http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhsenm/2011/dppd/prof/index.cfm?Lang=E     Statistics Canada (2016). National Household Survey. National Household Survey. Web url:  http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/censusrecensement/2016/dppd/indexeng.cfm     41     

Statistics Canada (2011). Religion (108), Immigrant Status and Period of Immigration (11), Age  Groups (10) and Sex (3) for the Population in Private Households of Canada, Provinces,    Territories, Census Metropolitan Areas and Census Agglomerations. 2011 National Household   Survey. Web url: http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhsenm/2011/dppd/dttd/Lp   eng.cfm?LANG=E&APATH=3&DETAIL=0&DIM=0&FL=A&FREE=0&GC=0&GID=0&GK=0&GRP=1&P   ID=0&PRID=0&PTYPE=105277&S=0&SHOWALL=0&SUB=0&Temporal=2013&THEME=95&VID=0   &VNAMEE&VNAMEF         Sandercock, L (2000). Cities of (In) Difference and the Challenge for Planning. The Planning  Review, 34 (140). 715.     Smith, C (1996) . Disruptive Religion: the Force of Faith in SocialMovement Activism.  Routledge New York.      Syed, F (2016). Finding Space for Spirituality. Subdivided. Coach House Books. 6575.       
The Plan (2018). AGA KHAN MUSEUM. Web Url:   https://www.theplan.it/eng/webzine/internationalarchitecture/enagakhanmuseum    

    Toronto Mayor's Committee on Community and Race Relations. Race Relations. Myths and  Facts. Web Url: https://www.torontopubliclibrary.ca/search.jsp?N=4294638613         WilkinsLaflamme, S. Islamophobia in Canada: Measuring the Realities of Negative Attitudes     Towards Muslims and Religious Discrimination. Canadian Review of Sociology. 55(1). 86110.        Vezina, M and Rene Houle (2017). Settlement Patterns and Social Integration of Population  with  an Immigration background in Montreal, Toronto and Vancouver Metropolitan Areas.  Ethnicity,  Language and Immigration Thematic Series. Statistics Canada. Web url:    
http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/89657x/89657x2016002eng.htm    

    Your guide to the Best Islamic Institutions. Salatomatic. Web url:  https://www.salatomatic.com/   Yousif, A (1992). Muslims in the Canadian Mosaic. American  Journal of Islamic Social Sciences.    
(2013). NHS Bulletin: Ethnic Diversity & Religion. Peel Data Center.   

42     

    

43     


