Lotfi 1

The Winning Political Campaign of the Digital Age: Justin Trudeau's Social Media-Oriented Politics
Asa Lotfi Supervisor Dr. Susan Cody

Ryerson University Toronto, Ontario, Canada August 31, 2019

Lotfi 2 AUTHOR'S DECLARATION FOR ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF A MAJOR RESEARCH PAPER I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this Major Research Paper and the accompanying Research Poster. This is a true copy of the MRP and the research poster, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this major research paper and/or poster to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this MRP and/or poster by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my MRP and/or my MRP research poster may be made electronically available to the public.

Lotfi 3 Table of contents Acknowledgements-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------p.4 Abstract---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------p.5 Introduction---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------p.6 Literature Review-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------p.10 The Trudeau Legacy-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- p.10 Voting and Voters-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------p.13 Theory Application----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------p.16 Research Questions-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------p. Data Collection----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------p.23 Methods-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------p.24 Findings and Selected Results----------------------------------------------------------------------------------p.30 The Instagramming----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------P.30 The Tweeting-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------p.41 The Twigramming----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------p.50 Limitations and Future Research------------------------------------------------------------------------------p.56 Conclusion----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------p.59 Figures---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------p.61 References----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------p.63

Lotfi 4

Acknowledgments I would like to thank Dr. Susan Cody for her continuous writing support and supervision, without whom this research paper would not have been possible. Similarly, Dr. Joanne Di Nova's insights and reviews of this paper as a second reader are much appreciated and acknowledged.

Lotfi 5 Abstract Given Justin Trudeau's unexpected win of the federal election of 2015 and his outstanding social media (SM) presence, this paper analyzes Justin Trudeau's social media marketing strategies through the study of his image on social media and his content creation. Social Media's effect on our daily lives has been long studied, but the effects of SM on political marketing and politics have not yet been extensively addressed by academic studies. The analysis of Justin Trudeau's marketing strategy and image on social media is done by comparing Justin Trudeau's visual, textual, and multimodal content creation on the two SM platforms Instagram and Twitter. The results of the analysis show that Justin Trudeau's politics and image on social media are dependent on the desires of social media users and concludes his success as being a result of his Social Media Oriented Politics--a term which refers to a politician whose actions are dependent on the desires of social media users.

Lotfi 6 Introduction: Along with the rising of new media, more specifically Social Media (SM), new forms of communications have also arrived, which have inevitably changed marketing strategizing and advertising for politicians. In today's world, being an active SM user can be counted as one of the most recent responsibilities of an important political figure. Politicians use SM platforms, such as twitter, in order to directly communicate with the public and share the newest updates about economic growth and progress. The enhancement of the quality of communication is not the only benefit offered by the usage of SM. however. In fact, SM enables self-expression for users, through the possibility of having an online identity and profile, which showcases the user's personal life and interests. Moreover, the display of life events and interests, provided through a user's SM profile, does not only encourage storytelling for the users, but also enables the users' `self-branding'. What we think about individuals and how we see them is no longer solely based on our face-to-face interactions: Social Media's power over our opinions is clear. Indeed, some of the most studied topics with regards to SM and SM usages that have interested researchers are centralized on themes about branding and online identities. For example, Kleppinger and Cain (2017) point to how "the absence of an online presence could potentially send a negative message, that the individual is ill equipped for digital communications", which highlights the significance and influential power of our online digital presence upon others' opinions. Moreover, marketing companies that have realized the potential of social media's influence on opinions are nowadays insistent on the incorporation of Social Media marketing for businesses, big or small. Komodoromos (2015) observes that "the private sector has long recognized this media's potential for influencing consumers, and many professionals are aware of the power at its disposal as an advocacy Tool" (218). This is important, as it shows the use of the powers of new media and SM for professionals. In fact, political marketers and researchers have increasingly begun studying the effect of SM usage on the voting

Lotfi 7 demography's decisions and on opinions of politicians. For example, Lee and Oh (2012) point to how SM messages enhance "message recognition and recall" increased the interactivity of voters, only for more affiliated individuals, and decreased the willingness of "less affiliated individuals to vote for the candidates" [emphasis added].Their research concludes that the usage of SM is `conditionally' effective in encouraging the voting demography to vote. Nevertheless, some politicians have found social media to be a beneficial communication hub with their fans and audience, such as Donald J. Trump, whose twitter engagements and posts has shown to be advantageous for the Republican party's campaign and gaining of popularity amongst voters (Vraga 2014). Indeed, Canada's liberal party leader, Justin Trudeau, although known and characterized very differently from Donald Trump, can also be referred to as one of the more tech-savvy and popular politicians, who unexpectedly and quickly gained the public's trust and love through his strategic use of SM. On October 20, 2015 Justin Trudeau was elected the prime minister of Canada. Trudeau, who was at the time a 40 year old candidate and known as the son of former Canadian prime minister Pierre Trudeau, stood up for minority groups and made promises with regards to immigration laws, health services, marijuana legalization, and taxes in favor of low income and middle-class families. Even though some found Trudeau inexperienced, Trudeau's slogan, "real change NOW", which emphasized the promise of change, attracted most of the voters, as they were "tired of the conservative party" and negative towards Stephen Harpers' economical knowledge and understanding(Vieira 2015; Clarke, Gravelle, Scotto, Stewart & Reifler 2017). Consequently, the Conservative party's marketing strategy and approaches to economics, which had been effective and praised for more than a decade, were proven to be insufficient to win the Canadian voters' hearts. By contrast, the Liberal party's campaign strategies and technique to gain popularity among the public turned out to be unexpectedly welcomed by Canadian voters. Moreover, the communication approach that my analyses shows to be most effective and

Lotfi 8 characteristically aligned with Trudeau's campaign is his use of SM. In fact, Trudeau's social media presence and public appearances have made him a political celebrity, known as the "selfie prime minister", which shows Trudeau's social involvement and handle on new cultural trends, such as the act of taking a `selfie' (Marland, 2018; p 140). Indeed, other researchers such as Kedzio point to the cultural implications of taking a selfie and its relevance to social media, as he writes "the selfie does not exist in separation from its natural habitat ­ social media". This statement not only points to the relevance of selfies and social media, but also suggests the increasing usage of selfies, as a result of social media's existence and domestication in humans' daily lives. To further justify his statement, Kedzio proposes viewing "selfies as assemblages which connect self, space, technology and social networks". Here, I would say that Kedzio's findings about selfies can also justify Justin Trudeau's awareness and emphasis on social networks and technology, as a `selfie prime minister'. That is to say that Justin Trudeau's nickname suggests that he is aware of and inhibits character traits that are relevant to being socially and technologically active. Moreover, Panjeta's study, which focuses on the effect of the preval ent selfie culture and cyber documentarism, "as a consequence of widespread new technologies and social networking", points to the universality of the `selfie' culture and how it can be seen as an international language of communication among humans (2017). Here, I would like to note the significance of Panjeta addressing the universality of this act and its embedment in our cultures, since such universality also makes Trudeau seem relatable and helps people identify with his personality--as a normal person taking a `selfie' picture, rather than an empowered politician. I also find this important to consider, because Justin Trudeau's attempt to appeal relatable and his emphasis on multiculturality and acceptance of `diversity' are found to be his most dominant techniques throughout his campaign. However, attempting to appeal to people as a rather relatable figure is not a new technique to gain popularity among the public. What makes Trudeau's aim

Lotfi 9 different from those of his opponents is his use of technology as a resource to practice a form of politics, which I will call "social media-oriented politics". The practice of Social Media-oriented politics is best described as, when a politician, whose supposed main goal is to grow a country's economic stance, bases his decisions and actions on the sole purpose of gaining a more popular and favorable social media status. That is to say that, the politician's goals and economic views are undermined and deprioritized by his/her aim to gain popularity and attention on social media. Moreover, when one digs into the deeper roots of Justin Trudeau's practice of `social media-oriented politics', it is possible to conclude that his skills in using social media and the influential power of social media on public opinion are some of the primary reasons for his practice of such politics. Especially in the case of Canadian Federal elections, where one deals with a voting population, such as Canadians, who mostly have access to social media and use social media on a daily basis. Unsurprisingly, Justin Trudeau's popularity and strategic use of SM to his advantage is apparent, when one compares his followers on Instagram or Twitter to that of his opponent at the time, being Stephen Harper. As of June 14th, 2019, Justin Trudeau has 2.9 million followers and Stephen Harper has 20.8 thousand followers. Although simply comparing the two adversaries in terms of their followers count is not only a limited, but also a superficial analysis of Justin Trudeau's use of social media, as his posts on Twitter and Instagram reflect many other hidden messages and themes, such as nostalgia and nationalism, that will be further discussed and explained in this research paper. So, "What was it about Trudeau's social media image that made his campaign successful and who were his target audience?" and "why did Trudeau choose such strategy?" and "what does this strategy reveal about the voting demography?". It is a part of my research plan to address such questions in the light of the following literature review, through which I introduce the theories that will be used as the basis of my research plan, such as impression management, social semiotics, and critical discourse analysis, and how such theories can be applied to the subject matter.

Lotfi 10 Literature review: In this literature review, I first points to how Justin Trudeau's image as the Prime Minister of Canada has been documented in media and how this image is a reflection of his political stance and emphasis on community engagement. In this section, Pierre Elliot Trudeau's legacy, as a prime minister will be discussed and explored, as one of the prominent bases of Justin Trudeau's Social-media oriented politics. After which, the paper addresses Canadian voters' preferences, voting statistics, and demographics of voting populations, which are significant to one's further understanding of my research aims and approaches. And lastly, the review introduces you to the communication theories that can help explain the reason and choices behind Trudeau's social media marketing strategies. The Trudeau Legacy Espousing a variety of progressive views and advantaged by a "cool" media-savvy presence the youthful, fluently bilingual, and comfortably bicultural prime minister quickly became a popular figure throughout much of the [Canada] (McLuhan 1964) I decided to begin this section with McLuhan's statement, since I think that McLuhan's description of Pierre Elliot Trudeau's personality remarks the uncanny resemblance of Justin Trudeau's personality traits to his father's. In fact, many youth, who are not as familiar with older political figures as the general population, may mistakenly think that the above statement is referring to Justin Trudeau, who is known for the same personality traits. The first Trudeau who was a part of the Canadian Liberal party was Justin Trudeau's father, Pierre Elliot Trudeau, who ran as the prime minister of Canada for almost 15 years. And so naturally, most literature on Justin Trudeau does not fail to compare and relate his action plans, as a prime minister, to his father's. According to Clarkson, Pierre Trudeau, who is known for his charisma has been described as one who represents "star quality," "being a celebrity," a "lady's man," a "media object,"

Lotfi 11 a "wise man"", which all show and agree with his charismatic personally trait, but also point to the strength of this trait in comparison to other politicians of his time, such as Tommy Douglas or John Diefenbaker(2000). This is important since Justin Trudeau as mentioned before is also recognized for being charismatic and treated like a celebrity by the public, who normally criticize and despise political figures (Marland, 2018). Marland's study talks about Pierre Trudeau's romantic associations with celebrities, such as Barbara Streisand, and his trendy suit style. But more importantly, she points to the public's fascination and desire for Pierre Trudeau as she refers to "an era of Trudeaumania". Indeed, during the height of Trudeau's popularity and after his successful campaign, Paul Litt published a book called Trudeaumania, which is about the rising power of Pierre Trudeau. Reviews of this book refer to how Litt makes the argument that Trudeau "was seen as hip and irreverent toward both status quo politics and social convention, be it via his bachelorhood or wearing sandals in Parliament", causing him to be a desired candidate for Canadians at the time, who were supposedly feeling young and progressive (Akin 2015). Although, Litt also addresses the role of Canadian influential intellectuals in boosting such mania around Pierre Trudeau, as he points how the intellectual community were mostly white male and relatively wealthy, who lived in either Montreal, Quebec, or Toronto. According to Litt, such class of Canadian Intellectuals saw a part of Trudeau's ideology, perspective, and even appearance in themselves, which again relates to my point about the relatability and identification effect Pierre Elliot and Justin Trudeau have on the voting demography. Furthermore, the word Trudeaumania provides a connotation that the rise of Trudeau is a conspiracy, Akin points to how what it truly advocates is the power of Canadian elites, who were also a large part of the voting demography during the years 1965-1968. However, the voting demography from the 1960's has naturally changed and progressed more towards middle-class immigrant families, the public's admiration for Trudeau's image and promises proved to be intact and continuously influential, based on Trudeau's winning campaign. In fact, the consistency of the both Pierre and Justin

Lotfi 12 Trudeau's successfulness in the federal elections with the everchanging voting demography, not only disapproves the idea of Trudeaumania as a conspiracy, but also shows the Trudeaus' understanding of and use of strategic political marketing techniques. Moreover, Pierre Trudeau's influence on Canadian identity and nationalism is also remarked by Clarkson, as he writes about how Trudeau "is the idealized model of what Canadians (at least Englishspeaking Canadians) like to think they are" and as the man who "branded" Canada as a bilingual and multicultural society (594). This is significant, as it not only shows how Pierre Trudeau is seen as the true representative of Canada, but also exposes his interest in multiculturalism. In fact, one can say that Justin Trudeau's campaign promises and specific attention to targeting the immigrant communities of Canada is a result of his familiarity and understanding of the immigrant communities, due to his father's interest and familiarity. In addition, the "branding" of Canada, which Clarkson refers to is a significant factor to consider, due to the influential power that an organization or `brand' is able to achieve through the creation of a strong relationship with its audience. For example, Marland points to how the "consumers form an emotional attachment to certain brands, becoming loyal to a brand and its symbols, preferring it over the alternatives even during a crisis" (Marland 2018). If one assumes that the voting demography are consumers and that the political figure is the product, one can say that Justin Trudeau was not a suitable choice for economic growth in Canada, and that the consumers' loyalty to the Trudeau brand was the real boost for the Trudeaus' winning elections. Lastly, the acknowledgement of Pierre Trudeau's public image and identity, does help us recognize some of the assumptions and preconceived notions associated with Justin Trudeau's identity for the voting demography, such as the `ideal image of Canada' or the interest and love for multiculturalism. One can also notice how the image and identity that Justin Trudeau promotes for himself on social media is related to the favorite and popular characteristics of his father, which would show Pierre Trudeau's significance on Justin Trudeau's `super star' quality on social media.

Lotfi 13 Therefore, an analysis of Justin Trudeau's social media posts, would not only be enlightening in terms of showing an effective strategy, but will also expose of Justin Trudeau's identity and how this identity is enhanced and supported by Pierre Trudeau's legacy and public image as a politician. Voting and voters: decision-making process and things that effect it Studying the voting patterns and voting demography's cultures, preferences and other relevant factors with regards to the decision of voting is one of the first actions taken by political marketing strategists. As suggested before, voters can be seen as consumers of a product, being the political candidate, and so knowing the consumer demands and emotional attachments to a brand and the product is a necessity to successful marketing. Especially, in the case of Trudeaus' marketing campaigns, which were based on two different generations and demography of Canadian voters.My study only focuses on the 2015 elections voting demography, since opposite to the case of other countries, most Canadian voters are first time voters of their family tree, due to the high volume and rate of immigration in Canada. Therefore, the Canadian voters' cultures and preferences are constantly changing, due to the fast change in the population of these voters. For example, Youth Voter Turnout in Canada, published by the library of Parliament, points to the increase of youth turnout between the years 2011-2015, which shows the change in the voting demography of the 2015 elections compared to the previous years. Some factors that are significant to the increase of youth turnout for the elections could be related to the increasingly political affairs and discussions on Social Media. For example, Ahmad and Sheikh's study of university students in Kenya shows that the rate of political participation among university students rose, when discussions and surveys about political opinions were conducted on social media Networks (SMN), while a small proportion of students participated in traditional political activities (2013). This study addresses the preference of the use of social media by youth and exposes the influential power of Social Media upon the opinions of the youth. Lastly, some argue that the use of Social Media in order to become politically

Lotfi 14 engaged plays a big role in the declination of traditional political activities by youth. However, Kahne and Middaugh's (2012) study disagrees with such counterarguments, as they observed that those "who engaged in at least one act of participatory politics were actually twice as likely to report voting as those who did not" (54). This not only shows Social Media's advantages and encouragement of youth towards political involvement, but also proves social media as an effective tool for the creation of political engagement. Indeed, with regards to this statement, one can also refer to Justin Trdueau's strategic use of social media and his success in engaging the Canadian youth through the use of social media. I would go as far as to say that the use of social media for politicians has become a part of their duty, as it is the primary outlet and connection to the public. In fact, some criticize how the using of social media has also had a negative impact, since politicians now use social media platforms, as a resource for dealing with economical problems and depend on solutions from the SM user's opinions. For example, Nash points to how popular social media platforms, such as twitter, can polarize voters and oversimplify issues, since they enable the politicians to inhibit a "shoot and ask questions later" strategy. In such strategy, politicians "put something out that might enrage most people, but caters to their base", which is similar to the strategy that Donald Trump uses. However, Social Media does still offer a direct communication link for politicians to the public and some studies point to how information posted on Social Media is perceived as more trustworthy, due to its source originality. That is to say that most SM users believe that the messages received from SM are more authentic and personal, as they are posted by the political figure themselves. For example, the results of a study conducted by Enil and Rosenberg (2018), shows that "the young people typically found politicians to be more dishonest in mainstream media compared to social media" and that the politician's social media accounts did raise the general public's trust towards a political figure.

Lotfi 15 Moreover, according to a study conducted by Bastedo, another factor that is found to be important with regards to the rate of youth's engagement with politics and voter turnout, is the feeling of identification with the political figure (2015). Bastedo describes how the one phrase that is the most recurring in her interviews with youth about their opinions of political candidates was that political candidates "don't represent me", which shows the importance of identification with a political leader for young voters (660). Nevertheless, Justin Trudeau's winning campaign, which also held the highest young voter turnout, shows Justin Trdueau's relatability to the young voting population. In fact, in an interview conducted by the CNN, David Colletta says it was "found that the Liberals won the support of the youngest voters by a significant margin -- enough to have potentially been decisive in the Liberals' majority victory". This statement not only suggests that Justin Trudeau's win is significantly influenced by his identifiable personality for the young generation, but is also exposing the lack of identification felt by the voters towards the opposing parties. Moreover, Seijts. De Clercy, and Nguyen(2018) who used the method of surveying voters of all ages in order to study how Canadian voters evaluate their leaders' characters, found that "voters rate the extent to which the candidate's personal attributes score relatively close to their own" (2018), which agrees with Bastedo's findings about the significance of relatability for all Canadian voters, including the older populations as well. In light of such knowledge about the factors and specificity of Canadian voter turnouts and statistics, it is only fair to then analyze what personality traits about Justin Trudeau were found identifiable by Canadian voters. Here, I would like to point to Seijts. De Clercy, and Nguyen (2018)'s study again, as it further explains that Canadians are recognized to "bring a more collectivistic orientation to their persona", whereas the Americans are more individualistic and consequently more sympathetic towards Republican candidates, such as Donald Trump. In fact, such comparison is used as an explanation to why a Canadian political figure, such as Justin Trudeau, who is rated in the surveys as "demonstrating the

Lotfi 16 leader character dimensions" desired by Canadian voters, would be the winning candidate (2018). That is to say that Justin Trudeau inhibits a collectivistic persona and that such persona is one of the characteristics which the Canadian voters can identify with and desire to see as a part of their leaders' characteristic traits. Similarly, other studies that have taken voting perspectives into consideration and analyzed voting statistics with regards to the significance of the personality of different party leaders in Canada, show that the party leaders' stance and personality always matter (Bittner, 2018). Although one must acknowledge that how party leaders and candidates show their personalities to the public is mainly through the use of mass and social media In addition, a politician's online identity is based on the voting demography's demands and based on strategic choices. Therefore, the analysis of a politician's online identity is best done through the application of theories that would help us understand the strategic choices of visual and textual presentations of the politicians' online identities. Theory Application Scholars that study factors effective on the public's opinion and perception towards a political candidate use the theory of impression management in politics, which "revolves around the concerns of individuals for making a positive impression on others", as the basis of their studies (Rosenfeld and Giacalone, 1994: p.602). Impression management is also described as "performance [that] requires performers to establish a front / [an image] by communicating to an audience about who they are, what their goals are, and what is the reason behind their actions and political stance (Woods, Manning, and Matz, 2015). Nowadays, politicians create the image and brand they want to communicate to the public through the use of social media outlets, such as Instagram and Twitter (Jung,Tay, Hong, and Ho. 2017). Although the promotion of positive impressions by using social media as an impression management tool is not guaranteed without the proper political marketing strategies. According to Landtsheer, De Vries, and Vertessen (2008), an effective political marketing strategy includes a strong "political language style".

Lotfi 17 Indeed, one of the main techniques that has been recognized as an effective tool for impression management is the use of metaphors in politics, due to their "preeminently emotive" quality and how they are "mostly hidden and unnoticed, for their mainly unconscious nature". Landtsheer, De Vries, and Vertessen's analysis of political impression management techniques also shows that "Charisma, true or false, can win [politicians] the elections" and that the availability and accessibility of media coverage holds an indispensable value on the road to electoral success. This is significant, since Justin Trudeau's charisma is one of the main personality traits that studies point towards and therefore one of the strongest impressions that he makes. In fact, the use of SM as a tool for media coverage and the gaining of the public's trust along with his charismatic `front' can justify Trudeau's winning campaign and successful impression management. Although how and why a politician chooses to display and create specific impressions upon the public is not solely influenced by his/her own stronger personality traits and rather based on the voter's demands. The cultures, races, ethnicities, social cues, and other factors that affect a voter's preferences, which are strongly representative of the present discourses among the society, are also significant aspects that a politician considers, before attempting to advocate a certain `front'. That is to say that impression management decisions are strongly affected by the discourses present in the society that the politician is attempting to impress. For example, Woods, Manning, and Matz's study of impression management techniques of the Canadian Immigration Studies (CIS), concluded how this organization's technique of impression management was used to create the image of a normal contributor to the mainstream discourse, whereas other organizations, such as universities, would use impression management techniques in order to create a superior image (2015). In other words, some organizations were found to use impression management to stand out, while others use it in order to fit in and be accepted. This is significant, as a discourse analysis of the Canadian voters' demands and present Canadian Political discussions would therefor provide a

Lotfi 18 justification of Justin Trudeau's use of impression management techniques and marketing strategies. For instance, Bernhardt and Pin (2018) point to the increasing frequency of the association of identity politics with Canadian politics through their study of political Canadian Literature. They report the 83 occurrences of the term "identity politics" or "politics of identity" from 1985 to 2015 in peer reviewed research articles of six different Canadian journals. The study points out that identity Politics are "frequently situated within broader discussions about how to identify and theorize `Canadianness' as a distinct identity", but undermining bigger social concerns and matters, such as race and ethnicity (775). The study's criticism of identity politics is significant for not one, but two reasons. Firstly, the addressing of `Canadianness' in political discussions and more specifically the theorization of Canadianness signifies the importance of nationalism and Canadian identity for Canadians. Secondly, the criticism that the study makes of the undermining of race and ethnicity exposes the importance of these discourses to Canadian politics. Indeed the study suggests that Canadian identity advocates inclusion and multiculturalism, while identity politics "reasserts an exclusionary conception of Canadian identity". Moreover, on the subject of Canadian politics and the liberal values of Canada, Mackey describes Canadian liberalism as dependent on "its ability to construct itself as not cultural (in that it is not presented as the project of one cultural or ethnic group), but as universal and rational". This is significant, as such referral to Canadian Liberalism, does explicitly point to the discourses that influence and form the Liberal parties' decisions and stance. Lastly, Clarke, Gravelle, Scotto, Stewart & Reifler (2017), who surveyed the voters of both Pierre Elliot Trudeau and Justin Trudeau's campaigns, found that at the time of the elections, voters had been most concerned about "unemployment or the economy more generally, with an additional seven percent referring to taxes or government debt". All of these are issues and discourses that are addressed mainly by the Liberal parties. In addition, some contemporary discourses that were found to be present in the voting discussions, were the healthcare system and environmental

Lotfi 19 concerns. The stated discourses and concerns of the voting demography and those advocated and addressed by Justin Trudeau are important factors to consider when studying Trdeau's political marketing campaign. Nevertheless, the studying of Trudeau's use of SM in order to show his attendance to the people's concerns and the promises of Canadian Liberalism is also significant, as it exposes the visual and textual strategies used by Trudeau. Indeed, these strategies and techniques, which are executed through the use of SM's visual and textual affordances, are meant to publicize Trudeau's understanding of the promises and expectations of the voting population. . Other than a discourse analysis, one of the most relevant theoretical studies that can be applied for the analysis of SM posts on platforms, such as Instagram, which are based on visuals/images, is the theory of social/cultural semiotics. The study of semiotics, which is based on the study of signs or rather "everything that can be taken as a sign", considers all types of media, such as text, image, and the interplay between the two (Chandler 2001). Although what is important about the study of semiotics, as pointed out by Chandler 2001, is that one must "recognize the importance of socio-cultural and historical factors in shaping how different media are used and their (ever-shifting) status within particular cultural contexts" (4). According to this statement, the significance of cultural values of the audience of a medium, such as an image or a text, cannot be ignored when conducting an analysis based on semiotics. Indeed, as a result of Chandler's emphasis on the importance of cultures, I have decided to focus on the cultural backgrounds of the voting populations and the audience of Justin Trudeau's campaign throughout my analysis. Moreover, Chandler also points to the `ever-shifting' status of media within a cultural context, which brings me to my next point about the emergence of SM platforms and their affordances compared to traditional media. SM platforms allow for an interactive experience with the flow of data, while they offer a two way communication field between a politician and his audience or corporations and consumers. Furthermore,

Lotfi 20 the specific affordances of SM platforms and the effect of the affordance upon one's social interactions through the lens of social semiotic theories have been studied by researchers such as Poulsen and Kvåle (2018). In their analysis of 504 Instagram posts, which aims for the understanding of how SM technology enables making, enacting and managing meaning, Poulsen and Kvale point to SM's facilitation of a broader range of possibilities for interpersonal meaning-making. The affordance of such possibility does indeed justify their hypothesis' claim, which suggests social media as a "semiotic technology" resource. According to their claim, one can also notice the influencing power of SM upon opinions and the connectivity of one's opinion with regards to social expectations and social media. Moreover, their research stresses that different SM platforms may "facilitate different degrees of sociability qua the interpersonal semiotic resources they provide" (705). Indeed, what I find most interesting about Poulsen and Kvale's research is their referral to the change in the chronological order of news feed posts on Instagram, to the `most relevant' posts instead, which occurred on May 2016. This change in the algorithm of posts that appear on one's news feed, highlights that Instagram's presentation of sociality is modelled on popularity (705). That is to say that Instagram's social model, not only encourages social interactions as its basic affordance, but also supports social mechanisms that strengthen the social standing of already popular individuals with cultural and social capital. This is important since it shows how a specific model of sociality supported by a SM platform can affect one's social interactions, or rather the posts that they see. In addition, the model of popularity that is promoted by Instagram is also significant in that it supports the expansion and reach of social interactions for users that are popular. In fact, Instagram's system can be looked at as a SM platform, in which persons of low social capital are undermined, while those who are relevant and popular are promoted. This becomes significant, especially in the case of a politician who is known and popular, due to strong ties with other popular politicians, similar to Justin Trudeau, whose father is counted as one of the most popular Canadian political figures. I would even go so far as to say

Lotfi 21 that Trudeau's choice to use Instagram, as one of his primary tools from the other SM platforms, can be justified through his understanding of the sociability that Instagram is based on. In other words, my research does agree with Poulsen and Kvale about the use of SM as a "semiotic technology" and proves the possibility of this claim, through study of Justin Trudeau's posts. To sum up, this literature review has introduced Pierre Elliot Trudeau and familiarized the readers with the figure behind Justin Trudeau's image on mass and social media. Through this, some of Justin Trudeau's campaign promises and affiliations have been exposed. The review has also referred to literature written about the audience of Justin Trudeau's campaign and the demands of Canadian voters with regards to their desired characteristics of a political figure/candidate. After this, broader topics and theories, such as political impression management, marketing, discourse analysis, and semiotic theories that can be applied and used for a better understanding and justification of Justin Trudeau's campaign, have been addressed.

Lotfi 22 Research Questions: My first research question would be to first analyze and ask `what kind of image does Justin Trudeau represent to social media users?' For this question I hypothesize that through the analysis of my data, I will find that Justin Trudeau's Instagram images, Tweets, and public appearances are greatly dependent on the desires of social media users and therefore vary throughout different times. My second research question is `What does the image that Trudeau has tried to create for himself through the use of social media show about who his target audience is?', as his successful campaign is the result of the voting population's preferences and desires. Therefore, by studying his campaign strategies, I will be able to announce the most majorly targeted group of Justin Trudeau's campaign for the election. To which I hypothesize that I will find a centralized focus on his tactics to create an image and identity on social media that is identifiable to the middle-class immigrant families of Canada. And lastly, I aim to ask a more general and broad question, is if `Justin Trudeau's strategic use of social media could help him be reelected for the upcoming federal elections?', especially considering the new SM users' preferences and demands. I hypothesize that Justin Trudeau's emphasis on strategic SM content creation and SM marketing to gain popularity among voters would continue to be an effective strategy because of the increasing significance of SM on human lives and perspectives.

Lotfi 23 Data collection: I will be focusing on Justin Trudeau's twitter posts for the section of my textual analysis, where specific words and topics will be found, through the implementation of coding and using word clouds created from netlytic/syosmos (Figure 2,3,4). I will also aim to find specific tweets from the week of the election, through the Library of Congress archive, which extends go beyond the 15 month period limit of the more private search engines such as Netlytics and Syosmos. Similar research conducted by Ryoo and Bendle focuses on what words were most used in different periods of time for the, elections in the United States. I too have created a list of words that are most mentioned by twitter users speaking about Liberal politics and Justin Trudeau during the past 15 months. I have conducted an analysis of these words and their relationship to one another through the use of a Laten Dirichlet Allocation method, which will be discussed in the following section. In addition, for my approach to visual analysis and Justin Trudeau's use of social media's visual affordances, I classified about 40 posts created during and before the period of the elections. These photos will be descriptive of the image that Trudeau aimed to create for himself among public citizens and consequently his technique of impression management, through visual strategies in Instagram photos on his profile. More specifically, my visual analysis first classifies the types of photos that are found on Justin Trudeau's profile, referring to their specifically focused categories. Some of these categories include topics like the campaign, #throwbacks, family, community, and multiculturalism, which are provided by (Figure 1). Indeed, Liebhart, & Bernhardt's (2017) study of Andrew Van der Bellen's political campaign also used a bar graph to quantify image types, agreeing with my method for data collection .Moreover, their research, which is similar to my focusing on an unexpectedly successful campaign of one candidate in particular, also addresses the text and image relationship of Instagram posts, which is an approach I too have taken with regards to my Instagram post analyses. That is to first point to how it is important to recognize that Instagram images have captions and

Lotfi 24 that a solely image-based type of analysis can be limiting. As a result, I have also included an analysis of the caption of Instagram posts and consider aspects of their context such as specific hashtags used or the emojis included within. In fact, the hashtags used in the captions of Instagram images may also be compared to the hashtags used in Justin Trudeau's twitter posts, meaning that the Instagram captions can be referenced through a multimodal analysis with regards to their relationship to the images, but also used for the expansion of my textual analysis. All in all, the data that I have collected, including the twitter posts and mentions, the Instagram posts and captions, during the time of the elections, will be analyzed separately, but also with regards to one another through different methods that will be detailed in the following section. Method of Analysis: I use a qualitative method of analysis, which is based on my findings and data collections mentioned previously, as the means for proposing a theory with regards to the use of social media for political marketing campaigns, specifically tailored to Canadian audiences/voters. For the analysis of my textual data of twitter posts and sourcing these data, I use the LDA method of analysis, which assumes that each document, for example, here a twitter post, is a mixture of uncovered topics that are hidden messages within the text. The hidden structure can be represented as word clouds/clusters per topic that each contain words relevant to the topic focus. The hidden messages that may be uncovered through this analysis specify the proportions of topics in terms of their significance and how often they are used. In addition, such analysis shows the likelihood that any given word in a topic is used. The hidden message/focus found to have the highest probability of having created the data can then be identified as being the underlying hidden message of the posts. For example, if the words "money" and "taxes" are found to be most occurring in twitter posts during the period of times before the elections, one can conclude that one of the hidden messages of Justin Trudeau's campaign is to address low-income families'

Lotfi 25 attention, as these words are associated with low-income families' top concerns, which will be further examined in my discourse analysis of cultural and economical discourses and the specific voting populations that are most influenced and concerned about issues regarding taxes and money. Indeed, I have used the LDA methodology and my textual data findings, as a resource for the focus of my discourse analysis, since the most relevant and central hidden messages found in my textual analysis is suggestive of the most prominent discourses among the society. Although, this might not be the case for all textual data, Justin Trudeau's successful campaign confirms the significance of these hidden messages and their persuasive power. Image Type Methodology For analyzing my visual data/ images collected from Justin Trudeau's Instagram posts, I have used an image type methodology, which was developed by the German communication scholars Elke Grittmann and Ilona Ammann. This method enables the classification of images based on their apparent motives. Although, the analysis was first used for analyzing the content of photo-journalistic routines and selection criteria, other scholarly research, using a visual analysis technique have ever since used it in different fields and disciplines. An example that I have previously referred to is Liebhart, & Bernhardt's (2017), research, which uses an image type analysis. Liebhart and Benhardt explain how an image type analysis "requires an in-depth knowledge of the selected visual content and is oriented around the process of the iconographic approach developed by Erwin Panofsky in the 1920s and 1930s. This approach is based on a three-step procedure: a pre-iconographic description, an iconographic analysis, and an iconological interpretation (cf. Panofsky, 1972, pp. 1­17). The most crucial of the steps stated is the preiconographic description of images, which includes an attention to the practical experience provoked by the image or rather the emotions enhanced by the first look at the image. The second phase of this method deal with the symbols, personifications, allegories, and other larger ideologies that can be referred to,

Lotfi 26 through an iconographic analysis. In fact, my use of social/cultural semiotic theory for the interpretation of specific symbols, which I refer to as the "signifier" and the "signified", is rather encouraged and a result of my use of the iconographic methodology. Moreover, the use of iconology has been established as a strategic methodology for the study of social media posts, by researchers such as Drainville (2018), who has found a recurring pattern in the way SM users interpret photographs. Drainville's study suggests that for a more meaningful and credible analysis, researchers must consider re-building the iconology method introduced by Erwin Panofsky and introduces a new approach, which includes the SM users' responses and comments, as a part of research analysis data. Although, this paper will be solely focused on the data proposed by Justin Trudeau himself, Drainville's research points to the significance of cultural and economical discourses of the society, by denoting the similarity and union of the audience/voters' reactions to the SM posts. Going back to the method of image type, which is derived from the iconology approach of Panofsky, the classification of the images for image type analysis will be based on the categories that are most prominent to Justin Trudeau's SM posts. These categories have then served as the basis of focus for the iconography analysis and interpretation phase, previously described in details. Moreover, some of the basic aspects that are considered in the classification of the categories that I have chosen for the analysis of Instagram posts, include things like image angle, lighting, special effects/photo filters, and clothing/customs of the participants in the image. It is also important to state that I have chosen to focus solely on the top 4 categories that have the most posts, in order to be able to provide a more unified and comprehensive analysis, as the categories themselves are unfavorably broad. For example, a classification that I can instantly see with regards to Justin Trudeau's posts is his childhood photos , categorized under Childhood, which emphasize Nostalgia and even naivety. One way to look at this category can be to point to how the feeling of Nostalgia is evoked by his childhood photos, which would count as a pre-

Lotfi 27 iconography phase of my study. Then, one could refer to how Trudeau's provocation of a Nostalgic feeling, would not only show the dominancy of Nostalgia as a prominent discourse in Canadian society, but also suggests that his target voting demography are the elderly and/or immigrants. That is to say that I predict my hypothesis about the voting demography, would be backed by my discourse analysis providing credible data about the relevancy and significance of Nostalgia, as a discourse associated mostly with the elderly and immigrants. However, other feelings that can be evoked by photos of childhood will have to be acknowledged and therefore prove my preference to focus on specific categories of the images. It is also important for me to denote that I will be using social semiotics alongside discourse analysis in order to perform the last phase of iconography, which is iconographic interpretation. Therefore, Iconography and Social Semiotics theories such as,

visual Social semiotics, will help with the accumulation and bringing together the aim for the posting of these images on Instagram and justify Trudeau's popularity on Instagram compared to Stephen Harper. In fact, a minor part of my visual analysis does include a comparison of Justin Trudeau's Instagram account's posts to those of Stephen harper's (Figure 4), through which one can instantly point to how Justin Trudeau's posts are desirably organized, compared to Stephen harper's posts. Multimodal/Mixed Methodology My analysis of the images on Instagram will not be only based on the image content, but also on the captions of the images and the relativity of text and image with one another. In their sentiment analysis of Social media data, Huang, Zhang, Zhao, Xu & Li(2019) talk about the lack of effort "paid to the joint analysis of multimodal data in social media" and how "most of the existing methods for multimodal sentiment analysis simply combine different data modalities". Indeed, their criticism about recent research on SM data, also suggests the significance of a multimodal analysis and agrees with my attempt to conduct this method. More specifically, I have used a Systematic Functional multimodal method, also performed

Lotfi 28 by Wu. (2014). She talks about how the use of "Systemic Functional theory provides a social semiotic framework for the analysis of multimodal texts with context-dependent meaning studies" (1415). For the study of multimodal texts, which could also include captions or posters with writings on them, she refers to M.A.K. Halliday's (1978) theory of metafunctions, which identify three distinct but coexisting kinds of meanings that interplay within any text. I too have referred to the elements such as anchor and relay, through creating a Systemic Functional Multimodal methodology for the multimodal analysis of Justin Trudeau's SM posts. Furthermore, it is important to note that multimodal texts/images can be studied from two different perspectives of inter-semiotic relations and logico-semantic relations. The former is an examination of how the visual and "verbal elements complement each other to form a single and cohesive text by identifying cohesive links across structural-unit boundaries of cohesive chains" and the latter being an analysis of how the relationship between the logical meaning of texts and clauses are or could be dependent on the presence of semiotics codes. Both of these practices are important to consider for my analysis, as some of Justin Trudeau's posts not only are not only inter-related, in terms of their cohesivity, but are also significant in their logicality. Moreover, the creation of meaning and logic are strongly dependent on sentiments and as expected sentiment analyses of Social Media data have been conducted by researchers using a multimodal methodology. In fact, Halverson, Bass & Woods(2012) talk about how "images may intrinsically have sentiment associated with them through design or through association with a specific subject matter which may be context sensitive", as they explain their emphasis on the necessity of a multimodal analysis for the detection of sentiments (53). Even though, I my study of SM posts is not based on sentiment detection nor creation, I do address the significance of sentiments and the voters' opinions are effected by sentiments. Indeed, I have referred to the terms that McCloud (1994) has used in order to classify image-

Lotfi 29 text relations in terms of their equal/unequal contributions to meaning. These terms and a brief explanation about their meaning is included in the list provided below: a) word specific, where pictures illustrate but do not significantly add to a largely complete text; b) picture specific, where the picture dominates and words do not add significantly to the meaning of the image; c) duo specific, where words and pictures send essentially the same message; d) additive ­ words amplify or elaborate on an image or vice versa; e) parallel ­ words/image follow different courses without intersecting; f) montage ­ words are treated as integral parts of the picture; g) interdependent ­ image/words together convey an idea that neither could convey alone. All in all, this paper's analysis of Justin Trudeau's SM posts on Twitter and Instagram, uses varying types of methodologies previously conducted by other researchers, who have similarly analyzed SM data. These methodologies, also referred to as mixed methods, contribute to the further understanding of Justin Trudeau's strategic choices and help make sense and analyze the data of my textual, visual, and multimodal findings (Sloan and Quan Hasse,ppp. 397, 2017).

Lotfi 30 Findings and Selected Results: The information that I have found through my visual, textual, and multimodal analyses co-relate with one another and display the same result that I had hypothesized during the early stages of my research. The `Instagramming' exposes Justin Trudeau's strategic SM content creation and his dependency on SM features in order to display an ideal image for SM users. `The Tweeting' shows how the use of specific words in the same sentences and implied metaphors are strategically chosen to present Justin Trudeau's alliance with the desires of Canadian voters and more specifically SM users, through the utilization of SM affordances. In fact, the results prove Justin Trudeau's emphasis on creating an agreeing image on SM , while they expose his acknowledgment of the changes that need to be taken for the new SM audience of the 2019 elections. And lastly, the `Twigramming' once again confirms Trudeau's emphasis on rebuilding a positive SM image, through the creation of strategic SM content. According to these results, not only is Justin Trudeau's `Social Media-Oriented Politics' displayed, but one can also predict the possibility of him being re-elected for the upcoming federal elections, as he acknowledges the new SM users' opinions about economic growth and trustworthiness. The Instagramming/Image Type Analysis I decided to begin describing the findings of my research by referring to my visual analysis of SM data, due to the orderliness of these findings. Meaning that the images I have analyzed go back to the elections in October 2015, when Justin Trudeau's ideal SM image won the heart of SM users and resulted in his winning of the elections. The images that I have found on the most common and visually focused SM platform, Instagram, are studied in terms of their content and semiotics. Using an Image type analysis method, the photos gathered were first categorized and classified as shown in Figure 1.1, where one can observe a visual comparison of the number of specific images posted by Justin Trudeau and the main sentiment of these images compared to one another. The images are also categorized based on the date of

Lotfi 31 their which shows my aim to highlight the more recent images, since the postings closer to the date of the elections are more relevant and therefore more influential on present day SM users' opinions. However, the images posted one year before the elections and beyond, are also significant, since they expose Trudeau's `self-branding' strategy on SM. Furthermore, studying Figure 1.1, unsurprisingly, one can instantly point to Justin Trudeau's focus on posting images about the campaign/liberal and governmental sentiments. On the other hand, the second topic that is centralized in the image postings is the images about Justin Trudeau's family and his portrayal as a family-man. However, the third topic of the focus among the images Justin Trudeau has posted on Instagram until before the day of the elections varies for all three time periods that I have chosen to analyze. Thirdly, the results show an initial focus on `#TB' for the earlier images posted on Justin Trudeau's Instagram. Then, for the period of 1 year before the date of the elections, the results show a transitioning emphasis to the topic of multiculturalism. And lastly, the images posted 3 months before the elections, show economic growth and employment opportunities, as the third most significant topic. And lastly, the images posted 3 months before the elections, show economic growth and employment opportunities, as the third most significant topic.

Lotfi 32

Image Category

# of images All images before the elections 62 25 15 5 4 11 3 3 9 5 8 11 4

Liberal Value Family #TB Childhood Selfies multiculturalism economic growth/job creation Canadian Nature Sports/youth Paparazzi French Community nationalism Gay pride

# of images # of images 1 year before the 3 months before elections the election 17 7 4 0 0 6 2 2 1 1 4 3

7 5 1 0 0 2 1 1 1 1

Table 1.1 Justin Trudeau's Instagram posts classified based on the image category and posting date. This table shows a comparison of specific image categories and the frequency of the posting of images belonging to the selected categories, based on three different time periods.

Lotfi 33

Justin Trudeau's Instagram Posts
70 62 60 50 40 30 20 10 0

25 15 11 5 4 3 3 9 5 8 11 4

# of images All images before the elections

# of images 1 year before the elections

# of images 3 months before the election

Figure 1.1 a comparison of the image types posted by Justin Trudeau on Instagram from the beginning of his joining and up to October 20th 2015 federal elections date.

Lotfi 34 It is also important to notice that the classification of these images is based on the most apparent motive of the images and according to the details of their captions. For example, the throwback images all include the `#TB' in their captions, and the Campaign images include `#cdnpoli' or `liberal' in their captions. Moreover, the family images refer to family time, the multicultural images refer to multicultural events/meetings, and the `economic growth' category consists of images referring to economic growth. Other significant topics such as `gay pride', `Canadian Nature', `French community', and `sports' are also found to be present during all three different time period sections. However, for the purpose of discussion, I decided to study the third top varying topics in each section, which show the third most frequent number of postings. That is to say I chose to focus my analysis on the image types, #TB, multiculturalism, and economic growth, because images belonging to the `Campaign' and `Family' category show a consistent and foreseen emphasis throughout all the three different time periods. In fact the consistent posting of images about the liberal campaign and family is rather predictable from a political member of the liberal party and a father of three children. However, the varying image types between the three sections, which are also shown to be the third most relevant topics of images in the three different time periods, expose the change in Justin Trudeau's marketing strategies with regards to the time of the postings. As a result of my choosing to focus on the topics holding the third place of relevancy in each of the three sections, I have included three images from each of these sections, which I will analyze closely. Image #1 is a photo of Justin Trudeau, as a child, being held by his father Pierre Elliot Trudeau, during the spring of 1972. Image #1 belongs to the throwback category, signified by the #TB, which is one of the most popular social media trends especially on the SM channel Instagram. The #TB trend is meant to highlight memories of the past for users who are feeling Nostalgic or reminiscent about specific days or memories. Image #2 is a photo collage posted by Justin Trudeau as he celebrates the Lunar New Year with the Chinese community of Canada.

Lotfi 35 This image belongs to the `multiculturalism' category and displays Justin Trudeau's support of the diversity and multicultural ethnicities of the Canadian nation. Finally, image #3 is a photo of Justin Trudeau sitting beside a middle-aged man and shaking someone's hand which is exposing of his meetings about investing in issues concerning middle-class families and the aging population, according to the description of the caption of the image. Now, other than the fact that each of the images has a different theme, the timing of Justin Trudeau's emphasis on the varying themes is also important. For example, image #1, which is selected from the #TB themed images, is significant, as this group of images are the first images posted on Instagram and therefore exposing of Justin Trudeau's `self -branding' strategy. Indeed, Trudeau's emphasis on #TB images, which highlight the past and remind SM users of Pierre Elliot Trudeau, is exposing of Justin Trudeau's referral to the `Trudeau Legacy', in order to build a positive image for himself. In continuing my analysis of image #1, it is also important to point to the provocation of nostalgia that is achieved through this image, which portrays Justin Trudeau, as a baby being held by his father. One way that this photo creates a nostalgic effect is through its photo editing strategy of using a black frame around the photo, which literally `frames' the photo, as an old image. In fact, one can say that the use of the Instagram frame on this photo, shows Justin Trudeau's familiarity with SM features and his use of these features in order to engage other SM users. That is to say that he tries to identify with SM users, through the display of his knowledge about SM features. Furthermore, another way this photo provokes nostalgia is through the clothing and quality of the photo, which suggest that the photo is old and from the past. Such emphasis on the provocation of nostalgic emotions is important, since it not only shows Justin Trudeau's aim to remind the Canadians about the memories of Pierre Elliot Trudeau or rather the `Trudeau Legacy', but it also helps him identify with other general demography of SM users feeling nostalgic, such as the immigrants. More interestingly, Sucharov (2006), whose research analyzes the effect of nostalgia

Lotfi 36 on Canadian Identity and multiculturalism, points out that contrary to nostalgia's critics, multicultural integration of immigrants and new generations can actually be enhanced and quickened through the use of nostalgia. Sucharov talks about how the space of mourning provided by nostalgia, is beneficiary for a faster settlement. That is to say that nostalgia promotes and enables one's mourning through its reference to memories of the past: the past that immigrants would try to erase and forget without permitting themselves to go through a necessary mourning period. This research not only suggests that Justin Trudeau's emphasis on the provocation of nostalgia is meant to benefit SM users' need for mourning, but also exposes Justin Trudeau's preparation and strategic planning of SM content for the next marketing campaign he had planned, as it is found to be focused on multiculturalism. That is to say that t he `#TB' image types help remind SM users of the `Trudeau Legacy, help the newer generation of Canadians mourn, and implicitly suggest Trudeau's support of multiculturalism, which is then confirmed by Trudeau's focus on multiculturalism for the posts he creates 1 year before the elections. Image #2, which belongs to the third most focused theme in Justin Trudeau's Instagram posts, is a collage that highlights Trudeau's support of multiculturalism. In this collage, one can see Justin Trudeau, celebrating the lunar new year with other people, who are seemingly Asian. In addition, Trudeau has chosen to include a picture of the Red Dragon, used in Chinese celebrations of the Luna year, along with a picture of him leaning down to shake a Chinese woman's hand. Firstly, the use of a collage in order to describe his experiences for SM users, can once again be suggestive of Justin Trudeau's use of SM features, in order to show that he, just like other SM users, uses the collage feature. But more importantly, Justin Trudeau's decision to use a collage for these image, also shows his aim to display not only one, but a few different aspects of the event For instance, the top left image can be seen as an image that highlights the caring and friendliness of Justin Trudeau. The top right image can be seen as an image that addresses the communities that celebrate the Lunar New Year, as the Red Dragon would instantly be recognized by

Lotfi 37 such community of SM users. Although, what I can imagine many would miss is Justin Trudeau's wearing of the Dragon costume, which can be seen as one zooms in the picture. This is significant, as it points to Justin Trudeau's complete integration into the Asian culture, through the actual wearing of the costume. Interestingly, he used the same silly technique, just recently during his visit to India, which he was mocked for by SM users. And lastly, the picture in the bottom of the collage brings Justin Trudeau's acceptance and proactive politics towards diversity and multiculturalism to the audience's attention, as the image places him enjoying the celebrations with the Asian community. Even though the top right image and the bottom image may both be explicitly pointing to the same theme of multiculturalism, they differ in how they present Justin Trudeau's figure. That is to say, that Justin Trudeau is shown without his suit and wearing a costume, while making a silly face, in the top right image. Whereas, in the bottom image, he is wearing his suit and looks formal--yet still happy and smiling. Moreover, the second picture includes monk figures beside Justin Trudeau, which shows his relationship with the respected figures of the Asian community, in addition to his acceptance and welcoming of the multicultural celebrations in Canada. In fact, the proportions of the image frames suggest an emphasis on the bottom picture, since it automatically becomes the most noticeable of the three images, due to its bigger portion size. The directed focus of the user's attention to the bottom image, which depicts Justin Trudeau in formal clothing and a more holistic view of the event, exposes Justin Trudeau's acknowledgment of the significance of this image for the means of creating a positive and desirable image on SM. Therefore, through a close analysis of this collage, one can point to Justin Trudeau's strategic use of a collage that depicts different themes, but still focuses on the most desirable image of Justin Trudeau-- one which shows his pro-multicultural politics and friendly, yet professional appearance. Highlighting Justin Trudeau's friendliness or rather community involvement is focused most strongly in the last image of my analysis. Image #3, which is taken from a mid-angle view and places

Lotfi 38 Justin Trudeau, on the same frame level as the other figures, portrays Justin Trudeau's collaboration and meeting, about home care and health benefits, as stated in the caption. Indeed, this image is selected from the image types classified as `economic growth' and remarks the main focus of Justin Trudeau's campaign during the period of 3 months before the elections date. I selected this image from the other ones classified under the `economic growth' category, because one can easily recognize Justin Trudeau's attempt to highlight his care for the general and aging population of Canada, without the help of the caption and through an anlysis of Justin Trudeau's costume, body language, and surroundings/photo setting. Firstly, Justin Trudeau is not wearing a suit in this image and rolled up his sleeves, which suggests his attempt to identify himself as a part of the `working' or `middle-class' community. Secondly, he is shown shaking someone's hand and smiling in the picture, which remarks a collaboration of some sort. And thirdly, the image displays Trudeau beside other people, who are wearing casual clothing and sitting around a desk, which all suggest a more public and civil meeting, rather than a political or governmental gathering. Furthermore, the person sitting beside Trudeau is a middle-aged man, who is not wearing a tie. This is significant, as it shows that the man is not a political figure and a part of the middle class or public community. In fact, one can spot a phone and a camera on the desk and consequently denote the informality of the meeting, due to the rather careless or `unpolished' set up of the desk. The casual setting, the friendly handshake, and the informal clothing of Justin Trudeau, all work with one another, in order to not only, show Justin Trudeau's collaboration with the middle class and aging populati on, but to also portrays him as a part of these community. Such framing, would benefit his image on SM, as it would help the sympathizing and identifying of middle-class and aging populations with Justin Trudeau. In addition, it is also important to note how this image literally frames Justin Trudeau in the center, where the back of the other two people sitting around the table are shown on both sides of the image. Such

Lotfi 39 framing strategy not only agrees with my analysis, but also exposes Trudeau's strategic and meaningful SM content. One possible reason for Trudeau's focus to portray himself as a part of the middle-class community, other than the fact that the middle-class make-up more than half of the population of Canada, can also be that the middle-class community consists of the largest immigrant population. This is significant, as it exposes Justin Trudeau's continuous attempt to identify and brand himself, as a supporter of multiculturalism. Indeed, here one can also point to how every stage of the changes in Justin Trudeau's SM content creation strategies during the three separate time periods, suggest his continuous targeting of the immigrant community among other SM users, which also agrees with my initial hypothesis. Although, it is also important to acknowledge Justin Trudeau's use of SM in order to reach his target audience and his strategic SM content planning for the means of creating an image that is desirable to immigrant SM users, who make up more than half of the voting demography. This shows his understanding of strategic Social Media marketing, which won him the elections in 2015 and may very well win him the elections in 2019 as well. But, what do today's SM audience think of Justin Trudeau? Has he been able to keep up a desirable image on SM? And is his social-media oriented politics still intact and effect for today's voting demography? The results that I have selected from my collected twitter data, which refer to the most recent SM content created by Justin Trudeau, provide information that can be seen as possible answers to these questions.

Lotfi 40

Instagram Exhibit:
Image #1 Image #2

Image #3

Lotfi 41 The Tweeting/Textual Analysis To begin with, I started my textual analysis of Justin Trudeau's marketing strategy, by first studying his present image on Social Media and the desirability of this image, through the words that SM users associate with his identity and the sentiment behind their reference to his name on Twitter (Figure 1). The results, based on posts from May 15 2018 to June 15 2019, show that the current impression of Justin Trudeau is 52% positive among twitter users, which proves his standing current image on SM as a desirable and beloved figure. In addition, the words most mentioned by SM users along with Justin Trudeau's name, shown in Figure 2, tell of the topics associated with his character. Although, many of these topics/words are broad and general, some of the topics mentioned are significant to this study. For example, the words media, work, trade, and climate support, are indeed related to and exposing of Justin Trudeau's online identity and political promises. That is to say that, these words suggest the most recent topics that SM users have mentioned and relate to Justin Trudeau, as a prime minister, which consequently makes these words significant to my research. Indeed, the use of the word media along with Trudeau's name, also supports my hypothesis about Trudeau's peculiar social media identity. The second step I took after finding the words most associated with Justin Trudeau's twitter identity (@justintrudeau), was to see whether the association of these word with Trudeau carry a positive or a negative sentiment. Interestingly, the mentions including Trudeau and `social media' displayed a negative sentiment of about 82% with regards to a total of 5000 twitter posts (Figure 3). The negativity associated with Justin Trudeau and media, suggests that Justin Trudeau's social media image is also negative. However, what is important is that Justin Trudeau's identity on media is still a major topic of discussion. In fact, in order to unpack these negative results, I referred to the word-cloud of these mentions, where one can see the specific topics that are talked about with regards to Justin Trudeau's media presence. After analyzing Figure 4 and the tweets which include media and mention Justin Trudeau together, I

Lotfi 42 created Table 1.1, through the use of coding method. Table 1.1 shows that most of the tweets, including `media' and Justin Trudeau', are focused on topics such as, trust, hate, freedom of speech, and the new digital charter. The inclusivity of these words in tweets containing Trudeau and media, which are ranked as generally negative, expose the present-day SM users' concerns and arguments against Justin Trudeau, but also help political marketing researchers with regards to the voting demographic cultures and concerns.
Key Words: "Justin Most Tweeted Topics Trust Most SM users talk about how Justin digital RT @kinsellawarren: This is a frankly astonishing result. "He has no plan, but Canadians still trust @AndrewScheer more than @JustinTrudeau to handle climate change" https://t.co/t9AVKZ4PHc via @nationalpost ca · 7/10 · 6:51 pm 10 Jun 2019 @ArtWoodhouse @DrJacobsRad @realDonaldTrump @karinagould Description Examples

Trudeau" and MEDIA

Trdueau's

charter, which points to the hate,

misinformation, and the ruining of trust is by itself proposed by the PM, who SM users don't trust.

@JustinTrudeau I don't trust him. He's a spoiled elitist and use to getting his way ca · 7/10 · 1:35 am 11 Jun 2019 "Question @JustinTrudeau Why not just tell truth about your domestic bottled water for your family? That's why I don't trust you, you cannot help but babble about nothing when the truth would do. #LAVSCAM #NotAsAdvertised #NotMyPM #youdonotspeakforme 3:26 AM - Jun 11, 2019"

Freedom speech

of

SM users are agitated by the loss of freedom of speech that can be caused through Justin Trdueau's `new digital charter'.

RT @MarkOkanagan: So @JustinTrudeau idea of "freedom" is to ban plastic, ban firearms, ban free speech, ban social media, ban tankers, ban pipelines and compel speech... what, besides abortion is the @liberal_party for? 7/10 · 10:54 pm 9 Jun 2019 RT @ceeneegee: @JustinTrudeau Those hero's fought for our freedom, the very freedoms you're trying to take away... - pays media $600 mil tax dollars - creates digital watchdog - threatens social media platforms - 5 ethics violations - labels opposition Nazi's / alt right - shuts down our AG Shameful! 6/10 · 10:43 am 7 Jun 2019

Lotfi 43
Now that you are back from overseas @JustinTrudeau are you still planning to shut down social media during the election so that people will only see and hear what you and your paid off media lackeys print as facts. The Canadian people won't stand for their rights being trampled. https://t.co/M8cRsen7I1 Hate SM users confess their dislike Trudeau of and Justin his @Undoomed RT @JustinTrudeau "You know what buddy boy, I really hate you and I speak about it. How is it so hard to understand that venting is a normal and HEALTHY human activity? Without it there is only violence." @MaximeBernier "Being held accountable for hate speech and

policies and opinions about Social Media.

disinformation??You've been exploiting the Christchurch massacre for weeks. You've been lying about SNC-Lavalin for months. You've been lying for years about small deficits supposed to be gone by 2019.YOU must be held accountable!" Social media platforms must be held accountable for the hate speech & disinformation we see online ­ and if they don't step up, there will be consequences. We launched Canada's new Digital Charter today to guide our decisions, learn more about it here: https://bit.ly/2YGiTuu

Table 1.1 Twitter posts made by SM users including the words `Justin Trudeau' and MEDIA. These posts are categorized
based on their sentiments and themes

In fact, the high frequency of the use of `trust' in a tweet containing media and Justin Trudeau, is suggestive of the lack of SM users' trust and their concern about Trudeau's authenticity and credibility on media. One example of the lack of trust displayed by SM users, which I found through a search of the most recent tweets including the words `social media', `Justin Trudeau', and `trust', is the tweet posted by @Deplorable_Bree on May 26th, 2019:

Lotfi 44 "Oh this is rich. The most untrustworthy and corrupt government in the history of Canada talking about trust. Spare us" More importantly, the tweet mentioned above, is a reply to Justin Trudeau's stating the following about the new Digital Charter: "Our goal is to restore trust in the digital world. It's a huge task, but governments & social media platforms have a responsibility to act ­ we can't afford to do nothing. That's why Canada will be stepping up, and launching a new Digital Charter. https://t.co/xHfu4kM344" This tweet is significant, as it points to Justin Trudeau's understanding of the untrusting emotions against social media and the digital media of today. In fact, according to Latent Drichlet Analysis (LDA) theory, the positioning of the words "huge" and "task" or "governments" and "Social Media" beside one another, suggest the implicit highlighting of the relevancy of governments and social media. This is surprising, since the empowerment of voices and freedom of expression are the unique affordance of SM and rather disagreeing with the characteristics of the "government" discourse. That is to say that SM users associate SM with intimacy and personal opinions, whereas the government is often a controlled and private sector run by the most hated of all professionals--politicians. In fact, the inclusion of the word social media and government beside one another, can also suggest the mixing of the two. Such similiarity between these two discourses, implied by Trudeau's tweet, leads me to the social-media oriented politics I previously referred to, which highlights Justin Trudeau's politics' dependency and relatedness to SM user's desires. In fact, it is also important to study Justin Trudeau's replies to the recent negativity on SM, through the use of twitter as an information distribution outlet and a way to communicate more personally with the SM users. As a result, I decided to search for the most recent tweets from Justin Trudeau himself and the word cloud shown in Figure 3 was created with regards to 5000 of his most recent tweets. Analyzing Figure 3, one can instantly notice an emphasis on topics such as, middle-class, women, support,

Lotfi 45 climate, and Canadians. Moreover, for a deeper analysis of Justin Trudeau's most recent tweets, I once again use the method of coding and ensemble table 2.2, which is descriptive of the topics that Justin Trudeau refers to and consequently some of the society's most relevant and effective discourses.

Key Word Tweets from Justin Trudeau

Topics Employment

Description Justin Trudeau addresses how the actions he is taking are in order to create more employment opportunities for all.

Examples Over one million new jobs since 2015. A growing middle class. The lowest unemployment &

Lotfi 12:02 46 PM - Jun poverty rates on record. And we'll keep working hard to support you & your family
11, 2019 Good meeting with @EmmanuelMacron in Paris, focused on how CETA will create jobs & opportunities for the middle class in both our countries, the progress made on the Canada-France climate partnership, and the work that remains to keep protecting our oceans & reducing pollution. 11:25 AM - Jun 7, 2019 Our communities are what make Canada such a great place to live, and our government will always support them. That's why we're working with Mayors ­ at @FCM_online today & every day ­ to grow our economy, create jobs, & build strong, thriving communities for people to call home.

Women's rights

Justin Trudeau points to the significance and

Every woman & girl ­ no matter where she lives ­ deserves access to safe health care, and Canada is stepping up. Today at @WomenDeliver, we announced a historic investment to support the health and rights of women & girls around the world. Jun 4, 2019 "Facing the hardest of truths is a difficult and necessary step to addressing them. And the hard truth is that we have failed the missing & murdered Indigenous women and girls, their families, survivors, LGBTQ and two-spirit people. But we will not fail you any longer. " June 3,2019 Women start close to half of all new businesses in Canada ­ so supporting women entrepreneurs is essential to growing our economy. At #WITW, @TinaBrownLM & I spoke with female entrepreneurs about some of the challenges they face & what we can do to support more women in business. Sep 10, 2018

contribution that women make to the Canadian economy and why gender equality is important.

Environmental Plan

Talking about the actions that will be taken by the government in order to help reduce pollution and the effects of climate change.

Canadians are tired of seeing our beaches, parks, streets, and shorelines littered with plastic waste. Learn more about the action we're taking to ban harmful single-use plastics: https://bit.ly/2wMBtp0 #BeatPlasticPollution Climate change and air pollution are severe global threats ­ for our environment and our health. On World Environment Day, we're reminded that we all need to work together to make sure our kids and grandkids have clean air to breathe. #BeatAirPollution https://bit.ly/2XuRPOS 9:10 AM - Jun 5, 2019 To the young Canadians who marched today, we hear you. Climate change is real & we're taking action to put a price on pollution, phase out coal & keep our oceans & communities clean, so you can have a better future. We know there's more to do & you inspire us. #YouthClimateStrike

Cannabis

The

legalization

of

In 2018, we kept our commitment to fight organized crime and keep our kids safer by legalizing and strictly regulating cannabis. Dec 31,2018

Cannabis and the positive

Lotfi 47
effects of this decision for the economy and families The old approach to #cannabis didn't work. It was too easy for our kids to get it and gangs & drug dealers were reaping the profits. That changes from now on. #promisekept 18 october,2018 Profits out of the hands of criminals. Protection for our kids. Today #cannabis is legalized and regulated across Canada.Oct 17, 2018 Healthcare The new incentives and benefits that are provided by the government to all and especially seniors. On #WorldHealthDay, we recognize that everyone has the right to the health care they need. Here at home, Canadians are proud of our universal health care system & we're always working to improve it to build healthier & stronger communities. @WHO 9:08 AM - Apr 7, 2019 Retweet: "Great town hall on #YourBudget2019 with @_DebSchulte today in King City! We talked about steps our government is taking to lower costs and improve coverage for prescription drugs-- including a Canadian Drug Agency, another change that improves quality of life for seniors." 12:09 PM - Mar 25, 2019 Canadians pay too much for prescription drugs. #YourBudget2019 will: Help make prescription drugs more affordable & accessible. Create a new Canadian Drug Agency. Help people with rare diseases get the life-saving drugs they need. Learn more: https://bit.ly/2ueXhbx5:00 PM - Mar 25, 2019

Table 2.2 Justin Trudeau's twitter posts categorized based on the most relevant topics found from figure 5

One can instantly notice that the topics focused by Trudeau on SM are corelated with the promises that I mentioned he made during the elections in 2015. This shows how he is trying to continue his campaign, through the addressing of the same promises, but also how he is aiming to show credibility and authenticity, through the keeping of his promises. Moreover, one can say that Justin Trudeau's aim to prove his credibility reveals his addressing the concerns that most SM users have expressed about the lack of `trust' (Table 2.2). The addressing of the SM users' criticism about his identity exposes Justin Trdueau's `Social-media oriented politics', because it shows his aim to impress SM users and display his acknowledgment of their concerns. In addition, one of the main topics that Justin Trudeau has focused on in his most recent tweets, which was not addressed in his initial campaign in 2015, is his emphasis on women's rights and equality. This is significant, as the topic of women rights has been increasingly important to the voting population of today, even though less attention was paid to this topic back during

Lotfi 48 the 2015 elections. According, to a Twitter blog report, by Michele Austin, women's rights including #InternationalWomensDay and #DayofTheGirl, were some of the most trending topics of the year 2018. Michele Austin's report is important, as it agrees with my hypothesis about Justin Trudeau's social-media oriented politics, through the revelation of the trendy topic of women's rights on Twitter. That is to say that Justin Trudeau's strategy to show a desirable image on social media, based on social media trends and SM users' positive reactions, can be seen through his addressing the women's right topic. Moreover, it is important to notice how most of the exemplified tweets include the use of a hashtag, which shows Justin Trudeau's use of SM's affordances in order to not only summarize his intended message, but to also generate a conversational thread about this message. Hashtags are used by twitter users, firstly to highlight the goal of a tweet, secondly to generate and expand the audience of the tweet, and thirdly to gather a community of SM users that are interested or agree on a topic (Rauchenable, Sheldon and Herzfeldt 2019). Therefore, Justin Trudeau's use of hashtags, show his aim to highlight, publicize, and generate a community of identifiable SM users through the use of twitter affordances. Lastly, it is important to denote the presence of the hidden message--the enhancement of Canadian Identity present behind these tweets, which is found through the use of LDA theory. Looking at the examples I have provided in the Table 2.2, it is not difficult to notice the presence of the word `Canadian' in almost every tweet. This is significant, not only because it shows Justin Trudeau's goal to call upon the whole nation, but also since it exposes his attempt to co-relate the Canadian identity to his messages. Therefore, Justin Trudeau associates Canadians with the messages he proposes, through the mentioning of the word Canadian in the tweets, while he also advocates and shapes the meaning of being Canadian. This method of branding Canadian identity can be seen as a result of Justin Trudeau's referral to his father's methods and success, which agrees my foreseeing of Trudeau's dependency on the positive attributes of the `Trudeau legacy'. Furthermore, Justin Trudeau's use of the words `we' and `our' suggests

Lotfi 49 that he aims to unite the SM users, through sympathizing and identifying with them. In fact, one can notice that the only instances, he uses the word `you/your' are when he is referring to the new budgets created for the community--#YourBudget2019. This is significant, as it shows Trudeau's emphasis on the aspect that his proposed budget plans are made specifically for SM users and potential voting demography, by denoting the budget's belonging to the audience through the use of the word `Your' in the hashtag. One can say that this is yet another method to engage SM users and encourage a sense of trust towards Trudeau, due to his promoted selfless action plans for the economy, being `YourBudget2019'. To sum up, a textual content analysis of the tweets posted by either SM users or Justin Trudeau himself, during the period of 13months (May 15th 2018-June 15th,2019), has provided us with the data discussed above. Through the analysis of these data, political marketing researchers can learn about the current image of Justin Trudeau and utilize these findings for the creation of yet another successful marketing strategy. In fact, the findings show that Justin Trudeau's most recent campaigns and SM marketing strategy has been updated to address and engage the new voting demography of 2019 federal elections, by emphasizing on image repair and building trust. Such change in the SM marketing strategy of Justin Trudeau, agrees with my emphasis on the studying of social media marketing, while it also exposes Justin Trudeau's continual attendance to SM users' impressions and expectati ons--his socialmedia oriented politics. The same results are expected to be seen by the following multimodal analysis of the collected Data.

Lotfi 50 The Twigramming/ Multimodal Analysis: The one thing I noticed, when studying the images of Instagram was how at times the purpose of the images could not be recognized without the information detailed in the captions. In fact, one can say that images without captions could lose their main purpose or get wrongfully interpreted especially in the case of politics. On the other hand, when looking at the tweets posted by Justin Trudeau on twitter, I noticed the presence of a type of infographic or a picture containing textual messages along with almost all the tweets. This shows his increasing use of infographics on social media and points to the significance of the collaboration of words and images with one another in order to create meaning. Indeed, I decided to include a multimodal analysis of some of the posts created by Justin Trudeau, due to the observations I made during the research process and the increasing use of infographics on Social Media. The infographics that I have decided to analyze in this section are collected from the two SM channels, Instagram and Twitter, during the same time period used for my textual analysis--May 15, 2018 to June 15, 2019. More importantly, these posts were all shared on both the SM platforms Instagram and Twitter, which not only shows the significance of their content, but also points to Justin Trudeau's acknowledging the importance of these two channels. Moreover, as I have mentioned previously, I have referred to MacCloud's terminology in order to classify the relationship and contribution of the texts in each image to the meaning and main focus of the image. The table below, which is followed by my detailed visual analysis, shows my classification of the images based on MacCloud's terminology and other basic information about the images.
Image # 1 Text-Image relationship Duo-Specific Background Toronto City skyline Topic/Theme Air pollution and Climate Action Target SM Audience City of Toronto(more than 50% Immigrant population) 2 3 Montage Montage Solid Red Background Solid White Background Unemployment and Job Creation Cannabis Legalization Middle-class Canadian Families Canadians (Families and Youth)

Lotfi 51

Image #1

Image #2

Image #3

Lotfi 52 To begin with, Image #1, which is a duo specific image was posted by Justin Trudeau on Instagram and Twitter on May24th,2018. Looking at the brief analysis of this image, described in Table 3.1, one can point to Trudeau's attempt to show that he is proposing a climate action plan, that will benefit all families and help the quality of life. But more importantly, the use of Toronto's skyline in the background image, shows that he is targeting Toronto residences, who would be able to identify with the picture of the city's skyline. This is important, as according to StatsCanada, Toronto is not only the most immigrant populated city of Canada, but also the city with the highest youth population. Such results agree with my previous findings that show Justin Trudeau's emphasis on the engagement of young and immigrant voters. Indeed, digging deeper into the aesthetic representation of this picture, one can say that the split made in the middle of the picture, centralizes the CN tower, making it the main focus point of the image, which also guarantees the engagement of the target audience. And lastly, the placement of the words on top of this image, which has a blurry and unattractive site on one side, and a clear and desiring sight on the other, shows the strategic SM content creation of Justin Trudeau. The words `price' and pollution, are placed on the side of th e image that is displeasing. Whereas, the words `Family' and `benefits' are placed on the side of the image that is pleasing and clear to read. This shows how the image is strategically edited and created in such way that the `positive' message of the image is more noticed and acknowledged, than the negative, since some users might be provoked and worried, once they see the words `price' and `pollution'. Whereas, the words `Family' and `benefits' provide positive connotation for most--if not all. In fact, one can notice the same strategy of image editing, when analyzing Image #2 in terms of highlighting the specific words displayed in the image. The phrases "unemployment rate" and "lowest level" have been bolded in Image #2, which was posted by Justin Trudeau on August 14th, 2018. Even though the creation of a specific focus on specific words in this image, is not made through the use of the same strategy as Image #1, one can point to the

Lotfi 53 identical emphasis on the creation of a positive message and one that pleases SM users. That is to say that the `lowest level' of `unemployment rate' point to Justin Trudeau's keeping or fulfilling his original promises made to the voting demography, while it showcases his success and benefits for unemployed and middle-class families. It is also important to point to Justin Trudeau's use of a red background for this image along with white colored fonts. The colors red and white comprise the colors of the Canadian flag and is therefore suggestive of `Canadians' being the targeted audience of this post. Moreover, the use of a specific color for the background of this picture, instead of a scenery or portrait like image #1, displays a more unified and specific message, due to the easily read and centered position of the text on top of a rather `blank'/ `simple' background. In fact, observing the emphasis placed on the text of this image, one must recognize the significance of the un-bolded words. For example, it is important that the rate of unemployment is compared to the 1970's, as it points back to more than 40 years ago and is once again a reminder of the past. Here, one can say that Justin Trudeau is using a signifier of the past in order to create reminiscent emotions and feelings--a strategy also exposed through the use of #TB on his Instagram posts. But more importantly, the years of the 1970's, which are referred to in this image, are significant, as they are the same years of Pierre Elliot Trudeau's height of popularity among the public. Therefore, Trudeau's specific mentioning of these years can be seen as a direct reference to the memory of his father, which I have previously referred to as the `Trudeau legacy'. Moreover, based on the Laten Drichlet Theory about the proximity of the same words in one phrase/sentence, once can say that the reminder of the 1970's and the association of these years specifically with rather pleasing results of the `lowest unemployment rates', is suggestive of Justin Trudeau's aim to keep and promote a positive image for the `Trudeau legacy'. All of this, not only agree with other studies that I mentioned before about the significance of Pierre Elliot Trudeau on Justin Trudeau's image, but also show Justin Trudeau's use of social media posts in order to create or rather keep a positive image.

Lotfi 54 Trudeau's continual aim to promote and keep a positive image can be easily spotted when analyzing Image #3, where the strategy of highlighting the words has been used in order to point out their significance. For example, the phrases "Cannabis in Canada" and "Promise Made. Promise Kept", are both highlighted. Although, the two phrases are highlighted in different colors; "Cannabis in Canada" is highlighted with a light blue and "Promise Made. Promise Kept" is highlighted in red. This is significant, since the color blue is not only less noticeable or jarring to the eyes, but it also does not signify or symbolize a specific theme. In fact, red is more noticeable and often associated with Canadian Nationalism, due to its reference to the Canadian Flag. One can say that this shows Justin Trudeau's attempt to assure that the SM users notice the phrase "Promise Made. Promise Kept.", while they are implicitly encouraged to empathize and identify with it's nationalistic reference. Furthermore, the explicit statement about Trudeau's keeping the promise that he had made, shows his acknowledgement of today's SM user's distrusting feelings and his attempt to regain their trust. Justin Trudeau's emphasis on the gaining of trust and the use of strategic SM content, which highlight the messages he wants SM users to notice, also agrees with my assigning of Social-Media Oriented politics to Justin Trudeau's political stance. That is to say that similar to the previous images, the highlighted words in image #3, show that Justin Trudeau's actions are highly influenced and strategically tailored to the desires of SM users. In fact, it is once again important to denote the phrases that are not highlighted in this image, such as "Now Legal and Strictly Regulated". This phrase is significant, as I find it ironic that it is not highlighted nor the first phrase noticed on this image, as you would expect it to be, since this post is the first official announcement of cannabis legalization in Canada. Instead, "Cannabis in Canada" is highlighted in blue, which only suggests that the post provides information about Cannabis in Canada. However, this strategy also encourages the readers to read the details of the post, which include messages other than the legalization announcement. For example, the second appointed phrase seen in the image is about how

Lotfi 55 cannabis legalization benefits every family and the third phrase refers to the other benefits of it. Therefore, one can say that the editing choices of this image, show Justin Trudeau's approach to deliver the message of cannabis legalization, but also to highlight the benefits of this action for all families regardless of their associations with cannabis. Nevertheless, this image not only delivers the news about cannabis legalization, but also engages and encourages the acceptance of disagreeing SM users, through the mentioning of its benefits. In continuation, the legalization of cannabis is also widely appreciated by most of the young generation of Canadians, which points to Justin Trudeau's recognition of the importance of the younger generation of voters and his approach to engage their attention and possibly gain their vote-- once again.

Lotfi 56 Limitations: The data collected for this research point to the significance of Social Media marketing in political campaigns and agree with my reference to Justin Trudeau's politics, as social-media oriented. Even though these data co-relate with one another, they are limited in terms of their timing. For example, the textual analysis of Justin Trudeau's tweets was limited to a 13 months period. Whereas, a larger collection of tweets would have provided us with more accurate data. Also, it is important to note that SM posts are updated daily and the trending topics of discussion or focus are constantly changing. The regular updates and fast pace of information usage on SM, make it difficult to predict and provide accurate statements about future occurrences. In fact, one of the unexpected occurrences that I faced during my research was the changing of Instagram's photo details, which stopped displaying the number of likes. Originally, I wanted to refer to the number of likes received for the photos of each category and refer to those specific photos for my analysis, since the number of likes received by each photo would have been a good indicator of the photo's success with regards to the satisfaction rate of SM users. Nevertheless, Instagram's sudden change of photo details limited my scope and data collection, especially when choosing the results for my detailed semiotic analysis. Moreover, the method of image type analysis is great in how one can group different images, but one of the difficulties with this method is how some images belong to more than one group. For example, some of the images that belonged to the `campaign' category, could arguably also be recognized as belonging to the category of `family', since they also included Justin Trudeau's children/wife by his side and suggest the connotation of him being a family man. The difficulty of determining the classification group for each photo, which was frequently encountered, not only decreases the objectivity of my data, but was also slowing down my research and data collection, as I often had to refer to the captions, in order to find the intended message of the image. Nevertheless, Justin Trudeau's use of hashtags such as, #tbt or

Lotfi 57 #cdnpoli, enabled me to make more clear and forward decisions. And lastly, my research scope has been limited to only two Social Media platforms of Instagram and Twitter. Whereas, platforms such as Facebook or Youtube also provide significant visual and textual data, which could be used for a more accurate analysis of Justin Trudeau's political campaigning. Future Research: I urge political marketing researchers to continue the studying of SM data and build on top of the findings of this research, through conducting an analysis for the winning political campaign of the federal elections coming up in October 2019. Such research would not only expose the most recent strategies of SM marketing techniques, but also show the significance and influence of the change in the voting demography, during the past five years, with regards to the voting preferences and cultural connotations. In fact, the analysis of the results for this year's upcoming federal elections, could reaffirm the findings of this research. More specifically, due to the increasing awareness of the importance of SM in politics, the winning candidate's use of SM marketing may be similar to that of Justin Trudeau. In addition, I suggest the inclusion of other SM channels' data, such as Facebook, which is one of the strongest SM channels and has the largest user base. Indeed, the multifunctionality of Facebook and how it affords a multimodal content creation, can be a more credible resource for research purposes, especially since multimodal data analysis is seemingly the most holistic type of analysis for SM research. Although, it is important to remember that SM data are continuously changing and increasing, which suggests that even the same topics should be studied again after a certain period of time has passed. Therefor, conducting an analysis similar to the methods used in this research, which focuses on twitter and Instagram, would still provide good insights. Social Media's prevalence on our daily lives is predicted to not only increase, but also take over other forms of digital communications. Indeed, almost all online platforms are beginning to add social features, such as chat groups, photo sharing, and video sharing,

Lotfi 58 which show the significance of the social aspects of SM channels and their power to override others digital platforms. With such great power and increasing usage in our daily lives, the study of SM platforms, would not only help professional marketers, but also be a good resource for cultural and societal research studies. The final section of this paper provides a short review of the findings and my analysis of the results chosen for this study and talks about how these results compare to my initial hypothesis. Also, my research questions are addressed once again considering the analyses of SM data I have provided.

Lotfi 59 Conclusion The results support my theory about Justin Trudeau's Social-Media Oriented Politics, as my analysis of his Instagram posts, Tweets, and Twigrams, all show his emphasis on the satisfaction of SM users' desires and demands. From the earliest stages of Justin Trudeau's appearance on Social Media, which is observed through his Instagram posts, until the most recent posts that he has made on SM; Justin Trudeau's focus on the younger generation of voters and middle-class immigrant families is shown to be a continuous effort. The textual data found using Twitter as a resource ("The Tweeting") suggest a possible decrease in Justin Trudeau's popularity among SM users, which is shown to be caused by the lack of trust. Although, Justin Trudeau's most recent tweets display his acknowledgment of this lack of trust and suggest an increasing effort to prove his credibility, through the use of SM. Indeed, the changing conditions of Trudeau's image on SM, have only caused a shift on Justin Trudeau's SM content creation, from being focused on multiculturalism to pointing to the economic growth and progress he has made for Canadian families. Through which, he aims to implicitly encourage the trust of SM users and show his credibility, as he displays the keeping of his promises. As expected, the multimodal analysis ("The Twigraming") shows the same emphasis of proving Justin Trudeau's credibility to SM users, since most of the images-text relationships are centralized on the economic progress and `kept promises' by Justin Trudeau. Moreover, these findings suggest an answer to my first research question, by showing that Justin Trudeau's strategic SM marketing has significantly helped him create a good public image, through the use of visual, textual, and multimodal affordances of SM platforms. They also prove my initial hypothesis about Justin Trudeau's focus on immigrant and youth populations of Canada, by the exposing of the aims of the messages implied by the SM content. And lastly, these results suggest that such `social-media oriented politics', could also help Justin Trudeau regain the public's trust and consequently win the upcoming federal elections. More specifically, the effectiveness

Lotfi 60 of Justin Trudeau's `social-media oriented politics', prove his marketing strategies as the ideal marketing strategy for any politician aiming to win the elections. Therefore, to answer my last research question; one can fairly point to the possibility of a re-election for Justin Trudeau using the same marketing strategies, which are focused on the desires and demands of SM users.

Lotfi 61 Figures:

Figure 1. A comparison of the sentiment of SM users' tweets including @JustinTrudeau

Figure 2. Word Cloud of the users' mentioned tweets about @JustinTrudeau

Figure 3. The comparison of negative and positive sentiments of tweets including @JustinTrudeau and the word "media"

Lotfi 62

Figure 4. Word Cloud of mentioned tweets about @JustinTrudeau, including the word "media"

Figure 5. Word Cloud of Justin Trudeau's most recent tweets

Lotfi 63 References: Austin, M. (n.d.). Canadian Politics in 2018. Retrieved from https://blog.twitter.com/en_ca/topics/insights/2018/Year_on_Twitter_Canadian_Politics_in_201 8.html Ahmad, K., & Sheikh, K. S. (2013). Social media and youth participatory politics: A study of university students. South Asian Studies, 28(2), 353. Bastedo, H. (2015). Not 'one of us': Understanding how non-engaged youth feel about politics and political leadership. Journal of Youth Studies, 18(5), 649-665. doi:10.1080/13676261.2014.992309

Bernhardt, N. S., & Pin, L. G. (2018). Engaging with identity politics in canadian political science. Canadian Journal of Political Science, 51(4), 771-794. doi:10.1017/S0008423918000318

Bittner, A. (2018). Leaders always mattered: The persistence of personality in canadian elections. Electoral Studies, 54, 297-302. doi:10.1016/j.electstud.2018.04.013

Clarke, H. D., Gravelle, T. B., Scotto, T. J., Stewart, M. C., & Reifler, J. (2017). Like father, like son: Justin trudeau and valence voting in Canada's 2015 federal election. PS: Political Science & Politics, 50(3), 701-707. doi:10.1017/S1049096517000452

Clarkson, S. (2000, Winter). Charisma and contradiction: The legacy of pierre elliott trudeau. Queen's Quarterly, 107, 590-607. Retrieved from http://ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/login?url=https://searchproquest-com.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/docview/233306971?accountid=13631

Lotfi 64 Colliander, J., Marder, B., Lid Falkman, L., Madestam, J., Modig, E., & Sagfossen, S. (2017). The social media balancing act: Testing the use of a balanced self-presentation strategy for politicians using twitter. Computers in Human Behavior, 74(Complete), 277-285. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2017.04.042
Chandler, Daniel. Semiotics : The Basics, Taylor & Francis Group, 2001. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ryerson/detail.action?docID=180682. created from ryerson on 201906-04 08:53:00.

David Akin Parliamentary, B. C. (2015). Toronto falls for trudeaumania

Drainville, R. (2018). Iconography for the age of social media. Humanities, 7(1), 12. doi:10.3390/h7010012

Eric Grenier's Pollcast: The importance of Canada's youth vote | CBC News. (2016, April 21). Retrieved from https://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/grenier-pollcast-coletto-youth-1.3545379

Enli, G., & Rosenberg, L. T. (2018). Trust in the age of social media: Populist politicians seem more authentic. Social Media + Society, 4(1), 205630511876443. doi:10.1177/2056305118764430

Ferguson, D. A., & Greer, C. F. (2018). Visualizing a non-visual medium through social media: The semiotics of radio station posts on instagram. Journal of Radio & Audio Media, 25(1), 126-141. doi:10.1080/19376529.2017.1385617 Huang, F., Zhang, X., Zhao, Z., Xu, J., & Li, Z. (2019). Image­text sentiment analysis via deep multimodal attentive fusion. Knowledge-Based Systems, 167, 26-37. doi:10.1016/j.knosys.2019.01.019 Halverson, E. R., Bass, M., & Woods, D. (2012). The process of creation: A novel methodology for analyzing multimodal data. The Qualitative Report, 17(11), 1.

Lotfi 65 Jung, Y., Tay, A., Hong, T., Ho, J., & Goh, Y.H. (2017). Politician's Strategic Impression Management on Instagram. HICSS. Kedzior, R., Allen, D. E., & Schroeder, J. (2016). The selfie phenomenon ­ consumer identities in the social media marketplace. European Journal of Marketing, 50(9/10), 1767-1772. doi:10.1108/EJM-06-2016-0363 Komodromos, M. (2015). Social media and its role for cypriot members of parliament in times of crisis. The Cyprus Review, 27(1), 217. Kahne, J., & Middaugh, E. (2012). Digital Media Shapes Youth Participation in Politics. Phi Delta Kappan, 94(3), 52­56. https://doi.org/10.1177/003172171209400312 Krippendorff, K. (2012) Content analysis: An introduction to its methodology. 3rd Edition, Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE. The SAGE Handbook of Social Media Research Methods, edited by Luke Sloan, and Anabel QuanHaase, SAGE Publications, 2017. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ryerson/detail.action?docID=4771733. Created from ryerson on 2019-06-07 13:40:12. Landtsheer, C. D., De Vries, P., & Vertessen, D. (2008). Political impression management: How metaphors, sound bites, appearance effectiveness, and personality traits can win elections. Journal of Political Marketing, 7(3-4), 217-238. doi:10.1080/15377850802005083 Lee, E., & Oh, S. Y. (2012). To personalize or depersonalize? when and how politicians' personalized tweets affect the public's reactions. Journal of Communication, 62(6), 932-949. doi:10.1111/j.1460-2466.2012.01681.x

Lotfi 66 Liebhart, K., & Bernhardt, P. (2017). Political storytelling on instagram: Key aspects of alexander van der Bellen's successful 2016 presidential election campaign. Media and Communication, 5(4), 15-25. doi:10.17645/mac.v5i4.1062

Macey, J. R. (2002). Cynicism and trust in politics and constitutional theory. Cornell Law Review, 87(2), 280.

Mackey, E. (1999). The house of difference: Cultural politics and national identity in canada Routledge. Marland, A. (2017). Above and below the line: Strategic communications and media management in canadian governments. Canadian Public Administration, 60(3), 417-437. doi:10.1111/capa.12222 Marland, A. (2018). The brand image of canadian prime minister justin trudeau in international context. Canadian Foreign Policy Journal, 24(2), 139-144. doi:10.1080/11926422.2018.1461665 McCloud, S. (1994). Understanding comics: The invisible art. New York: Harper Collins. McLuhan, Marshall. 1964. Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. New York: Signet Books. McGuirk, K. (2017). GET IT, GIRL! an exploration of "fitspiration" content on instagram using visual social semiotics and social comparison theory Nash, C. (2017). cdnpoli: Social media like twitter can polarize voters and over-simplify issues. The Hill Times, (1411), 6. Panjeta, L. (2017). Selfie culture: A view on cyber documentarism. Studii Si Cercetari De Istoria Artei : Teatru, Muzic, Cinematografie, 10-11 (54-55), 143-153.

Lotfi 67 Politicians need to do better on social media, trudeau says. (2018, ). Abbotsford News (Vancouver, British Columbia)
Poulsen, S. V., & Kvåle, G. (2018). Studying social media as semiotic technology: A social semiotic multimodal framework. Social Semiotics, 28(5), 700-717. doi:10.1080/10350330.2018.1505689

Seijts, G., De Clercy, C., & Nguyen, B. (2018). Exploring how canadian voters evaluate leader character in three cases: Justin trudeau, hillary clinton, and donald trump. Journal of Canadian Studies/Revue d'Études Canadiennes, 52(2), 427-450. doi:10.3138/jcs.2017-0055.r1 Sucharov, M. (2013). Imagining ourselves then and now: Nostalgia and canadian multiculturalism. Journal of International Relations and Development, 16(4), 539-565. doi:10.1057/jird.2012.23 Rauschnabel, P. A., Sheldon, P., & Herzfeldt, E. (2019). What motivates users to hashtag on social media? Psychology & Marketing, 36(5), 473-488. doi:10.1002/mar.21191 Roma, P., & Aloini, D. (2019). How does brand-related user-generated content differ across social media? evidence reloaded. Journal of Business Research, 96, 322-339. doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2018.11.055 ROSENFELD, P., GIACALONE, R. A., & RIORDAN, C. A. (1994). Impression Management Theory and Diversity: Lessons for Organizational Behavior. American Behavioral Scientist, 37(5), 601­ 604. https://doi.org/10.1177/0002764294037005002 Richardson, P. S., Choong, P., & Parker, M. (2016). Social media marketing strategy: Theory and research propositions. Journal of Marketing Development and Competitiveness, 10(2), 24-34. Retrieved from http://ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/login?url=https://search-proquestcom.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/docview/1860725006?accountid=13631

Lotfi 68 Ryoo, J. (. H., & Bendle, N. (2017). Understanding the social media strategies of U.S. primary candidates. Journal of Political Marketing, 16(3-4), 244-266. doi:10.1080/15377857.2017.1338207 Vieira, P. (2015, Oct 20). Trudeau wins canada vote --- liberal party set to gain majority, ending nearly a decade of conservative rule. Wall Street Journal Retrieved from http://ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/login?url=https://search-proquestcom.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/docview/1723481425?accountid=13631 Woods, J., Manning, J., & Matz, J. (2015). The impression management tactics of an immigration think tank. Sociological Focus, 48(4), 354-372. doi:10.1080/00380237.2015.1064852 Wu, S. (2014). A multimodal analysis of image-text relations in picture books. Theory and Practice in Language Studies, 4(7), 1415. doi:10.4304/tpls.4.7.1415-1420 Vraga, E. (2014). Jason gainous and kevin M. wagner. tweeting to power: The social media revolution in american politics. new york: Oxford university press. 2013. 208 pp. $99.00 (cloth). $24.95 (paper). Public Opinion Quarterly, 78(4), 1026-1028. doi:10.1093/poq/nfu049

https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/75-006-x/2016001/article/14669-eng.htm file:///D:/Users/asa.lotfi/AppData/Local/Packages/Microsoft.MicrosoftEdge_8wekyb3d8bbwe/TempStat e/Downloads/1206-3549-1-PB%20(1).pdf https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/75-006-x/2016001/article/14669-eng.htm https://bdp.parl.ca/sites/PublicWebsite/default/en_CA/ResearchPublications/2016104E# (CITE THIS)


