READING DRESS: FASHION AND FRIENDSHIP IN A LITTLE PRINCESS AND ANNE OF GREEN GABLES

by Jaclyn Marcus BA, Queen's University, 2015

A MRP presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in the Program of Fashion

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2018 ©Jaclyn Marcus, 2018

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION FOR ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF A MRP I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this MRP. This is a true copy of the MRP, including any required final revisions. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this MRP to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this MRP by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my MRP may be made electronically available to the public.

ii 

READING DRESS: FASHION AND FRIENDSHIP IN A LITTLE PRINCESS AND ANNE OF GREEN GABLES Jaclyn Marcus Master of Arts in Fashion, 2018 School of Fashion, Ryerson University

ABSTRACT This Major Research Project (MRP) argues that fashion is a key tool for the critical examination of textual and visual works. Specifically, this research illustrates fashion's impact on the social identities of young female protagonists in early-twentieth-century adolescent literature, through a comparative literary study of A Little Princess by Frances Hodgson Burnett and Anne of Green Gables by L.M. Montgomery. Engaging theories of fashion, literature, and girl culture, as well as theories of semiotics and fashion diffusion, dress is shown to be instrumental in developing episodes of closeness and friendship for the protagonists in these novels, along with moments that may isolate them. This MRP examines the illustrations and accompanying textual descriptions found in the 1905 (London) and 1908 (Boston) editions of each work in order to expose fashion's mirroring and shaping of social identity; ultimately, this study reveals the tension between fashion's ability to both cement and subvert dominant cultural norms and ideals at the turn of the century.

iii 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS To begin, I would like to thank my supervisor, Dr. Irene Gammel. Your interest in my research and consistent encouragement to push my analysis further have been instrumental to this Major Research Project and its development. Your own research on literature, fashion, and women's heritage has paved the way for scholars like myself to undertake new projects in these fields, and I am honoured to be able to directly benefit from your insight. Thank you for your invaluable mentorship and counsel. I am also indebted to my second reader, Dr. Sandra Tullio-Pow, whose support has allowed this project to develop and improve. Thank you for your greatly appreciated suggestions and for the care taken with my work. I would like to thank my instructors and peers at Ryerson University's School of Fashion. The lectures, discussions, and courses that I have had the opportunity to participate in throughout this program have allowed me to engage more deeply with fashion and offered countless opportunities for learning. Thank you for teaching me and inspiring me. As well, I would like to thank Dr. Ben Barry and Dr. Alison Matthews David for being such wonderful guides and mentors throughout this program. This research was made possible by the generous support of the Modern Literature and Culture Research Centre (MLC), where I have also benefited from access to its extensive L. M. Montgomery Collection. Thank you to the MLC director and team for providing me with a space to write, learn, and advance my research. I would like to thank Kate Marland for being the perfect office mate and friend, and for providing day-to-day support throughout this project. I thank Emma Dunn for her thoughtful feedback and counsel, Jason Wang for his valuable advice, and the rest of the PUBZ group at the MLC. Additionally, the Osborne Collection of Early Children's Books and the Ryerson University Special Collections and Archives allowed me to access their materials, which I use throughout this research. Thank you for being an incredible resource for students like myself. Finally, I am eternally grateful to my family and friends, without whom this project would not have been possible. Thank you to my incredible father, mother, and sister for pushing me to believe in myself; I am so appreciative of your love, humour, patience, and support. iv 

TABLE OF CONTENTS Introduction Chapter One Fashion, Literature, and Girl Culture: Theoretical Concerns Chapter Two "It would be much easier to be a princess if I were dressed in cloth of gold": Fashion's Authority in A Little Princess Chapter Three "I thought of my lovely puffed sleeves and took courage": Transformative Dress in Anne of Green Gables Conclusion Notes Works Cited 40 59 63 67 19 1 6

v 

Harold Piffard, cover, A Little Princess: Being the Whole Story of Sara Crewe Now Told for the First Time, by Frances Hodgson Burnett (Frederick Warne and Co., 1905). Ryerson University Special Collections and Archives, Toronto.

vi 

Introduction Twentieth-century literature reveals fashion to be central in the construction of identity. More than a reflection of social change, fashion is an agent in it, involved both in normalizing characters in social identities and roles, and in affording them opportunities for rebellion. ­ Irene Gammel and Karen Mulhallen (191)

Fashion has long been understood as having the ability to both reveal and conceal identity. In a novel, characters do not choose their own clothing, but rather are dressed by the author to deliver a message; as such, literary figures often rely on their clothing as initial descriptors of identity. This is particularly true for young, developing characters, whose maturation as a novel develops may be communicated through their application of dress. Popular, best-selling novels A Little Princess (1905) by British-American novelist Frances Hodgson Burnett and Anne of Green Gables (1908) by Canadian author L.M. Montgomery are two primary examples of how fashion shapes the identities of adolescent female protagonists within literature. Burnett and Montgomery each published their completed novels as the Victorian era came to a close and the early Edwardian era began,1 producing works within the canon of the popular bildungsroman genre. Since publication, both works have maintained their positions as cornerstones in the literary imagination of adolescents.2 Despite the fact that these enormously successful works were published within three years of one another, with the texts sharing multiple thematic connections including the significance of friendship and community ties, comparative analysis juxtaposing the two has yet to be fully conducted. Burnett's well-endowed little princess Sara Crewe is poised and thoughtful while Montgomery's red-haired and impoverished orphan Anne

1 

Shirley is fiery and unpredictable. Raised within unconventional parenting structures, the social identities of these two imaginative heroines are ripe for comparison, contextualized within the similar sartorial themes found in both works. Consequently, my project is fuelled by pertinent research questions: what impact do fashion, dress, and style have on the friendships and social identities of the young female heroines in A Little Princess and Anne of Green Gables? What are the key sartorial moments in both novels and how do they signify fashion's shaping of class, social identity, and friendship? How does fashion help to encourage relationships and drive the heroines' social developments? And in what ways can fashion's facilitation of close friendships and stable social identities be considered subversive? In the case of my study, fashion is understood as a social and cultural force that is shaped by its surroundings while simultaneously influencing future cultural norms. Fashion is revealed to be instrumental in developing the episodes of community and friendship that illustrate social growth in A Little Princess and Anne of Green Gables. Fashion thus has a tangible impact on the social identities of the novels' protagonists. Burnett's Sara Crewe makes a stir amongst her fellow students when she first appears at school with her luxurious possessions and clothing, while the shabby and eclectic appearance of Montgomery's orphan Anne Shirley garners its own negative reaction with her peers upon first impression. Likewise, Sara and her "best friend" Ermengarde bond over Sara's beautifully dressed doll, while Anne and her "bosom friend" Diana Barry share close moments as they style one another's hair and outfits. Material possessions illustrate each character's social standing and serve as a tool for comparison, both positive and negative, between Sara and Anne and their peers. Fashion influences the way these characters are perceived and accepted within their communities.

2 

To demonstrate this, my research will be divided into two main sections, each respectively centred on key textual and visual moments that prioritize the development of social identity through fashion in A Little Princess and Anne of Green Gables. In this, my analysis will be focused not on fashion as literal garments, but instead as fashion is represented within the novels -- as a tool to gain social acceptance and a way to connect with one's peers. In constructing and highlighting these relationships, both Burnett and Montgomery crafted opportunities for their heroines to safely question the values and boundaries of the late nineteenth century, without straying too far from these dominant cultural norms. Fashion enables the balancing of this tension, providing a suitably benign outlet for characters to express, adjust, and even transform their individuality and social identities, while remaining a part of their communities and social group. To what extent does fashion allow for a questioning of Victorian ideologies, and to what extent is fashion's role to help maintain the status quo in young adult fiction? How does fashion enable a subversive subtext within a literary work? Ultimately, I argue that through an engagement with aesthetics and material objects, fashion is utilized within both novels as a tool for developing friendship and networks of support, in order to craft stable social identities. Throughout this Major Research Project, I use theories by Thorstein Veblen and Georg Simmel and more recent approaches by feminist fashion scholars Elizabeth Wilson and Joanne Entwistle to study the social role of fashion as it relates to the adolescent female protagonists in my two early twentieth-century literary case studies. In particular, fashion diffusion, a set of theories that look to explain the ways clothing trends and fashion spread through a society, and semiotics, the interpretation of signs within culture, will be crucial in analyzing fashion's role in literature as well as the unique relationship between fashion and modernity. "Chapter One:

3 

Fashion, Literature, and Girl Culture: Theoretical Concerns" will now introduce these theories and concepts, among others, and lay the foundation for my literary case studies in "Chapter Two: Fashion's Authority in A Little Princess" and "Chapter Three: Transformative Dress in Anne of Green Gables." As we shall see in these subsequent chapters, the adolescent protagonists found in these novels are loaded with the cultural anxieties of their respective eras, reflecting both their fictional settings in the Victorian era and the preoccupations of readership during the later Edwardian era. The British first edition of A Little Princess was published in London in 1905 by Frederick Warne and Co. with colour illustrations by British artist Harold H. Piffard, while L.C. Page in Boston commissioned a couple, M.A. and W.A.J. Claus, to illustrate Montgomery's original publication of Anne of Green Gables with black and white drawings.3 Since fashion is a theme in many of these image plates, this investigation requires theoretical consideration of the relationship between the visual and verbal, to be explored in Chapter 1. As will be demonstrated in Chapters 2 and 3, the illustrations and text in a novel may simultaneously deliver coinciding and conflicting messages, even while depicting the same scene. This is further complicated by numerous publications of each novel from the early twentieth century and onwards, illustrated by various artists. Given that there are multiple editions of both novels, I draw my textual citations from a 2002 republication of A Little Princess by Penguin Classics with annotations by scholar Ulrich C. Knoepflmacher, based on the American first edition, published by Charles Scribner's Sons in New York in 1905.4 I use the 2004 Broadview Press edition of Anne of Green Gables, republished from the original 1908 L.C. Page edition and featuring the black and white illustrations by M.A. and W.A.J. Claus that will be investigated herein, as well as providing

4 

scholarly annotations by Cecily Devereux. I examine clothing and style as they shape the female heroine's evolving relationships and social identities, considering both text and illustration in order to explore the ways they complement each other or alert us to tensions. In doing so, this research reveals fashion's narrative importance and impact within adolescent literature of the early twentieth century.

5 

Chapter One Fashion, Friendship, and Girl Culture: Theoretical Concerns

A large body of scholarly theories at the interface of fashion, literature, and girl culture underpin my case studies. In the following, I consider these various domains, introducing and illuminating my key terms and concepts before turning to my literature review, reviewing feminist, gender, and developmental theories that underpin much of the previous scholarship on Frances Hodgson Burnett and L.M. Montgomery. I begin by considering fashion, which I define through the lens of both early sociological and semiotic theory. I also review fashion through the frameworks of more recent feminist researchers who, contrary to earlier scholars, refuse to see fashion as mere adornment and rather see clothing and dress as essential in the construction of human identity and culture. This concept is the foundation for my consideration of fashion's role within girlhood texts.

Fashion Theory Fashion has long been understood to create connections and divides across culture. Contemporaneous with both Montgomery and Burnett, in The Theory of the Leisure Class (1899) American sociologist Thorstein Veblen discussed members of the upper class and their use of conspicuous consumption to highlight wealth and separate themselves from the middle and lower classes. The more obvious and excessive the consumption, the more status achieved. Within this sociological framework, material consumption works as a type of communication, where expensive clothing signifies achievement and accomplishment (Veblen). Years later, in his article "Fashion" (1904) German sociologist and philosopher Georg Simmel

6 

argued that members of social classes are able to connect with one another through fashion (558). Simmel viewed fashion as paradoxical, in that it allows wearers to be simultaneously a member of a group while also asserting their individuality through style (543). Women, according to Simmel, havean affinity towards fashion because of what he calls "the weakness of her social position"; Simmel thus highlights misogynistic attitudes at the turn of the century (550). Fashion is consequently one of the only spheres where women, and girls, can exercise agency and self-expression; in this sense, fashion may be an empowering tool (Simmel). However, Simmel stipulates that women's limited agency may continue to develop with the arrival of modernism, providing an early reference to modernism's shaping of fashion, and vice versa (550). Both Veblen and Simmel argue that fashion is diffused across a society and through various groups. This form of communication, whether conscious or subconscious, demonstrates fashion's role in shaping social identity and can be considered within fictional settings as well. Rather than understanding fashion as a symptom of modern society, late twentiethcentury and twenty-first-century theorists such as Elizabeth Wilson and Joanne Entwistle understand clothing and dress as a force that actively shapes the way these cultures unfold. Wilson's seminal work Adorned in Dreams: Fashion and Modernity (1985) asserts fashion's constructive, and even omnipresent, role within culture. For Wilson, identities are held in place by fashion; clothing and dress allow us to select a version of ourselves to share with the world, creating a "semblance of a unified identity" despite varied traits and moods (11). Wilson's assertion that fashion is an integral part of a society's collective consciousness opened the door for the study of fashion's influence within multiple fields, including literature. In The Fashioned Body (2000), Joanne Entwistle posits fashion as an embodied experience that helps shape the way individuals physically move throughout culture. Entwistle's sociological framework views

7 

fashion and bodies as symbiotic, forever entangled and continuously influencing one another, much like Wilson's own view of the relationship between fashion and culture (1). Because of this interrelationship, for both Wilson and Entwistle, no analysis of a society is complete without the consideration of fashion's impact. Wilson argues that "[f]ashion is dress in which the key feature is rapid and continual changing of styles" (3). Style and dress are thus key terms which delineate fashion as a cultural force and illuminate its meaning. In my research, dress is understood as the act of clothing the body, synonymous with the term "adornment," drawn from Entwistle's fashion theory and sociological framework (6-7). Entwistle views dressing the body as a social act, "one of the means by which bodies are made social and given meaning and identity" (7). Dress thus ties in to social identity, as discussed in this research. Style, alternatively, represents varied and multiple expressions of fashion, and the particular ways in which the body may be dressed and clothing worn; as Wilson demonstrates in the above quote, changing styles allows for fashion's existence. It is these individual expressions which lead to the interpretation of fashion within culture.

Fashion and Semiotics Our ability to "read" dress and style points to the relationship between fashion and semiotics, as well as the written and the visual. In both A Little Princess and Anne of Green Gables, fashion's influence is felt in the illustrations and text, leading to analysis of these mediums. Are verbal and visual texts complementary, or is there a tension in how they operate; or is it both? To answer this question, I draw on semiology, which engages three key terms: signifier, signified, and sign. The signifier can denote any object, while the signified is the association drawn from that object. Both are needed in order to create a sign -- the overall meaning. An example, drawn from

8 

fashion, further illuminates these terms: a diamond is the signifier, while the signified is marriage, or engagement; both make up this sign within twenty-first-century culture. Semiology is the study of signs -- the way we perceive and interpret them -- pointing to dress' signification of cultural and social statements. Semiotician and literary theorist Roland Barthes thus understood fashion as a system of signification, going so far as to see fashion as a form of communication, or how "garments are translated into language" (Jobling 132). Barthes' framed fashion studies within semiology, regarding interpretations of dress as reliant on the viewer's ability to read signs. For Barthes, fashion's symbolism even takes precedence over the meanings and associations of garments themselves (Jobling 132). The Fashion System (1967) is Barthes' work that most closely examines this relationship between semiotics and fashion. In this seminal text, Barthes introduces the concept of image clothing, which refers to fashion as it is portrayed in imagery, and written clothing, the accompanying textual description of the fashion depicted (3). Utilizing fashion magazines as a corpus of analysis, Barthes argues that a photographed garment (an example of image clothing) is a different type of dress than the description of the garment featured beside it (an example of written clothing). Both are needed for a semiotic analysis of fashion; and yet, for Barthes, the written takes priority over the visual (3-4, 8). This is because written clothing is included with no aesthetic purpose; instead, text reveals the "signification," or meaning, of the garments displayed (8). Barthes' framework illustrates fashion's role within literature: when an object of fashion is featured in both imagery and text, dress is facilitated as a mode of communication between the author and the reader. Any article of clothing, whether in the form of fabric or fiction, can be a sign.

9 

Semiology, and Barthes' framework, continues to be applied and adapted in the twentyfirst century, offering additional helpful approaches for examining fashion. In the chapter "Roland Barthes: Semiology and the Rhetorical Codes of Fashion" (2016), scholar Paul Jobling argues that semiology continues to be a valuable lens for interpreting culture, particularly "in an age of mass media and mass-produced items..." (145). Engaging with and critiquing Barthes, in Reading Images: The Grammar of Visual Design (1996), authors Kress and van Leeuwen reimagine previous frameworks (17-8).The authors take issue with Barthes' prioritizing of the text and go so far as to argue that images may be the more important medium in contemporary culture (18).Similarly, though they do not engage directly with Barthes, in "Introduction to the Paratext" (1991) literary theorists Gérard Genette and Marie Maclean argue that the paratext of a novel, including its illustrations, is a crucial aspect of the text, which itself cannot exist without these additional elements (261, 263). These theorists point both to the continued relevance of semiology, as well as to opportunities for reimagining the field. In my own research, I adapt Barthes' framework according to these recent theorists, treating fashion as it is constructed in both a novel's illustrations and text equally.

Fashion and Literature Fashion theorists paved the way for interdisciplinary approaches to dress studies. The past ten years have seen the development of research focused on understanding the relationship between fashion and literature, seen through a number of scholarly and critical anthologies that analyze dress in literature in multiple publications. In Styling Texts: Dress and Fashion in Literature (2007), Cynthia Kuhn and Cindy Carlson believe that previous literary texts may be studied in new ways, given that past research did not recognize or theorize fashion's role (2). Taking Kuhn

10 

and Carlson's stance one step further, I suggest that fashion has the ability to revolutionize earlier literary studies. In particular, the two authors acknowledge that clothing shapes characters' perceptions of themselves and those around them, arguing that "Fashioning is a mindful effort to construct an identity...." This is because fashion is consistently interacting with "a network of cultural codes" left to be interpreted by those who come into contact with the dressed figure (Kuhn and Carlson 3). Styling Texts thus offers an example of intersections between fashion, literary studies, and semiotics, believing that fashion, like prose, can be read. Similarly, in Fashion in Fiction: Text and Clothing in Literature, Film and Television (2009), Peter McNeil, Vicki Karaminas, and Catherine Cole explore Barthes' framework to study dress within popular media, aligning with fashion theorists who view the relationship between fashion and culture as reciprocal (McNeil, Karaminas, and Cole 1-3; Entwistle; Wilson). Their collection offers various approaches for analyzing fashion's role within literature, particularly fashion's relationship with "form, narrative and aesthetics" (McNeil, Karaminas, and Cole 5). This includes analyzing clothing as a means of interpreting the "cultural changes signaled by fashion and the way in which such change was generated." This approach finds its root in feminist literary studies that read female characters and their roles within a society by focusing on their clothing; this was particularly popular for analysis of Victorian literature, where female characters could often be closely studied to reveal more complicated and nuanced readings (McNeil, Karaminas, and Cole 4). This historical context is significant, given that both A Little Princess and Anne of Green Gables were published as novels shortly after this time period. The method outlined by the authors serves as a blueprint for my case studies, as I analyze fashion's impact on the shifting social identities of the female protagonists found in each text.

11 

Adding further to these scholarly advancements at the intersection of fashion and literature, in "Dressing the Twentieth Century in Literature" (2017) Irene Gammel and Karen Mulhallen undertake a detailed analysis of clothing's impact on twentieth-century literature, including modernism and postmodernism. In considering this relationship, the two literary scholars argue that fashion's influence is profoundly bidirectional, both cementing and subverting the social norms acted out within the texts (191). Or in other words, fashion's shaping of identity, within the context of fiction, can be both normalizing or transformational. Bringing together fashion theory, literary studies, sociology, and semiotics, Gammel and Mulhallen's analysis is crucial for understanding fashion's ability to create a subtext within a literary work, which can both challenge or reinforce dominant cultural boundaries. This research has shed light on the copious amount there is left to discover at the intersection of these disciplines within specific genres and time periods of literature, paving the way for my case studies and analysis of girls' relationship to fashion in literature, a field that also requires a brief introduction.

Fashion, Literature, and Girl Culture The study of girls -- how we define a girl, girlhood, and girl culture -- is a recent area of academic research with multiple terms and methodologies for considering the field. In her article "Girls Today: Girls, Girl Culture, and Girl Studies" (2008) theorist Catherine Driscoll cites the turn of the century as the start of popularized interest in "girls," marking girl culture as a distinctly modern phenomenon. Driscoll defines a "girl" as "an assemblage of social and cultural issues and questions," as opposed to consisting of subjective restrictions, for example age or gender (14). Similarly, in "The Adolescent Novel" (2012) literary theorist Julia Kristeva understands the adolescent as "a mythical figure," a stage on which specific cultural expectations

12 

are played out, rather than a role defined through restrictive boundaries (135-136). These understandings recognize that novels like A Little Princess and Anne of Green Gables can offer value and be directed towards a wide variety of groups beyond young, female-identifying readers. The time frame covered in Claudia A. Mitchell and Jacqueline Reid-Walsh's edited volume Girl Culture: An Encyclopedia (2008) begins during the early twentieth century, corroborating Driscoll's understanding of girl culture as an inherently modern phenomenon. Harmonious with Driscoll and Kristeva's analysis, the two theorists view girls as a product of current culture, developed through social and political events occurring centuries past (xxvi). The most important contribution by Mitchell and Reid-Walsh is a categorizing of methodologies for examining girl culture; notably, material culture and social relations are listed among the central lenses through which girls may be understood (xxvi-xxviii). As well, entries within the encyclopedia make direct mention of both Montgomery's Anne of Green Gables (Gammel, "Anne of Green Gables") and Burnett's A Little Princess (Forman-Brunell), recognizing the importance of these works within girl studies. As in fashion theory, as girl culture has developed further avenues of analysis have begun to be explored by researchers in the field. Girls, Texts, Cultures (2015) by Clare Bradford and Mavis Reimer is one example of this scholarship, studying the relationship between girls and the written word. This analysis focused on a wide range of texts, from fiction, to advertisements, to books made up of paper dolls. Taking analysis of the relationship between girl culture and literature one step further, Joe Sutcliff Sanders, author of Disciplining Girls: Understanding the Origins of the Classic Orphan Girl Story (2011), zeroes in on "the classic orphan girl story" from the turn of the century, analyzing the impact these narratives have had on girls who engage

13 

with this genre. The chapter "Spinning Sympathy" notes that fashion is often a primary avenue of support and affection offered to young girls in literature (156). Sanders equates consumption with the development of a social identity and sense of self for these fictional heroines (158). Clothing and dress thus hold an unquestionable place of importance within novels directed towards girls in the early twentieth century. A specialist in adolescent literature, author Joe Sutcliff Sanders engages with nine primary works as case studies within his analysis, of which A Little Princess and Anne of Green Gables are two examples; in doing so, Sanders also recognizes these novels as central within girl culture and offers a key available comparison between these two texts.

Literature Review for A Little Princess and Anne of Green Gables Carole Gerson argues that academics who have turned their attention towards girlhood novels have contributed to their "scholarly capital" within academia, even as popular literature continues to be disregarded in other spheres and across universities (17). Unfortunately, many of this research, particularly those focused on A Little Princess, do not directly utilize fashion as a means of illuminating the texts. Though clothing and dress do not figure predominantly in Burnett scholar Phyllis Bixler Koppes' work, the author takes notice of moments in the novel where fashion plays a part in the heroine's development and social identity. Also underscoring the importance of dress, Iris Otero's doctoral dissertation entitled "An Analysis of Gender Representations in Children's Novels by Frances Hodgson Burnett" (2007) provides additional insight into the ways that Burnett's works both secure and question gender norms that were prevalent during the Victorian era, maintaining that Burnett's novels bring tensions surrounding gender and culture to the

14 

present through their continuous popularity (Otero 3, 6). Finally, the 2002 Penguin Classics republication of A Little Princess includes a list of critical studies (xxvi-xxvii), created by U.C. Knoepflmacher; though relating, too, to the topics of gender, girl culture, and social identity, none of the works listed directly cite fashion. Interestingly, despite the comparative popularity of A Little Princess Montgomery and Anne of Green Gables scholarship is far more widespread, and includes studies of clothing and dress. The proliferating scholarly interest in Montgomery's work is exemplified through the many anthologies dedicated to Montgomery studies.5 Pertinent to my own research, Montgomery scholars have addressed the key themes of community and friendship within Anne of Green Gables, offering various approaches and conclusions for understanding the role of these forces within Anne (Berg; Gammel, "`My Secret Garden'"; Robinson; Santelmann). Also from a feminist perspective, Mary Henley Rubio uncovers the subversive elements found within the author's fiction, refusing to see Montgomery's novel as simple prose for children. In her article "Subverting the Trite" (1992), Rubio argues that Montgomery engages conventional literary devices and the popularity of the romance genre to subtly address social and political issues of her time period. Rubio believes that Montgomery "makes it safe for herself to tell tales and say things which are outside the pale of acceptable female public discourse" through application of these devices, including character and genre; however, fashion is not included among the devices she recognizes (8). In contrast, Irene Gammel's Looking for Anne of Green Gables (2008), which also reads Montgomery's works as complicated, nuanced texts, draws on fashion resources as a means of interpreting both the novel and its cultural context. Gammel employs fashion publications like The Delineator and Godey's Lady Book as support for her research, arguing that Montgomery drew heavily from these resources as

15 

inspiration for Anne (16).As such, Gammel acknowledges fashion's integral role in shaping the novel. Gammel's research also ties fashion into social identity, arguing that Anne employs fashion trends and style changes as a way of crafting her individuality (169). As well, the chapter "Maud's Bosom Friends" examines the close relationships built between Anne's and her female friends in the novel and Montgomery's own relationships with other women, including childhood friends, classmates, and cousins, many of which were passionate and often dramafilled. These portions of Looking for Anne of Green Gables offer insight into the historical and personal settings that surround the novel's publication and popularity. Recent scholarship has built on the study of fashion in Anne of Green Gables, regarding dress as central to the text. Juliet McMaster, author of "Taking Control: Hair Red, Black, Gold, and Nut-Brown" (2002), focuses her analysis of fashion on hair, arguing that the treatment and styling of a character's hair serves as a means of representing and pushing back against cultural boundaries played out within Montgomery's works (58-9, 61, 63). As well, in "`Matthew Insists on Puffed Sleeves': Ambivalence Towards Fashion in Anne of Green Gables" (2010), fashion's movements throughout the novel are deftly tracked. Authors Alison Matthews David and Kimberly Wahl note that Anne's interactions with fashion are consistently facilitated by a third party in the novel, for example Matthew or Diana (47). Applying Anne's puffed sleeves as their primary example, the authors argue that this ambivalent relationship is due to the tension between modernity's increasing presence within the world of Green Gables, and the pastoral, rural setting of the novel. In barring Anne from interacting with clothing independently, Montgomery allows the world of Green Gables to "remain untainted by the more disturbing elements of the New Woman..." while still acknowledging the importance of dress in the modern era (David and Wahl 36-37, 39, 47). As in Looking for Anne, David and Wahl make use

16 

of popular fashion publications at the turn of the century to support their argument, recognizing as well the impact of real-life events and environments on fictional texts (see 35, 37-38). Most recently, in "`I just love pretty clothes': Considering the Sartorial in Anne of Green Gables" (2013), Jennie Macdonald maps fashion's influence throughout the novel, focusing as well on the illustrations in the originally published work. For Macdonald, these paratextual elements offer the greatest insight into the central themes of Montgomery's novel, which include the relationship between fashion and community, as well as fashion and modernity (246-48). This research offers many valuable insights into my own consideration of fashion's impact on friendship and social identity in the novel, including considerations of the colour and cut of dresses, as well as illuminating specific scenes that engage with fashion in the text.

Contributions Within the context of this knowledge, my study joins scholarship that pushes back against studies that have long left the influence of clothing and dress unacknowledged. This project contributes to the growing body of work that examines intersections between fashion and literature, a field that has only begun to yield its full potential, and hopes to provoke further scholarship. When directed toward adolescent literature, fashion's impact becomes increasingly complex; fashion's ties to social identity are heightened within a genre where identities are often in flux. With this literature review completed and my theories and key terms laid out, I now turn towards my two case studies with a focus on the 1905 (London) and 1908 (Boston) publications of each work. Reading fashion's influence within these girlhood texts both contributes to the current field while also inviting future researchers to take seriously the influence of fashion on popular texts. As in so many fields, fashion's influence cannot be overstated; not simply as a

17 

means of interpreting culture, but as a means of shaping it. Ultimately, the following comparative analysis of A Little Princess and Anne of Green Gables will demonstrate both fashion's impact in literature and, when applied skillfully, its ability to create a subversive, empowering subtext within a novel.

18 

Chapter Two "It would be much easier to be a princess if I were dressed in cloth of gold": Fashion's Authority in A Little Princess

The story of A Little Princess opens with the female protagonist, Sara Crewe: a clever, imaginative, and kind seven-year-old girl who is to study at Miss Minchin's Select Seminary for Young Ladies. A Little Princess follows Sara throughout her time at the Seminary, from childhood to adolescence. Sara is first taken to the Seminary by her father, who wants her to be educated as befits a young heiress and girl of her status, so that she may "keep the house" for him, among the other responsibilities which await her in adulthood (Burnett 7). The novel depicts Sarah's development throughout her enrolment at the Seminary, its climax occurring once Sara's father passes away when she is eleven years old and her fortune is presumed loss; an orphan and pauper, Sara is forced to work in the role of servant in order to secure food and shelter for herself. The remainder of the novel follows Sara as she faces adversity and the challenges that come with her abrupt change in social status, concluding with Sara's fortune almost magically restored to her. Sara is left matured and changed by her experiences, as well as empowered to question the culture which surrounds her. Sara's story concludes with her using her agency to help other young women like herself, whom she encounters previously within the novel, as well as securing her own independence. Within the 1905 London edition of A Little Princess, four illustrations, or examples of "image clothing," and their accompanying captions and text, or "written clothing" (Barthes), portray key moments in the development of Sara's social identity through fashion: the very first image, depicting Sara purchasing a fashionable doll; second, Sara's meeting of the secondary

19 

protagonist, Becky, mediated through fashion and class signifiers; third, Sara's loss of privilege and fashionable dress following her father's passing; and fourth, the concluding illustration, showing through dress Sara's return to social status. A Little Princess opens with Sara's penchant for friendship facilitated through play acting with her doll, Emily, seen purchased in novel's initial illustration. Before her arrival at the Seminary, Sara's closest friend is her beloved father, Captain Crewe, who we learn little about throughout the text outside of his dedicated, doting love for Sara; he is described as light-hearted and intent on treating his daughter like royalty. This focus on Sara by the third-person narrator sets a young girl, rather than an adult or male figure, as the protagonist and focus of the novel.6 In turn, while Sara will soon develop close friendships at the Seminary, particularly with the scullery maid Becky, her classmate Ermengarde St. John, and a younger student, Lottie Legh, at the start of the novel Sara's penchant for friendship is facilitated through play acting with her doll, Emily. As she explains to Miss Minchin, the headmistress and antagonist of the novel, the purchasing of the doll will help to fill the absence of her father once she is left at the Seminary: "Dolls ought to be intimate friends. Emily is going to be my intimate friend... She is going to be my friend when papa is gone" (Burnett 10). Sara's solemn speech highlights the relationship between consumption and companionship that is central throughout the novel. Many of Sara's initial relationships are accelerated by material goods; in this case, the purchasing of a doll creates her earliest connection independent of her father, as evidenced in the edition's very first colour plate by Harold Piffard, depicting Sara and her father as they finally find "Emily," in a shop window of a toy store (figure 1). Sara points to Emily, drawing the viewer's eye towards her new friend; as such, we are invited into developing a new relationship with an inanimate object like a doll, who

20 

Fig. 1. Harold Piffard, colour illustration, A Little Princess: Being the Whole Story of Sara Crewe Now Told for the First Time, by Frances Hodgson Burnett (Frederick Warne and Co., 1905), p. 12. Osborne Collection of Early Children's Books, Toronto.

21 

constitutes an object of fashion herself. In the illustration, Emily's blonde hair, white dress, and blue sash align her with white European beauty ideals, suitable for Sara's purchasing as a member of the upper-class during the late Victorian era. Emily's description subtly instils the reader of the image with Eurocentric ideologies surrounding appearance, due to Emily's selection as Sara's friend and companion after searching widely and finding the other dolls wanting; this is an example of fashion's ability to negatively implement such cultural dogma. Semiotically, Piffard's colourful illustration exemplifies "image clothing" as described by Barthes, complementing the text and alerting the viewer and reader to Sara's wealth and privilege. Piffard's illustration lingers on Sara's fur-trimmed coat, coloured in a deep green dye. Over her coat peeks a lace collar, covered with a fur scarf. In her other hand, she holds a fur muff. These luxurious materials communicate that Sara is a young woman of means and aesthetic taste. As well, the pristine white of Sara's lace collar and gloves hints at their recent purchase and lack of use; a sign of economic power, underscoring Sara's ability to purchase new clothing as well as a sign of privilege, highlighting her ability to forgo manual work. At age seven, Sara wears boots with a small heel, illustrating that she is elegant, stylish, and a girl of leisure. Atop Sara's head sits a black beret that does not cover her ears, suggesting that she does not need the hat for warmth, but rather wears it for fashion. The illustration offers Sara as a representative figure of the upper class, possessing astonishing wealth, as Veblen would describe (24). This social identity is communicated visually through her clothing. The link between Piffard's image and Burnet's text is provided by the caption which reads: "`Oh, Papa!' she cried. `There is Emily!'" Indeed, the novel dwells on the many extravagant outfits that Mr. Crewe lavishes on his daughter, providing elaborate examples of what Barthes would term the "written clothing":

22 

There were velvet dresses trimmed with costly furs, and lace dresses, and embroidered ones, and hats with great, soft ostrich feathers, and ermine coats and muffs, and boxes of tiny gloves and handkerchiefs and silk stockings in such abundant supplies that the polite young women behind the counters whispered to each other that the odd little girl with the big, solemn eyes must be at least some foreign princess... (Burnett 10-1) A semiotic analysis of both visual and written elements reads each element of fashion found in the illustrations and texts as examples of signs (Barthes). Sara's coat, muff, hat, and boots are all signifiers, revealing Sara's position as an elite member of society. Though many of her purchases include items that are recognized as valuable even within twenty-first-century culture, including fur, lace, silk, and ostrich feathers, Sara's purchasing of an ermine coat is particularly significant. Ermine was worn by royalty during coronation and as a sign of power, because of its status as a valuable and rare material (Dennis 26-28). Sara's doll, too, signifies her social status, given that dolls are primarily examples of young girls' initial forays into material culture (Peers 25). Emily can be read as a fashionable object. Sara explains that if she does not have enough clothing for Emily, she will "take her to a dressmaker and have her things made to fit" (Burnett 11). Indeed, Emily's wardrobe is soon as large as Sara's, including "lace frocks, too, and velvet and muslin ones, and hats and coats and beautiful lace-trimmed underclothes, and gloves and handkerchiefs and furs" (Burnett 12). Both visual and textual signifiers work in tandem to highlight fashion's creation of a connection which goes beyond ownership and consumption; in purchasing Emily, Sara creates a connection for herself which is separate from her father, who she is currently dependent on as her only source of companionship. Once this relationship has been established, Emily serves as a tool to enchant Sara's peers.

23 

Sara's classmates, ranging from ages four to thirteen, immediately understand the unique social position the school's new "show pupil" possesses (Burnett 14). Upon entering the schoolroom, Sara's possessions inspire both awe and envy in her companions, as evidenced in Lavinia's whispers to her friend, Jessie: "`[She has a box] full of petticoats with lace frills on them -- frills and frills'" (Burnett 14). With the jealousy-fueled exchange turning malicious, the school functions as a pivot for the social world, as Stephanie Pomerantz explains: "Nowhere is the connection between style and identity more apparent for girls than in the school" (65). At the Seminary, Sara's wealth, communicated through her clothing, grants her both an advantage and disadvantage, socially, both facilitating, complicating, and even thwarting, friendships, which are saturated with embodied social and economic signifiers. Upon first meeting Ermengarde St. John -- her peer at the Seminary who is later to become her close friend -- Sara invites her to her room where she is able to hold Emily. It is this exchange which prompts Ermengarde to ask Sara to be "best friends," to which Sara agrees (Burnett 26; Mellor 324). Though Ermengarde is unpopular at the Seminary due her to difficulty with the lessons, structure, and hierarchical learning styles promoted at the school, Sara is shown befriending her almost immediately. Ermengarde's name echoes "ermine" and its ties to royalty in the mind of the reader, hinting to the important role Ermengarde's friendship will play in maintaining Sara's confidence in her role as "princess" throughout the novel. Lottie, a young classmate who likewise is not an expected friend of the older, mature Sara, also bonds with our protagonist through Emily. The two girls, along with some of Sara's other, younger classmates, play with the doll and have tea parties using her tea set, contributing to Sara's status as a "goddess and a queen" amongst her peers (Burnett 30). The narrator notes that part of the appeal of these parties was the fact that "No one had seen such a very real doll's tea-set before" (Burnett

24 

29). Sara thus displays her kindness and interest in friendship through her costly, unusual possessions, creating avenues for connection within her new community. Importantly, Sara chooses to befriend girls outside of popular circles within the Seminary. This is significant as it marks the first moment where Sara ignores societal expectations in favour of her own emotions and values. The purchasing of Emily initially facilitates these friendships for Sara, and allows her to exercise her morals within the social setting of the Seminary. If "Style operates as a type of social skin," then Sara's clothing is a powerful armor (Pomerantz 65). In emphasizing Sara's dress and material possessions, Burnett dramatically foreshadows Sara's impending loss as well as the value of her current fashionable status within the Seminary. The subsequent image continues to underscore this wealth, and is the second to appear in Burnett's work. Sara's privilege allows her to wield fashion to her advantage, skillfully employed as a means of connecting with those around her. In this second illustration, Sara is shown meeting Becky, whom she had encountered previously in the novel, but had never had the chance to meet in person (figure 2). Though Becky shows interest in befriending Sara, as she catches glances of her and listens in on her storytelling to her peers while she conducts her work around the Seminary, because of her position as a servant the two girls are not able to come into contact directly. This is implemented by Miss Minchin and the Seminary employees, as well as by Sara's peers. As James David Mellor writes in "Girls' Friendships," "social class is also an important determinant of friendship group membership, functioning ... as a marker of identity" (326). Sara status, however, allows her to disregard these societal conventions.

25 

Fig. 2. Harold Piffard, colour illustration, A Little Princess: Being the Whole Story of Sara Crewe Now Told for the First Time, by Frances Hodgson Burnett (Frederick Warne and Co., 1905), p. 59. Osborne Collection of Early Children's Books, Toronto.

26 

The reader is told that Becky is fourteen years old to Sara's nine years,7 though it is Sara who acts as a mentor to Becky throughout the beginning A Little Princess, her confidence enabled by her privilege. The illustration depicts the moment where the two girls finally befriend one another, facilitated in part by Sara's fashionable dress. This is a primary example of the tension created by fashion throughout the novel; dress can cement boundaries like class, while also offering avenues for pushing back against them. Following their first meeting, Becky becomes the secondary protagonist in Burnett's novel after Sara herself. Though she does not start off in the same well-off social position as Sara, she later undergoes a Cinderella-like transformation because of their friendship (Knoepflmacher x-xi). Throughout A Little Princess, Sara's social status allows her to empower those around her, in this case Becky. In the following scene, Sara and Becky's appearances can be read as signs, with their clothing as the signifiers and their social positions serving as the signified. The second illustration heightens the already apparent contrast between the two girls. In the image, Sara is shown standing over Becky in a motherly, protective stance. She literally looks down on her, while also shielding her. Sara wears a pink dress, collar, ruffled hem, and sash, coloured in a darker pink. Every aspect of her outfit, from her rose-coloured stockings to the blossoms on her head, match, revealing that this is an ensemble, and not merely haphazardly thrown-on clothing. Her pink, rosy colouring alludes to her happy, well-cared for existence, while also signifying her position as a romantic figure within the novel, the princess she aspires to become and whom others often associate her with. The flowers in Sara's hair recall this mythical imagery as well, aligning with her romanticized appearance. Becky's appearance serves as a stark contrast to Sara's as she is slumped on a chair, unaware of anyone approaching, her black and white dress juxtaposing with Sara's rosy colours. Her dress is covered in part by the

27 

chair and the pillow she rests on, marking her exhaustion as more visually significant than her clothing. Close inspection reveals that Becky's dress is dirty, likely covered in coal, as the coal brush at her feet reveals. This detail unfolds a narrative of child labor, the beginning of addressing the darker issues at play within Burnett's narrative. Becky's black boots, so different from Sara's easily-scuffed pink satin slippers, would not show signs of wear even if they were there. Sara is dressed for leisure, while Becky is dressed to work. Because of this, their dress communicates both their social status and hints at the characters' relationship to one another: mistress and servant. And yet, as we will come to see, the text reveals a more nuanced connection between the two adolescents, in spite and because of their dress. This can partly be read through Becky's positionality in the illustration; though Sara is more extravagant, and thus draws the eye, it is Becky who is set in the centre. This placement signifies to the reader that Becky's character is important as well, and is one technique the illustrator uses to grant Becky agency, along with Sara's own. The caption accompanying this image reveals Sara's immediate respect and care for Becky, despite never having formally met her: "She [Sara] crept toward her quietly, and stood looking at her. Becky gave a little snore." The text also marks Sara as active, and Becky as passive; in a sense, she is ambushed by Sara, who finds her in a vulnerable position: "In [Sara's] own special and pet easy-chair before the bright fire, Becky -- with a coal smudge on her nose and several on her apron, with her poor little cap hanging half off her head, and an empty coalbox on the floor near her -- sat fast asleep, tired out beyond even the endurance of her hardworking young body" (Burnett 38). Barthes argues that, often, "the commentary can single out certain elements in order to stress their value..." (14-15). The verbal text describing Becky's appearance serves to highlight her positioning as a member of the working class, as does the

28 

mention of coal, directly referencing her labour. She is said to be wearing an apron, a gendered item of clothing not immediately noticeable in the illustration and traditionally worn for household work. As well, she dons a cap, an accessory usually associated with employment as a maid and thus signifying that she is dressed for function over form. According to the narrator, Becky looks "like an ugly, stunted, worn-out little scullery drudge" (Burnett 39). This is preceded by the claim that, though asleep, Becky looks deeply unlike the fabled Sleeping Beauty; Becky is thus separated from the role of princess that is integral to the title and plot of Sara's story in A Little Princess, referencing again the class differences between the two girls. Sara's appearance, as it is described by the narrator, also contrasts strongly with Becky's in the accompanying text. As the reader discovers, Sara had been taking a dancing-lesson, and is dressed by her maid to suit the occasion. She is described as "diaphanous" and "fine"; the use of these descriptors points to Sara's consumption of goods whose purpose stands only to communicate her wealth and status, because of their ephemeral nature. The text brings to light details perhaps already gleaned by the viewer and reader: "To-day a frock the color of a rose had been put on her, and Mariette [her maid] had bought some real buds and made her a wreath to wear on her black locks" (Burnett 39-40). The flowers in Sara's hair signal her wealth; she can afford to purchase expensive blossoms, which will be discarded shortly thereafter once they wilt (Veblen). This description also corroborates the romanticized view of Sara's appearance as a "rose-colored butterfly," as well as a "rose-colored fairy" (Burnett 40). These otherworldly descriptors juxtapose with Becky's starkly real presence in the text. According to the narrator, "Sara seemed as much unlike her as if she were a creature from another world" (Burnett 39); though both are young girls around the same age, they are made distinct because of their clothing; essentially, by their money and class.

29 

Sara's luxurious dress offers her an advantage in the social interaction that follows Becky's awakening. When Becky jolts into consciousness, she is shocked that "this one -- in her rose-colored dancing afternoon splendor -- was looking at her as if she were not a culprit at all..." (Burnett 41). The ensuing interaction continues to highlight Becky's fascination with Sara's clothing: "Is that" -- she ventured, looking longingly at the rose-colored frock. And she asked it in almost a whisper. "Is that there your best?" "It is one of my dancing-frocks," answered Sara. "I like it, don't you?" For a few seconds Becky was almost speechless with admiration. (Burnett 42) This interaction emphasizes the power that Sara's clothing grants her in the eyes of her peers, particularly when they are from different social classes, as Becky and Sara are. It is this first meeting that marks the start of the supportive, empowering relationship that defines Sara and Becky's friendship. Despite expected dynamics of inclusion and exclusion within girls' friendships, typically motivated by factors including class, Sara and Becky soon develop a genuine connection (Mellor 324-325). As such, though fashion may initially serve as a separating force between the two adolescents, it is also a tool for bonding them. Searching for new items that she can gift to Becky, whom she wants to help and support, "added a new interest to Sara's existence. When she drove or walked out, she used to look into shop windows eagerly" (Burnett 49). In the early twentieth century, the ability to consume and purchase was empowering; the ability to purchase on behalf of someone else, even more so (Sanders 159). The act of consuming on Sara's part creates true camaraderie between the two characters. Sara's status and the consumption that follows allows her to serve as a benefactor to Becky, a role that traditionally was held by men, and not young girls. As such, the purchasing of

30 

these material goods also allows Sara to disrupt convention at the turn of the century. Becky, though not possessing the same wealth as Sara, instinctually returns her friendship through the channels of fashion and materiality. This exemplifies the avenue fashion offers young women to connect and display affection. On Sara's eleventh birthday, two years after their first meeting, Becky gifts her with a pincushion, made of used flannel (Burnett 52). Becky's care for Sara is demonstrated through the gift, and their friendship is solidified through the act of giving and consumption on Sara's part. Importantly, this interaction marks the first time that Sara voices to Becky that she loves her; much like a romantic relationship, this is a significant moment in the girls' friendship (Robinson 6), facilitated through fashion and signified through their initial, romanticized meeting. Given that the development of Sara and Becky's relationship is found at the end of the final chapter before Sara's loss of fortune, these scenes take on an added significance. Though fashion may have been the initial force that connected the two girls, their affection for one another soon withstands the loss of Sara's wealth and status. A reader unfamiliar with Sara's story would likely be able to view the following image and understand that something strange had taken place in the novel (figure 3). In contrast to the lavish illustrations seen up until this point, this figure is darkly-coloured and foreboding, and shows our protagonist in tears. In the chapter that accompanies the image, Sara has just learned of her father's death. This heartbreaking disclosure follows one of the most luxurious scenes in the novel: Sara's eleventh birthday celebration. Upon realizing that Sara is left an orphan and pauper on her hands, Miss Minchin quickly ends the celebration and decides that Sara must work for her living, in the role of scullery maid alongside Becky. It is notable that the first aspect of Sara's life to alter is her clothing. Miss Minchin furiously proclaims: "Go and tell her to take off that preposterous pink silk gauze, and put the black one on, whether it is too short or not. She has

31 

Fig. 3. Harold Piffard, colour illustration, A Little Princess: Being the Whole Story of Sara Crewe Now Told for the First Time, by Frances Hodgson Burnett (Frederick Warne and Co., 1905), p. 108. Osborne Collection of Early Children's Books, Toronto.

32 

done with finery!" (Burnett 62). Sara's pink dress that she wears on her birthday recalls the pink dancing frock that so enchants Becky, and emphasizes the outfit change that follows. In contrast to the previous illustrations, Sara is shown sitting, slumped over on the bed, with Becky kneeling beside her. Sara wears the black dress she has been ordered to change into by Miss Minchin, as well as black stockings and black shoes, revealing her altered role as servant in the household. Black is a solemn colour typically worn for mourning; given that Sara has just lost her father, her dark dress is a poetic choice. Black also signifies labour, as it does not show dirt easily; this can be contrasted with Sara's previously colourful clothing, made up in deep green and light pink. Her hair is unadorned, and falls around her face without any specific style. The result is the beginning of an unkempt and disorderly appearance. At the turn of the century, hair was typically tied to signifiers of status within society, from class, to age, to romantic status (Churcher 339). In previous illustrations, Sara's hair has always been adorned with accessories; as such, Sara's bare head demonstrates her loss. Finally, Sara's dress appears too small for her. The skin above her wrists protrudes from her sleeves, drawing attention to the fact that she has outgrown the ensemble. Similarly, her black dress does not touch the floor as Becky's does. Though neither of Sara's previous frocks, as shown in the last two illustrations, had the extra material to touch the ground, they revealed high heeled, shiny boots (in the case of the first illustration) or brightly covered tights and matching slippers (in the case of the second). In this image, however, Sara's short dress reveals only the plain black stockings and boots. When juxtaposed with the extra material making up Becky's white dress, it is Sara who appears destitute. However, there are also aspects of the illustration that confuse Sara's change in social identity: her black dress shines, revealing it to be a luxurious material, and she holds her doll, Emily, a symbol of consumption.9 This tension between Sara's immediate exterior, where she

33 

appears as a scullery maid, and her history as a girl of leisure, is skillfully revealed within the illustration. The written clothing, too, corroborates many of the revelations revealed by the image. Becky is indeed shown as Sara's friend, rather than her employee: "Becky ran to her and caught her hand, and hugged it to her breast, kneeling beside her." As well, the black dress Miss Minchin commands Sara to change into is described as "only the old black velvet," and is confirmed to be too small on her (Burnett 62). Miss Minchin, it seems, understands fashion's importance in declaring Sara's changed social status to others. Burnett offers a detailed description of Sara's appearance once she has changed: Sara "had put on, without Mariette's help, the cast-aside black-velvet frock. It was too short and tight, and her slender legs looked long and thin, showing themselves from beneath the brief skirt. As she had not found a piece of black ribbon, her short, thick, black hair tumbled loosely about her face and contrasted strongly with its pallor" (Burnett 66). With the change in Sara's class comes the loss of her maid; she must dress herself, losing a connection she had developed since moving to the Seminary. Sara attempts to maintain her tenuous connection to fashion by refusing to tie back her hair when she cannot find a ribbon that will match her dress; however, remaining fashionable is no longer entirely in her control. According to our narrator, "[Sara] did not look in the least like the rosecolored butterfly child who had flown about from one of her treasures to the other in the decorated school-room" (Burnett 66). Though she is the same girl, without the same clothing she is unrecognizable. Without fashion, Sara is unable to connect with those around her as readily and loses much of her previously well-established support network: "as Sara's frocks grew shorter and shabbier and queerer-looking,8 and it became an established fact that she wore shoes with holes

34 

in them ... they felt rather as if, when they spoke to her, they were addressing an under servant" (Burnett 73-4). Ermengarde and Lottie, whom Sara had previously developed relationships with, do eventually resume their friendship with Sara, but only after acknowledging her changed exterior. For Ermengarde, "[Sara] looked pale and unlike herself, and she was attired in the queer, outgrown frock whose shortness showed so much thin black leg" (Burnett 75). Similarly, the younger Lottie "could not understand why she looked different -- why she wore an old black frock" (Burnett 80). Sara is both a product and a victim of a time when an appealing appearance was vital for a young woman's social success. However, it is only truly shallow relationships that are impacted; though initially facilitated by fashion, the genuine connections made by Sara thanks in part to her previous social status may be maintained following the loss of her fortune. The final illustration in the 1905 British edition of A Little Princess reveals Sara's return to her former social status, as well as her resumed connection to fashion (figure 4). Sara's happily-ever-after is facilitated by Mr. Carrisford, Sara's father's friend who plans to return Sara's fortune to her, and who meets and helps Sara without realizing her identity: "When he saw you pass by, looking so sad and neglected, he did not dream that you were his friend's poor child; but because you were a little girl, too, he was sorry for you, and wanted to make you happier" (Burnett 173). Mr. Carrisford employs primarily material items to aid Sara, signifying consumption's value in creating social stability. However, it is the final gift, anonymously purchased for Sara, which allows her to truly rejoin her peers and regain her status: new clothing for her to wear on a day-to-day basis at the Seminary. The clothes are found by Miss Minchin, still wrapped, and Sara is ordered to open them immediately: What she saw was pretty and comfortable clothing -- clothing of different kinds: shoes, stockings, and gloves, and a warm and beautiful coat. There were even a nice hat and an

35 

Fig. 4. Harold Piffard, colour illustration, A Little Princess: Being the Whole Story of Sara Crewe Now Told for the First Time, by Frances Hodgson Burnett (Frederick Warne and Co., 1905), p. 275. Osborne Collection of Early Children's Books, Toronto.

36 

umbrella. They were all good and expensive things, and on the pocket of the coat was pinned a paper, on which were written these words: "To be worn every day. -- Will be replaced by others when necessary." (Burnett 160) This moment demonstrates fashion's impact beyond simply serving as bodily protection or covering. To Miss Minchin, this clothing signifies that someone in London is thinking about Sara; that she might have a friend or relative who cares for her. Sara is told to change into her new clothing and to rejoin her peers in the school room instead of undertaking her usual chores, but only "After [she is] dressed..." (Burnett 160). Without stylish clothing, Sara is a servant; with it, a pupil. The final illustration shows Sara in these new garments, at the exact moment where she is found to be the girl whom Mr. Carrisford has been searching for. According to Mr. Carrisford, Sara "is a little dark, forlorn creature, as unlike poor Crewe [Sara's father] as a child could be" (Burnett 168); because of this, when Sara is found she must be dressed in her new clothing in order to be acknowledged. In the image, Sara is shown in a white dress and knee-high black, shiny boots. Much like her previously worn rose-coloured frock, Sara's new white dress has a ruffled hem and a collar, adornments that communicate wealth, whether it be Sara's own or wealth granted to her by a benefactor. Sara's sleeves are outlined in lace, a material normally worn for leisure rather than work because of its delicate structure and easily-dirtied colouring; Sara would not be employed as a maid in this gown. Most importantly, Sara's dress, which is a pristine white, and her shiny, new leather boots signify recent purchase and mark Sara as a consuming subject. Although Sara's clothing is not as extravagant as those worn in previous illustrations, her resumed connection with fashion enables her improved social position. What is important for Sara's social success is that her clothing is aesthetically pleasing and luxurious; her

37 

new apparel is described as "pretty," "comfortable," and "expensive" (Burnett 160), befitting a young heiress. Sara's true identity is made more believable by her stylish dress; as the caption tells us, "The invalid gasped, `It is the child! The child!'"10 With her new fortune secured, Sara immediately withdraws from Miss Minchin's Seminary. In doing so, Sara subverts what might normally be expected of a girl in her social position, forgoing her education at the school her father had wanted her to attend. The novel concludes with this act of rebellion, dedicating its final pages to Sara's newfound power and agency, realized in tandem with her recovery of fashionable dress. Sara ensures that Becky is hired as her attendant, freeing Becky of her employment at Miss Minchin's. This enables Sara to remain with her friend while not straying too far from what is expected in Victorian society; Becky is to stay within her social strata in the role of servant. Sara also uses her wealth to donate money to a local bakery, with the proposal that the money be used to feed hungry children, specifically young women, who pass by the shop, in memory of Sara's own time as a scullery maid; in doing so, Sara extends her social influence and circle. Ultimately, Sara's aim is to utilize her improved social status for good, helping other girls like herself. As opposed to simply enacting her values within her immediate social surroundings, as she had previously, Sara, matured by her past experiences, uses her fortune to act as a change-maker more widely, implementing movements that will empower others. Sara also uses her status to craft independence for herself -- her story ends with the reader left wondering where Sara will go, and what she will do next. As Sara muses at the height of her poverty: "If I am a princess in rags and tatters, I can be a princess inside. It would be much easier to be a princess if I were dressed in cloth of gold, but it is a great more of a triumph to be one all the time when no one knows it" (Burnett 105-6).

38 

Though Sara maintains her values and sense of self throughout the novel, it is an engagement with fashion that empowers her to execute these values with tangible results. As a young girl coming-of-age in the early twentieth century, Sara's agency is often grounded in her social class and network; as can be seen throughout the novel, clothing and dress, within this context, become exceedingly important. Sara's fashionable status and appearance throughout A Little Princess facilitate friendships and relationships that offer her social mobility and support. With the help of fashion, Sara is returned to her position as heiress and benefactress, and is able to use her influence to connect and empower the other girls she comes into contact with throughout the novel. The novel's conclusion depicts Sara's independence and her ability to implement her own whims and values, both mirrored and enabled by her connection to fashion and dress.

39 

Chapter Three "I thought of my lovely puffed sleeves and took courage": Transformative Dress in Anne of Green Gables

The 1908 edition of L.M. Montgomery's Anne of Green Gables follows the growth of protagonist Anne from child of about eleven to young woman aged sixteen. Anne is accidentally sent to Avonlea for adoption by Matthew and Marilla Cuthbert, who had been hoping to adopt a boy. This replacement of Anne as female protagonist is the start of Montgomery's feminist subversion of the typical story of the male hero. The novel tracks Anne's integration into the Avonlea community, including the development of her relationships with her adopted parents and her peers, particularly her closest friend throughout the novel, her neighbor Diana Barry. Anne's maturation is portrayed in the form of deft social satire throughout her many mishaps and errors that drive the novel's episodic plot, motivated by her desire to find acceptance within her social environment. By the novel's conclusion, Anne is an established and elegant member of the Avonlea community, signified through her skillful use of fashion. Together, the visual and textual mediums of image clothing and written clothing track Anne's shifting relationship with fashion throughout the novel. As in the previous case study, this chapter examines four illustrations and their accompanying text to reveal Anne's social identity as it is shaped by dress: I begin by analyzing the plate that shows Anne in the outfit given to her by the orphanage she previously resided in; next, I turn to Anne's first social event within her community, as it is shaped by her personal style; third, Anne and Diana as they dress and style one another's appearance; and finally, the concluding illustration, which depicts Anne in highly fashionable dress.

40 

Like Sara Crewe in A Little Princess, fashion's impact in Anne allows the protagonist, Anne Shirley, to build social networks through her skillful facilitation of dress. Unlike Sara, however, Anne does not enter her community as a privileged heiress; because of her lack of economic and social power, Anne's overt longing to engage with fashion at the start of the novel is more pronounced than Sara's in A Little Princess. As an outsider, Anne recognizes the power of fashion to improve her social position, while Sara, at least at the beginning of her story, remains seemingly ignorant to her own privilege. In fact, we are first introduced to Anne through the lens of her clothing: A child of about eleven, garbed in a very short, very tight, very ugly dress of yellowish wincey. She wore a faded brown sailor hat and beneath the hat, extending down her back, were two braids of very thick, decidedly red hair. Her face was small, white and thin, also much freckled; her mouth was large and so were her eyes, that looked green in some lights and moods and gray in others. (Montgomery 63) Anne's clothing is outlined before her physical traits, alerting the reader to the threadbare clothing that unravels her lonely and difficult past in orphanages and as a foster child cum child labourer. Indeed, wincey is a colloquialism for linsey-woolsey, "a course textile valued for its warmth and durability but not for its appearance" typically worn at the turn of the century by slaves (Matthews David and Wahl 43), so that the material conveys Anne's dark history. As fashion reveals Anne's low status, it is also the vehicle for altering her social identity. Throughout the story, Anne will exploit the changeability of dress for her own advantage, much like any other "modern day teenager ... constantly reinventing and testing herself..." (Gammel, Looking for Anne 169). Anne's preoccupation with fashion as a means of improving her social identity commences almost immediately, during her drive back to Green Gables with Matthew.

41 

Anne begins turning the nature that surrounds her into an imaginary fashion runway. Upon viewing a white, "lacy" tree that reminds her of a bride, Anne laments: "...I do hope that some day I shall have a white dress. That is my highest ideal of earthly bliss. I just love pretty clothes" (Montgomery 65-6). For Anne, this train of thought leads naturally into another; on fashion, of course, in particular her embarrassment at her current shabby appearance (Montgomery 66). Having just arrived in Avonlea, the above soliloquy is telling of Anne's social awareness, and her understanding of fashion's impact on others' perception of her. Anne recognizes that her appearance marks her as uncared for, separating her into a lower social class (Simmel 541). It is because of this that her ideal of happiness is the ownership of a white dress. White, as has been discussed, is a colour of luxury because of its easily dirtied nature, a signal of both leisure and consumption. As Jennie Macdonald writes in her article "`I Just Love Pretty Clothes': Considering the Sartorial in Anne of Green Gables," Anne's desire for new clothing is tied into her wish to transform, in order to integrate into her new community (246-7). Macdonald argues that white is also a colour of transformation in the novel (255); as we shall see, Anne's dream of wearing white will later be realized. The more beautiful and expensive the clothing, the more likely Anne is to have built a strong social network; it is for this reason that Anne also imagines herself in a "silk dress," "gold watch," and "kid gloves" (Montgomery 66). For Anne, an orphan, potential financial support would symbolize something even more important for her social survival: a sense of community and family. M.A. and W.A.J. Claus' opening illustration in the 1908 publication of Anne of Green Gables depicts Anne as she meets what is to be her new family, her first membership into a community of her own (figure 5). In the illustrated plate, Anne is shown looking up at Marilla, in awe of her authority. A first look at the image reveals little more than a plain, shaded dress and

42 

Fig. 5. M.A. and W.A.J. Claus, black and white illustration, Anne of Green Gables, by L.M. Montgomery (L.C. Page & Company, 1908), p. 33. Osborne Collection of Early Children's Books, Toronto.

43 

simple sailor hat. However, closer inspection reveals that Anne wears no coat; she has been waiting alone for Matthew at the train station and throughout the buggy ride home to Green Gables without any protection against the weather. Darkly coloured, the dress has no adornment; Anne is dressed for function only, to clothe herself. The illustration also reveals that Anne has outgrown her dress: her sleeves are too short, and do not cover the length of her arms. Further, the small size of Anne's carpet bag reveals how very little material items she owns, soliciting the reader's sympathy for an impoverished orphan. The visual medium thus dramatizes Anne's later relationship with fashion, as she continues to acquire stylish clothing and accessories throughout her maturation. Accompanying this illustration is the caption, which reads: "`Matthew Cuthbert, who's that?' [Marilla] ejaculated." Anne's fear that her clothing will negatively impact the way those in Avonlea view her is therefore brought to life in her first meeting with Marilla. It is Anne's "stiff, ugly dress" that Marilla first notes about Anne, signifying the importance of fashion within the Avonlea community as well as in the historical context of the novel. This appearance forces Marilla to conclude that Anne is an "odd little figure" (Montgomery 74). Though Marilla knows nothing about Anne, her background, her personality, or why she is at Green Gables, simple surveillance of her clothing leads to conclusions about her very being. As such, the beginning of Anne's integration into Avonlea begins with the receiving of new clothing, given to her by Marilla. Marilla therefore acknowledges fashion's role in creating social stability, illustrating fashion's social dynamics within the text (Sanders 94-5). It is notable that outside of the teaching of prayers, fashion is the primary tool employed by Marilla in situating Anne within Green Gables, illustrating Wilson's point that fashion is not only about adornment but is rather a key factor in shaping identity. Clothing and dress thus gain added significance when entering into a new social group. Unfortunately for both Marilla and Anne,

44 

however, at this point in the novel neither character is well-versed in what is fashionable within Avonlea's late nineteenth-century community. Marilla understands clothing's importance in making Anne look respectable and cared for; it is because of this that she gives her dresses to replace her old one. However, she does not endorse the "conspicuous consumption" that is implicit in social status (Veblen). In contrast Anne, as has been seen above, may not know current trends, but understands fashion as a system far better than her guardian. Upon being given the three dresses Marilla has made for her, Anne "solemnly" takes in what is to be her new wardrobe. The clothing is described as "serviceable," a "bargain," "ugly," and "plain" (Montgomery 124). Though better than her old wincey dress, Anne is unsatisfied because she understands that fashion is about more than simply clothing; it is a key construct in adolescent identity. For Anne, being fashionable means that she will be able to blend in with the other girls she is to meet, while also standing out thanks to her imagined stylish clothing (Simmel); this positive attention would allow her easily to befriend her peers. It is for this reason that she longs for a puffed-sleeve dress, the current height of fashion, instead of her tight-sleeved new dresses. For Marilla, the puffed sleeves are not sensible as they require extra material, representing pure adornment. Puffed sleeves were stylish in part because of this excess, aligning with Veblen's understanding of fashion as a means of highlighting consumption and social success. Defensive, Marilla calls the trend ridiculous, prompting Anne to respond: "But I'd rather look ridiculous when everybody else does than plain and sensible all by myself" (Montgomery 125). This statement clarifies any confusion surrounding Anne's obsession with fashion: she longs to fit in with the residents of Avonlea. As Gammel explains, "Nowhere is the pull between [Anne's] distinct individualism and her desire to belong to a group better exemplified than in the realm of

45 

fashion -- in her yearning for puffed sleeves" (Looking for Anne 181). Anne understands fashion's influence on social identity and relationships, particularly as a character who has always been left on the outside of a community. The second illustration (figure 6) depicts this key moment when Anne first meets her peers -- at Sunday school. The illustration shows Anne as she first appears in church, isolated and alone, though with her head held high. In contrast, Anne's peers surround her, sitting with one another in the church's pews. The reader of the illustration and Anne's image clothing is likely to assume that Anne is alone because of her recent arrival in Avonlea, as opposed to her appearance, given that the girls are depicted wearing dresses and hats that appear similar to Anne's own (though many wear the aforementioned puffed sleeves). Gaping at Anne's appearance, "They looked at her and whispered to each other." The caption reveals that Anne is, in fact, an object of gossip for her peers. However, it does not reveal any further information as to why; it is left to the written clothing to clarify. Upon leaving Marilla to head to Sunday school, Anne is described as follows: Anne started off irreproachably, arrayed in the stiff black-and-white sateen, which, while decent as regards to length, and certainly not open to the charge of skimpiness, contrived to emphasize every corner and angle of her thin figure. Her hat was a little flat, glossy, new sailor, the extreme plainness of which had likewise much disappointed Anne, who had permitted herself secret visions of ribbons and flowers ... being confronted halfway down the lane with a golden frenzy of wind-stirred buttercups and a glory of wild roses, Anne promptly and liberally garlanded her hat with a heavy wreath of them. Whatever

46 

Fig. 6. M.A. and W.A.J. Claus, black and white illustration, Anne of Green Gables, by L.M. Montgomery (L.C. Page & Company, 1908), p. 112. Osborne Collection of Early Children's Books, Toronto.

47 

other people might have thought of the result it satisfied Anne, and she tripped gaily down the road, holding her ruddy head with its decoration of pink and yellow very proudly. (Montgomery 125-6) Though not fashionably attired, it is the addition of wildflowers to her hat that causes Anne to stand out. She is not approached by any of the other girls, and builds no new friendships during her first social appearance in Avonlea. Irene Gammel explains that Anne's ties to nature, particularly flowers, connect her to the natural world as well as to pagan rituals (Looking for Anne 83-84). Because of this association, Anne, like Sara before her, takes on elements of a mythical, even powerful figure, enacted through her adornments. This authority, exemplified by Anne in her accidental disregard for fashion's rules, is read as an act of rebellion by the churchgoers and marks her as a potentially threatening figure to social order. In tying Anne to "the irreverent world of wood nymphs and dryads," Montgomery "poke[s] fun at the solemn Sunday school decorum" that casts Anne as immediate outsider (Gammel, Looking for Anne 84). Fashion is used by the author to mark Anne as a subversive figure, challenging prejudices previously held within the Avonlea community in this scene. Although Anne does attempt to engage with fashion by adding flowers to her plain hat, she does not understand that it is the purchasing of fake flowers that is stylish; this can be seen in Anne's later exchange with Marilla, where she attempts to discern the difference between wearing artificial flowers and her own real ones (Montgomery 130-1). Anne's confusion regarding when and how it is appropriate to adorn oneself with flowers satirizes the Avonlea community, who blindly adhere to fashion's nuances. By the same token, however, the severity by which Anne's outfit is judged highlights clothing's impact on social identity -- perhaps clinging to fashion is not irrational after all. While Anne wants to be stylish, she must do so

48 

within the bounds of social norms -- deviating from what is expected is the antithesis to her goal (Simmel 543). As can be seen, Anne's appearance has a direct and immediate negative impact on her social standing. The illustration and text thus emphasize fashion's role in negotiating friendships and sense of community for young girls. Anne begins to understand, in a more mature sense, the importance of clothing and dress. The development of Anne's social life progresses simultaneously with the accumulation of new clothing. The turning point in this evolution can be seen through Anne's eventual ownership of a dress with puffed sleeves (Gammel, Looking for Anne 178; Matthews David and Wahl, "Matthew Insists on Puffed Sleeves" 41). Upon receiving the dress, Anne is happily overwhelmed. A description of the garment reveals its overtly fashionable nature: it is made of gloria, in a brown material, with frills, shirrings, lace, ribbons and, of course, the puffed sleeves (Montgomery 236). The many adornments that are a part of the dress mark it as Anne's first truly luxurious, fashionable possession. Further symbolism surrounding the dress' importance can be discovered; first, gloria was a material that typically signified luxury and transformation (Matthews David and Wahl 44). As well, the brown colour chosen by Matthew is in line with the "earthy colour palate" that was stylish at the time the novel was written (Gammel, Looking for Anne 180). For Anne, what is important about the dress is its status as "fashionable," an obviously stylish garment (Montgomery 237). Though she loves puffed sleeves in and of themselves, Anne has learned her lesson from her mishap with the fresh wildflowers: if the puffed sleeves were not stylish in the Avonlea community, they would not communicate Anne's social status, and she would not wear them. Fashion is again here about more than simply garments, even beautifully constructed ones; instead, fashion is a form of social communication. The night of the Christmas concert, which occurs almost immediately after Anne receives her

49 

new dress, serves as a sort of "coming out" for Anne following the ownership of her new dress. Although Anne is overcome with stage fright, it is fashion that allows her to flourish, as she explains: "...I thought of my lovely puffed sleeves and took courage. I knew that I must live up to those sleeves..." (Montgomery 238). New clothing sets the social standard for Anne to aspire to. Matthews David and Wahl argue that "Anne's wardrobe is not actively acquired but given to her as a charitable donation, a practical necessity, or a loving gift" (42). The two scholars suggest that Anne is not entirely an agent of her fashionability, but rather connects with clothing through her relationships. While building on their conclusion, my argument, more specifically, connects Anne's lack of agency to her historical context and age. During her early adolescence, Anne must rely on the support of her benefactors, her parental figures Matthew and Marilla, for clothing. However, Anne is active, even aggressive, in her pursuit of these new garments, working within the social constraints surrounding her to ensure that she is fashionable. Well-meaning but unflinching, Anne ties fashion to her social success, going so far as to equate her moral virtue and academic achievements with clothing (Montgomery 264, 283). Anne's actions remind the reader that she purposefully applies fashion as a means of positive social transformation. Statements like these also remain at the back of the mind of the reader as Anne continues to excel, implying that her later successes -- including graduating at the top of her class for the entrance exams into the Queen's school -- are thanks in part to fashion. The illustration in question, the third I examine in this chapter, appears immediately following this major triumph on Anne's part (figure 7). This timing is important, as the illustrator thus connects Anne's success with her stylish appearance. In the image, Anne and Diana dress for the previously mentioned concert, where Anne is to perform -- the only resident of Avonlea

50 

Fig. 7. M.A. and W.A.J. Claus, black and white illustration, Anne of Green Gables, by L.M. Montgomery (L.C. Page & Company, 1908), frontispiece. Osborne Collection of Early Children's Books, Toronto. 51 

selected to do so. Both Anne and Diana's outfits constitute examples of image clothing within Barthes' semiotic framework. Diana is shown tying a necklace around Anne's neck in the illustration, helping to adorn her as Anne passively allows herself to be dressed, her stature almost queen-like. With Diana in the role of stylist and assistant, Anne stands in as fashion icon (Macdonald 249) and model. The illustration corroborates Anne's disinterest in defining what is fashionable, or in dealing directly with garments (Matthews David and Wahl); she simply wants to be stylish herself, and will be aggressive in ensuring that she is in fashion. Close reading of the illustration reveals that Anne has succeeded on this point. Anne and her apparel are the central focus of the image, with her dress in full sight and face directed towards the reader, almost as if she is looking back at them. In contrast, Diana is literally blocked by a portion of Anne's voluminous sleeves and skirt. Anne is heavily accessorized and wears a fashionable gown, a Mary Jane-style slipper seen delicately peeking from beneath her skirt. The illustration and Anne's relationship with fashion is further illuminated through its accompanying caption, which reads: "`There's something so stylish about you, Anne,' said Diana." Both girls wear their hair up, signifying their maturation (Gammel, Looking for Anne 181); Anne's hair is not shown up in any of the previous illustrations. This signals too the maturation of Anne and Diana's friendship alongside their own personal development. At least three pages, along with the illustration, are devoted to the two adolescents' dressing and preparation process. The written clothing reveals that Anne wears an organdy dress, along with pearl beads and the white rose given to her by Diana (Montgomery 295). It is ironic that in this image Anne once again wears flowers; however, here she competently engages with fashion, and only a single bud can be seen in her styled updo. As has been mentioned, Macdonald argues that white is the colour of resurrection in the novel; as such, Anne's all-white

52 

accessories symbolize her rebirth as a mature fashion icon within the Avonlea community, in contrast to Diana's own dress of "lovely wild-rose pink" (255; Montgomery 295). The romantic description of Diana and Anne's clothing recalls Sara and Becky's first meeting, similarly coated in soft shades of pink and rose. This colour palate emphasizes the characters' friendship as akin to that of a romantic partnership. Fittingly, in this moment Diana enables and supports Anne's social success. As Anne and Diana go back and forth about what outfits will suit them best while they prepare for their outing, Anne continues to be doted upon by her friend, persisting in marking Diana as the fashion expert, and Anne as the locus on which fashion's influence is played out: Pull out that frill a little more -- so; here, let me tie your sash; now for your slippers. I'm going to braid your hair in two thick braids, and tie them half-way up with big white bows -- no, don't pull out a single curl over your forehead -- just have the soft part. There is no way you do your hair suits you so well, Anne. (295) This quote exemplifies the ways that fashion can be an avenue for connection for young women. Diana styling Anne allows them to interact intimately, with Diana tying Anne's dress, fixing her hair, and offering compliments, thereby raising her self-esteem. As well, the trinkets bestowed on Anne by Diana demonstrates their close friendship, expressed through the acts of giving and consumption much like Sara and Becky's interactions in A Little Princess. Fashion grants Anne and Diana the time and space to confide in one another away from the eyes and ears of the authority figures in their lives. Anne is able to unselfconsciously voice her insecurities to Diana, and vice versa; this also allows the two young women to encourage and support one another. While dressing, Diana self-deprecatingly declares: "I am just a dumpling ... Well, I suppose I shall just have to resign myself to it."

53 

"But you have such dimples," said Anne, smiling affectionately into the pretty, vivacious face so near her own. (Montgomery 296) This interaction illuminates the ways that an engagement with aesthetics and fashion have allowed Anne and Diana to care for one another. Overall, this illustration demonstrates fashion as a bonding force between peers, highlighting the ways that fashion can be facilitated to create strong, stable social identities for adolescent female characters in literature. With the help of clothing and dress, Anne has become the beautiful, poised young woman she must embody in order to secure her own social success. Fashion is what, for Anne, holds her in place as "Anne of Green Gables." By the novel's end, Anne is sixteen years old and no longer a youthful girl. In a later scene, as Marilla views Anne, now a young woman dressed in elegant apparel, "memory recalled a vivid picture of the odd, frightened child in her preposterous yellowish-brown wincey dress, the heartbreak looking out of her tearful eyes. Something in the memory brought tears to Marilla's own eyes" (Montgomery 304). Marilla's recalling of Anne's isolated youth through her old clothing credits fashion as a major factor in her transformation and maturation, representative of the care she has received at Green Gables. Anne's integration into the Avonlea community is reflected through her expert engagement with fashion; just as Anne connects with those around her through fashion, so in turn do those close to her now understand that their affections may expressed through dress. A young adult, Anne is free to turn her focus from friends and family towards a romantic relationship: her budding courtship with Gilbert Blythe, a male protagonist in the novel who is hinted as being a potential romantic partner for Anne. The final illustration in the 1908 edition of Anne of Green Gables shows Anne and Gilbert, walking side by side (figure 8). As Gammel

54 

Fig. 8. M.A. and W.A.J. Claus, black and white illustration, Anne of Green Gables, by L.M. Montgomery (L.C. Page & Company, 1908), p. 428. Osborne Collection of Early Children's Books, Toronto.

55 

explains in Looking for Anne, "Both [Anne and Gilbert] are dressed for a courtship walk..." looking much like a fashion plate from the turn of the century (233). Their fashionable appearances signify their social success and development. Gilbert looks at Anne, directing the reader to focus on her and her appearance. Looking adult, Anne is dressed more fashionably than in any other illustration: she wears full length gloves, a hat, and an umbrella, despite the fact that she is shown walking outdoors, on an unpaved country road. Anne wears clothing that protects her from the outdoors, a setting she reveled in during her youth; this distinction, delineated through dress, separates her from past ties to wildness and nonconformity. Both Anne and Gilbert's clothing, worn by adults rather than children, hints at their impending courtship, as Gilbert assertively declares: "`Come, I'm going to walk home with you.'" Although specific text is not linked to the image, the concluding illustration does incorporate purposeful details that tie back to previous, key moments in the novel; in this way, Anne's written clothing may be analyzed as well. Anne's dress has subtle puffed sleeves, recalling her previous obsession with the trend and her ability to now keep up with current styles as she sees fit. Anne's hat also has flowers in it, bringing her facilitation of adorned accessories full circle: from a simple straw hat, to wildflowers, to a single rose, to wearing artificial, fashionable flowers generously spread atop her hat, as her young peers once did, the image seems to suggest that Anne no longer makes any fashion missteps. In doing so, the illustrator disconnects Anne from her previous, free-spirited behavior, marking her as a conservative, even restrained, figure.  It is interesting to note that L.M. Montgomery, as the author of Anne of Green Gables, was not happy with the illustrations created to accompany her book, and in particular this final image; this is because the illustration presents "conclusive evidence for Gilbert's romance with Anne..." rather than leaving the ending up to the reader's own imagination, as Montgomery had

56 

desired (Gammel, Looking for Anne 233). It is therefore significant that despite the extremely stylized image Anne's clothing is not described in the novel. This reveals the tension already apparent between the image and the text. The illustration implies that Anne's ultimate success can be found in partnership with a husband, as stylishly attired as she in a suit, loafers, and sailor hat. At the turn of the century, the "marriage plot" within literature was extremely prevalent; the illustration seems to allude to Anne's compliance with this nineteenth-century value, though no final answer is given to the reader. On the other hand, the text, written by Montgomery, crafts Anne as a far more subversive and independent figure. Anne's story ends with her saving both Marilla and Green Gables much in the way a male hero might be expected to. Anne's recuing of her home demonstrates the autonomy and agency she has developed as she has matured. But Anne does not stop here; she determines to continue working as well as educating herself, with the aim of attending college in the future. Anne is satisfied not just with ensuring her family life is secured. She must also guarantee her own future success, through education and employment. Therefore, despite this final illustration, like Sara's, Anne's ultimate destiny is left undecided at the end of Anne of Green Gables, with the reader free to hope that she will achieve her dreams. As I have demonstrated, throughout Anne of Green Gables fashion serves as a marker of Anne's social growth: with Matthew and Marilla, within the community as a whole, with Diana, and, finally, with Gilbert, a potential future suitor. The novel demonstrates the tension between fashion as liberating across social norms and boundaries, and fashion's ability to subtly instill these norms. Fashion enables Anne to develop from an orphan with no support of her own, into a young woman with family, friends, and a bright future. Ultimately, skillful application of clothing and dress creates opportunities for Anne to transcend her previous class and social status, offering her agency and the independence to determine her future. Anne's story leaves

57 

room for potential further analysis of the ways that fashion may facilitate social success for adult female protagonists as they mature, both in continuing to cement these cultural mores, while also offering opportunities for support, relationships, and rebellion.

58 

Conclusion Because the turn-of-the-century girls' novels ... were the junk novels of popular culture, they presented an ideal venue for [politics]. They were born into the world in guises that kept them from being too closely scrutinized and to this day have spent most of their print lives well below the scholarly radar. ­ Joe Sutcliff Sanders (5) Fashion, particularly in works directed toward young, female readers, has often been overlooked within serious academic study of literature. My research joins the scholarly fields that challenge this devaluing of fashion, recognizing the significant role clothing and dress play in helping to shape a novel's characters, plot, and message. This research has illustrated the impact of fashion, dress, and style on the friendships and social identities of the young female heroines in A Little Princess and Anne of Green Gables. In revealing the key sartorial moments in both novels and their signification of class, social identity, and friendship, I have demonstrated fashion's ability to encourage relationships and drive the heroines' social developments. Fashion's facilitation of these close friendships and stable social identities can be considered subversive within the context of the late nineteenth century and early twentieth century, creating opportunities for the empowerment of these characters. Fashion is revealed as a central force within the girlhood texts under examination here, marking critical analysis of fashion as imperative to understanding these narratives. Notably, as we have seen, fashion carries ideological meaning, symbolizing and signifying cultural standards or their rejection. Within literature, fashion serves as more than just an avenue for aesthetic pleasure; rather, descriptions of dress embed subtle messages -- even sartorial or fashion subtext -- within a novel that can then be decoded by the reader.

59 

Engagement with this subtext creates opportunities for both author and reader to address social and political issues of their time period. Indeed, as I have documented, my two case studies reflect the interests of the late nineteenth century, as well as the early twentieth century, as modernism was ushered into culture and society. Fashion's influence during an era that saw these changes unfold is thus amplified. In A Little Princess, Sara's social status shifts in tandem with her access to fashionable dress. Though Sara's status is communicated through her clothing, resulting in a loss of privilege once her material items are lost, fashion also empowers her, creating opportunities for her to push back against dominant social norms and across class boundaries as she develops. By the end of the novel, Sara is able to reengage with fashion, symbolizing her return to her previous status. Sara's renewed agency offers her independence, as she pulls out of the Seminary and away from Miss Minchin and her father's influence on her education and upbringing. Altered and matured by her experiences, Sara is additionally motivated to empower the young women surrounding her and creates opportunities for their own independence, offering Becky employment and providing funds for young, impoverished girls like she herself had been. Similarly, in Anne of Green Gables, Anne's social identity is shaped by her engagement with fashion. When Anne is first introduced, she is powerless, signified through her lack of clothing and material possessions. Anne's errors in the realm of style cost her improvements in her social status and make it harder for her to integrate into her community. By the same token, however, as Anne's relationships develop she is granted access to fashionable dress, in turn stabilizing her social identity. At the novel's conclusion, Anne herself becomes an expert fashionista, seen both in her stylish clothing and characterization, embodying her status and success. This, in turn,

60 

empowers Anne and provides her with opportunities for upward social mobility and personal development. As is illustrated by these case studies, an engagement with fashion can offer support for harmful cultural ideals, limiting the agency of the wearer. However, fashion also has the ability to displace these expectations, seen throughout this analysis in clothing's ability to create connections across boundaries as well as through the transformative influence of dress. Previous literary scholars (DuPlessis; Macdonald; Rubio; Sanders) have demonstrated that devices that were considered "feminine" -- novels, fashion, and female friendship being examples of these -- were safe mediums for examining political and social debates specific to the modern era surrounding gender, class, and distribution of wealth. This research illustrates that fashion, as a typically feminine sphere, offers an important lens through which to examine these issues. Much like the young female protagonists they depicted, female authors from the early twentieth century explored fashion in their works as a means of connecting and communicating with readers. Both A Little Princess and Anne of Green Gables offer fashion as an avenue for connection, care, and empowerment within adolescent, feminine circles of support. With this in mind, an understanding of fashion's role in literature has wider significance outside of providing further insight into the characters and novels themselves. Though fashion may seem to be a calming force within both works, thanks to "the girlhood rituals, the wreaths of flowers, the shared moments of dressing..." (Matthews David and Wahl 47), these seemingly banal moments, orchestrated through clothing and dress, have profound impacts on the social identities of the protagonists in each novel. Fashion, within these works, creates a socially acceptable safe space for characters like Sara Crewe and Anne Shirley to build connections with those around them, prioritize female friendship, and be vulnerable, honest, and supportive in

61 

their interactions with one another. The subtext of these novels, which often registered with readers subconsciously, continues to influence twenty-first-century readers who are frequently directed towards classic literary texts like A Little Princess and Anne of Green Gables in their education and through popular media, allowing them to question their own culture's ideologies as they reinterpret the texts and their protagonists' actions within the context of their current environments. The semiotic analysis conducted throughout this essay has valuable implications for the study of the interdisciplinary nature of fashion and literature. My research suggests that fashion is an integral device within academic literary study, particularly within the genre of adolescent literature. Further exploration of fashion's influence will continue to uncover the subversive potential held by dress and aesthetics, and the role garments play as empowering social devices in these texts. This research also offers opportunity for continued research: in what genres does fashion wield the strongest impact? How does fashion's influence change in novels for young girls that are later serialized? Is fashion's influence on identity as impactful on mature female protagonists, or is its influence felt most when directed towards adolescent heroines like Sara and Anne? In the end, the study of the relationship between fashion, literature, and girl culture powerfully reveals the tension created by dress as well as its subversive potential, both to empower the characters these novels depict and the readers who engage with them.

62 

NOTES 1. Frances Hodgson Burnett's A Little Princess went through multiple stages of publishing that may not be well known to readers, prior to the American and British editions of the final novel, produced in 1905. The novel was preceded by the serialized work Sara Crewe: Or, What Happened at Miss Minchin's, published in three installations in the American children's publication St. Nicholas Magazine from 1887­1888 (Resler 1). This serialized version was followed by a short story by the same name in 1888, published by Charles Scribner's Sons (Resler 21). Sara Crewe was in turn was followed by the 1902 play entitled A Little Un-fairy Princess, shown in England, and by the 1903 play shown in the United States, entitled A Little Princess; Being the Whole Story of Sara Crewe, Now Told for the First Time, both of which are known by additional titles as well (Resler 1-2, 22). The success of the plays prompted Burnett to publish her final version of the story as a novel in 1905, bearing the same name as the American play but popularly known today simply as A Little Princess (Resler 2, 21). The American first edition, published by Charles Scribner's Sons and illustrated by Ethel Franklin Betts, and the British first edition, published by Frederick Warne and Co. and illustrated by Harold Piffard, were both released in 1905, though Scribner's remained Burnett's primary publisher (Resler 3942; Knoeplfmacher xxix). Each edition included the preface "The Whole of the Story," which outlined Burnett's decision to republish Sara's story as a novel and addressed new elements found in the text (Knoepflemacher vii). For more information on Burnett's adaptation of Sara's story, see "Three Versions of A Little Princess: How the Story Developed" (1988) by Marian E. Brown and "Frances Hodgson Burnett's Sara Crewe Through 110 Years" (1997) by Janice Kirkland. 2. As one example, both A Little Princess and Anne of Green Gables made the School

Library Journal's Top 100 Children's Novels in 2012, the last year the list was published. A Little Princess was listed as #56, Anne of Green Gables as #8. 3. Harold Piffard created the illustrations found in the 1905 British edition of A Little Princess published by Frederick Warne and Co. in London. Piffard was a British painter who lived during the late nineteenth century and passed away during the early twentieth century. M.A. and W.A.J. Claus were the illustrators for the 1908 edition of Anne of Green Gables. May Austin Claus was an American painter and William Anton Joseph Claus was a German artist and teacher. Both were born in the late nineteenth century and married at the turn of the century. They are listed as the co-creators of the images found in the original AGG; however, as Irene Gammel has revealed, it was likely May Austin Claus who was the primary illustrator. 4. Though this republication draws on the American first edition of A Little Princess and not the British first edition (whose illustrations are visually explored throughout this research) it is valuable as a source for textual citations because of its introduction and notes by professor of English and children's literature scholar U.C. Knoepflmacher. As well, it is the first republication to include Burnett's preface, "The Whole of the Story," which was originally included in both the American and British first editions (Knoepflmacher viii). Burnett scholar Johanna Elizabeth Resler writes that "[t]he editorial variants between the American and British publications of Sara Crewe and A Little Princess show that Warne was not interested in altering Burnett's text, only stylizing it to match British conventions. The Warne publication only changed the aesthetics of the text, not Burnett's story" (41-42). This clarification reveals that it is possible to visually examine illustrations from the British edition, with textual analysis drawn from the American edition. 5. These anthologies include Harvesting Thistles: The Textual Garden of L.M. Montgomery: 

64 

Essays on Her Novels and Journals (1994), Making Avonlea: L.M. Montgomery and Popular Culture (2002), Anne's World: A New Century of Anne of Green Gables (2010), and the threevolume set of The L.M. Montgomery Reader (2013, 2014, 2015). 6. In choosing to depict young female protagonists in their novels, Burnett and Montgomery undertook an act of rebellion that allowed girls to see themselves represented as active figures within contemporary media. As Clare Bradford and Mavis Reimer explain in Girls, Texts, Cultures, "the historical marginalization of girls relates to their lack of visibility and presence in Western societies until the late twentieth century..." (1). Burnett and Montgomery were innovators of their time in recognizing the importance of portraying female leads for their adolescent audiences. 7. Sara's age throughout A Little Princess is contested. In the chapter "Lottie," which appears prior to the current chapter being analyzed, entitled "Becky," a misprint in both the American and British first editions of Burnett's novel stated that ten years had passed since Sara had been left at the Seminary, making her seventeen years old. However, an edition owned by U.C. Knoepflmacher, inscribed by Frances Hodgson Burnett herself, corrected this to two years, making Sara nine years old at this stage (xxix). I have prescribed to this timing, given that the plot and illustrations both point to Sara being nine years of age, given her upcoming eleventh birthday in a later chapter. 8. Both A Little Princess by Frances Hodgson Burnett and Anne of Green Gables by L.M. Montgomery apply the term "queer" to their protagonist's appearance (see Burnett pp. 73 and 75 and Montgomery pp. 126). Prior to these novels' publications in the late nineteenth century, "queer" was synonymous with "strange," a negative reference to difference ("Queer"); in this case, illustrated through the characters' clothing. However, at the turn of the century (when both

65 

novels were first published) the term had begun to be applied as a derogatory term for individuals who did not align themselves with heterosexual norms ("Queer"). In response, the later twentieth century saw "queer" deliberately utilized by LGBTQ communities in order to deprive the term of its negative connotation ("Queer"). Because of these efforts, today queer is an empowering phrase and applies to sexual identities existing outside the constraints of these heterosexual norms. 9. In contrast to this collaboration, the written description of Emily's clothing does not match her appearance in the illustration. While our narrator states that Emily is "swathed in a piece of black material," the image shows Emily in the same dress she was wearing when Sara and her father first purchased her: white, with a blue sash. That Emily would be wearing the same clothing as the day she was purchased seems extremely unlikely, given the lengths that Sara and her father went to in creating a custom wardrobe for her. This is an example of the tension between textual and visual, when the two contradict one another. 10. The term invalid is employed by Burnett in A Little Princess to describe Mr. Carrisford (see pp. 171). The term "invalid" originated in the mid-seventeenth century to signify a person with a disability ("Invalid"); this term is offensive within modern culture. Today, the individual should be prioritized and mentioned before disability; i.e. "people with disabilities." 

66 

WORKS CITED Barthes, Roland. "Written Clothing." The Fashion System. 1967. Translated by Matthew Ward and Richard Howard, University of California Press, 1990, pp. 3-18. Berg, Temma F. "Sisterhood is Fearful: Female Friendship in L.M. Montgomery." Harvesting Thistles: The Textual Garden of L.M. Montgomery: Essays on Her Novels and Journals, edited by Mary Henley Rubio, Canadian Children's Press, 1994, pp. 36-49. Bradford, Clare, and Mavis Reimer. Girls, Texts, Cultures. Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 2015. Brown, Marian E. "Three Versions of A Little Princess: How the Story Developed." Children's Literature in Education, vol. 19, no. 4, 1988, pp. 199-210. Burnett, Frances Hodgson. A Little Princess: Being the Whole Story of Sara Crewe Now Told for the First Time. Illustrated by Harold Piffard. F. Warne, 1905. ---. A Little Princess. 1905. Edited by U.C. Knoepflmacher, Penguin Classics, 2002. Churcher, Kassandra. "Hair, Stereotypes of." Girl Culture: An Encyclopedia, Volume 2, edited by Claudia A. Mitchell and Jacqueline Reid-Walsh, Greenwood Press, 2008, pp. 339-41. Dennis, Jones. A Key to the Regalia, or, the Emblematic Design of the Various Forms Observed in the Ceremonial of a Coronation, Interspersed with Unpublished Anecdotes of the Late King. J. Bretell, 1820. Driscoll, Catherine. "Girls Today: Girls, Girl Culture, and Girl Studies." Girlhood Studies, vol. 1, no. 1, 2008, pp. 13-32. Academia.edu, doi: 10.3167/ghs.2008.010103. DuPlessis, Rachel Blau. "Endings and Contradictions." Writing Beyond the Ending: Narrative Strategies of Twentieth-Century Women Writers, Indiana University Press, 1985, pp.1-19. Entwistle, Joanne. The Fashioned Body. I.B. Tauris, 2000.

67 

Forman-Brunell, Miriam. "Princess Play." Girl Culture: An Encyclopedia, Volume 2, edited by Claudia A. Mitchell and Jacqueline Reid-Walsh, Greenwood Press, 2008, pp. 483-86. Gammel, Irene. "Anne of Green Gables." Girl Culture: An Encyclopedia, Volume 1, edited by Claudia A. Mitchell and Jacqueline Reid-Walsh, Greenwood Press, 2008, pp. 145-8. ---. Looking for Anne of Green Gables: The Story of L.M. Montgomery and her Literary Classic. St. Martin's Press, 2008. ---. "`My Secret Garden': Dis/Pleasure in L.M. Montgomery and F.P. Grove." 1999. The L.M. Montgomery Reader: Volume Two: A Critical Heritage, edited by Benjamin Lefebvre, University of Toronto Press, 2014, pp. 236-58. Gammel, Irene, editor. Making Avonlea: L.M. Montgomery and Popular Culture. University of Toronto Press, 2002. Gammel, Irene, and Benjamin Lefebvre, editors. Anne's World: A New Century of Anne of Green Gables. University of Toronto Press, 2010. Gammel, Irene, and Karen Mulhallen. "Dressing the Twentieth Century in Literature." A Cultural History of Fashion in the Modern Age, edited by Alexandra Palmer, Bloomsbury, 2017, pp. 191-210. Genette, Gérard, and Marie Maclean. "Introduction to the Paratext." New Literary History, vol. 22, no. 2, 1991, pp. 261-72. The John Hopkins University Press, www.jstor.org/stable/469037. Gerson, Carole. "Anne of Green Gables Goes to University: L.M. Montgomery and Academic Culture." Making Avonlea: L.M. Montgomery and Popular Culture, edited by Irene Gammel, University of Toronto Press, 2002, pp. 17-42. "Invalid." English Oxford Living Dictionaries, en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/invalid.

68 

Jobling, Paul. "Roland Barthes: Semiology and the Rhetorical Codes of Fashion." Thinking Through Fashion, edited by Agnès Rocamora and Anneke Smelik, I.B. Taurus and Co. Ltd, 2016, pp. 132-48. Kirkland, Janice. "Frances Hodgson Burnett's Sara Crewe Through 110 Years." Children's Literature in Education, vol. 28, no. 4, 1997, pp. 191-203. Knoepflmacher, U.C. Introduction. A Little Princess, by Frances Hodgson Burnett, 1905, Penguin Classics, 2002, pp. vii-xxiii. Koppes, Phyllis Bixler. "Tradition and the Individual Talent of Frances Hodgson Burnett: A Generic Analysis of Little Lord Fauntleroy, A Little Princess, and The Secret Garden." Children's Literature, vol. 7, 1978, pp. 191-207. Project Muse, DOI: 10.1353/chl.0.0131. Kress, Gunther, and Theo van Leeuwen. "The Semiotic Landscape: Language and Visual Communication." Reading Images: The Grammar of Visual Design. 1996. 2nd ed., Routledge, 2006, pp. 16-44. Kristeva, Julia. "The Adolescent Novel." Abjection, Melancholia and Love: The Work of Julia Kristeva, edited by John Fletcher and Andrew Benjamin, Routledge, 2012, pp. 135-53. Kuhn, Cynthia, and Cindy Carlson. Introduction. Styling Texts: Dress and Fashion in Literature, edited by Kuhn and Carlson, Cambria Press, 2007, pp. 1-11. Lefebvre, Benjamin, editor. The L.M. Montgomery Reader: Volume One: A Life in Print. University of Toronto Press, 2013. ---. The L.M. Montgomery Reader: Volume Three: A Legacy in Review. University of Toronto Press, 2015. ---. The L.M. Montgomery Reader: Volume Two: A Critical Heritage. University of Toronto Press, 2014.

69 

Macdonald, Jennie. "I just love pretty clothes": Considering the Sartorial in Anne of Green Gables." Anne Around the World: L.M. Montgomery and Her Classic, edited by Jane Ledwell and Jean Mitchell, MQUP, 2013, pp. 245-61. ProQuest eBook Central, ebookcentral-proquestcom.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/lib/ryerson/detail.action?docID=3332594. Matthews David, Alison, and Kimberley Wahl. "`Matthew Insists on Puffed Sleeves': Ambivalence Towards Fashion in Anne of Green Gables." Anne's World: A New Century of Anne of Green Gables, edited by Irene Gammel and Benjamin Lefebvre. University of Toronto Press, 2010, pp. 35-49. McMaster, Juliet. "Taking Control: Hair Red, Black, Gold, and Nut-Brown." Making Avonlea: L.M. Montgomery and Popular Culture, edited by Irene Gammel, University of Toronto Press, 2002, pp. 58-71. McNeil, Peter, Vicki Karaminas, and Catherine Cole, editors. Fashion in Fiction: Text and Clothing in Literature, Film and Television. Berg, 2009. Mellor, David James. "Girls' Friendships." Girl Culture: An Encyclopedia, Volume 1, edited by Claudia A. Mitchell and Jacqueline Reid-Walsh, Greenwood Press, 2008, pp. 324-27. Mitchell, Claudia A., and Jacqueline Reid-Walsh, editors. Girl Culture: An Encyclopedia, Volume 1. Greenwood Press, 2008. ---. Girl Culture: An Encyclopedia, Volume 2. Greenwood Press, 2008. Montgomery, L.M. Anne of Green Gables. 1908. Edited by Cecily Devereux, scholarly ed., Broadview Press, 2004. ---. Anne of Green Gables. Illustrated by M.A. and W.A.J. Claus. L.C. Page & Company, 1908. Otero, Iris. An Analysis of Gender Representations in Children's Novels by Frances Hodgson

70 

Burnett. Thesis, University of Puerto Rico, 2007. UMI, 1446801. ProQuest Dissertations & Theses A&I; ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global, ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/login?url=http://search.proquest.com/docview/304765383?account id=13631. Peers, Juliette. "Doll Culture." Girl Culture: An Encyclopedia, Volume 1, edited by Claudia A. Mitchell and Jacqueline Reid-Walsh, Greenwood Press, 2008, pp. 25-38. Pomerantz, Shauna. "Style and Girl Culture." Girl Culture: An Encyclopedia, Volume 1, edited by Claudia A. Mitchell and Jacqueline Reid-Walsh, Greenwood Press, 2008, pp. 64-72. "Queer." English Oxford Living Dictionaries, en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/queer. Resler, Johanna Elizabeth. "Sara's Transformation: A Textual Analysis of Frances Hodgson Burnett's Sara Crewe and A Little Princess." Master's Thesis, Indiana University, 2007. Robinson, Laura. "Bosom Friends: Lesbian Desire in L.M. Montgomery's Anne Books." Canadian Literature, no. 180, 2004, pp. 12-28. ProQuest, search-proquestcom.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/docview/218776805?pq-origsite=summon. Rubio, Henley Mary, editor. Harvesting Thistles: The Textual Garden of L.M. Montgomery: Essays on Her Novels and Journals. Canadian Children's Press, 1994. Rubio, Henley Mary. "Subverting the Trite: L.M. Montgomery's `Room of Her Own.'" Canadian Children's Literature/Littérature canadienne pour la jeunesse, no. 65, 1992, pp. 6-39. Sanders, Joe Sutcliff. Disciplining Girls: Understanding the Origins of the Classic Orphan Girl Story. John Hopkins University Press, 2011. Santelmann, Patricia Kelly. "Writing as Women Write: Anne of Green Gables within the Female

71 

Literary Tradition." Harvesting Thistles: The Textual Garden of L.M. Montgomery: Essays on Her Novels and Journals, edited by Mary Henley Rubio, Canadian Children's Press, 1994, pp. 64-73. Simmel, Georg. "Fashion." 1904. The American Journal of Sociology, vol. 62, no. 6, 1957, pp. 541-58. Veblen, Thorstein. "Chapter Four: Conspicuous Consumption." The Theory of the Leisure Class, 1899, pp. 23-33. Project Gutenberg, 2008. Wilson, Elizabeth. Adorned in Dreams: Fashion and Modernity. 1985. I.B. Tauris, 2014.

72 


