To Archive Ephemera: The Importance of Atom Egoyan's Collection at the TIFF Archives

BY Andreas Babiolakis B.A. Cinema Studies, York University, 2013

THESIS A thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in Film and Photography Preservation and Collections Management, 2018

© Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2018

© Andreas Babiolakis, 2018

Declaration

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. This is a true copy of the thesis, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my thesis may be made electronically available to the public.

ii

Abstract To Archive Ephemera: The Importance of Atom Egoyan's Collection at the Tiff Archives Andreas Babiolakis, M.A., Film and Photography Preservation and Collections Management, Ryerson University, 2018.

The advantage of a multi-faceted institution like the Toronto International Film Festival (TIFF) is its capacity for connecting different aspects of the film industry to one another. For example, TIFF's archive houses a large quantity of ephemeral material that correlates to its databases; this binds collections together through metadata. The Atom Egoyan collection is particularly robust; all that stems from the wealth of information can be extracted from the paper ephemera that were donated in 1999. I use this opportunity to detail the general indispensability of ephemera when it comes to treating films as legacy objects and not just forms of entertainment, and by carefully examining and cataloguing the Egoyan collection, in particular. I created a digital catalogue that ties together item level titles, descriptions, dates, physical locations, and other forms of identification; this in turn builds upon the previous finding aid by strengthening the information taken from it.

iii

Acknowledgements

I am deeply grateful to both Ryerson University and the Toronto International Film Festival for this opportunity. I thank Thierry Gervais for his valuable teachings. I thank Kate Watson and Jason Cheung for their patience and grace while I worked and studied at TIFF; I also thank the rest of the Film Reference Library crew for stepping in to help whenever I needed it. I thank my supervisor Jean Bruce for advice and guidance, as well as for helping me wring out as much substance from my sources as possible. I knew I had valuable sources to work with, but you let me know how valuable they were! I also thank my second reader Alexandra Anderson for being the extra precaution my work usually needs. I finally thank my family, friends, partner, and any others who have encouraged me to flourish; you all nurtured me, and I am now a plant that refuses to stop growing.

iv

Table of Contents Abstract........................................................................................................iii Introduction...................................................................................................1 Literature Survey............................................................................................7 Chapter 1: History of TIFF...............................................................................12 1.1: As a Festival and an Institution..........................................................12 1.2: The History of the Atom Egoyan Donation that Serves this Thesis............14 Chapter 2: Methodology.................................................................................18 2.1: Practices......................................................................................18 2.2: Cataloguing Regulations..................................................................19 Chapter 3: Theoretical Analyses: The Function of Ephemera..................................2 5 3.1: Linking Pieces Together, and Separating Their Purposes........................2 5 3.2: Detailing the Importance of Objects and Contexts..................................30 Chapter 4: Theoretical Analyses: Atom Egoyan's Function..................................... 40 4.1: Understanding Egoyan as a Businessman and a Filmmaker.................... 40 4.2: Functioning as a Piece within an Interconnecting Archive........................ 45 Chapter 5: Issues and Complications I Encountered.............................................49 Conclusion...................................................................................................55 Appendices..................................................................................................58 Work Cited.................................................................................................116

v

Ephemera, n. 1. An insect (ephemeron) that (in its imago or winged form) lives only for a day. In modern entomology, the name of a genus of pseudo-neuropterous insects belonging to the group Ephemeridae (Day-flies, May-flies). 2. transf. and fig. One who or something which has a transitory existence.1

Archive, v. 1. To store historical records or documents in an archive. 2. In computer technology, to store electronic information that you no longer need to use regularly.2

1

Paul Grainge, Ephemeral Media: Transitory Screen Culture from Television to YouTube (London: Palgrave MacMillan, 2011), 24. 2 "Archive," Cambridge Dictionary, accessed March 14th, 2018, https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/archive.

vi

Introduction A Brief History of Cinema as a Culture, and the Ephemera that Comes with it As a reminder of films I enjoy, I purchase a poster -- or some sort of merchandise -- to emphasize my appreciation for the experience. My walls (and even my ceiling when I was an undergraduate student) were once covered in film images and posters; my shelves were overflowing with disc cases. I always knew I was a cinephile; I never knew I was destined to be a film archivist until I began working on my thesis. My primary focus with this thesis is not on cinema as a story telling device, or even as a source of entertainment -- at least not in the conventional sense. Films have other stories to tell, and the ephemera attached to them can help us tell those stories. Despite the collectible nature of cinematic artifacts now, film was not originally made to be permanent. In fact, no thought was given to its preservation whatsoever; it was once as transitory as all of the steps taken to make a film, such as the "objects" attached to them.3 These include the pre-production screenplays and budget reports, to flyers and promotional images, and reviews and articles that now enhance cinema's cultural legacy. At the dawn of cinema as a resonating form of entertainment (from the 1880s to the 1910s), films were short and digestible. They were on average about one reel in length, until D.W. Griffith's multiple reeled works were created.4 Films were also shot at a much quicker pace, as each subsequent film would replace last week's feature

3

Leo Enticknap, Film Restoration: The Culture and Science of Audiovisual Heritage (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013), 25. 4 Anthony Slide, Nitrate Won't Wait: A History of Film Preservation in the United States (Jefferson: McFarland & Company, Inc., 1992), 18.

1

in this highly disposable medium.5 Once cinema was being treated as a more serious art form with longevity (both in terms of length and cultural value) feature length films, like The Story of the Kelly Gang (1906) and Birth of a Nation (1915) were gaining popularity and, the idea that cinema should be treated as a lasting art form started to take hold. Early evidence of the importance of cinema as an artistic medium is conveyed by a lecture delivered at Columbia University in 1914 in response to the rise of feature length productions.6 The majority of films released prior to this time are now lost. Those will never be witnessed again, but some others are available as fragments. With the growing sense of the cultural value of cinema, the urgency to archive films for the future came into prominence. Nitrate film stock was dangerous, and its highly flammable nature resulted in fires that destroyed many films and film theatres in the process. Safety stock was introduced in 1909 by the Eastman Kodak Company as a direct outcome of the volatility of nitrate.7 Film stock changed again when colour film began and has evolved over time. For example, Kodak's affordable answer to Technicolor was Eastmancolor stock, but it turned magenta over time, even in as little as five years.8 As a result, there have been numerous alterations in the film industry that have had an impact on preservation: firstly, how film is made, and, secondly, how it is archived. Adjustments were eventually aimed at preserving the longevity of the film medium itself.

5

Paul Grainge, Ephemeral Media: Transitory Screen Culture from Television to YouTube (London: Palgrave MacMillan, 2011), 5. 6 Anthony Slide, Nitrate Won't Wait: A History of Film Preservation in the United States (Jefferson: McFarland & Company, Inc., 1992), 17. 7 Anthony Slide, Nitrate Won't Wait: A History of Film Preservation in the United States (Jefferson: McFarland & Company, Inc., 1992), 3. 8 Anthony Slide, Nitrate Won't Wait: A History of Film Preservation in the United States (Jefferson: McFarland & Company, Inc., 1992), 106.

2

However, the non-filmic processes to make and promote the cinematic experience are still designed to be temporary, just as the desire to preserve film initially neglected the protection of the production materials used. Early film preservation was instated to not only protect films from degrading, but to share prints of films between archives, essentially viewing these films while preserving them.9 Throughout history, much of the conservation of film was a novelty connected to the nostalgia that production objects contain. Film artifacts, particularly costumes, props and screenplays, get treated as novelty items for brief enjoyment at film exhibitions, institutions, and even restaurant franchises.10 At the end of the century and the start of the new millennium, the dawning of more advanced home releases (including DVD and BluRay) utilized part of their recording space to feature behind-the-scenes looks at how films were being made. Writer Caroline Frick ponders if home releases can even replace film archives in this way.11 The perpetuation of film production artifacts and events is frivolous and not academic. Aside from these cases, the actual process of making a film gets lost when it comes to many filmmakers, studios, and production companies. At this point, it might be useful to refer back to the Columbia University lecture that dictated the necessity of film as a creative medium back in 1914. Of particular interest here, this lecture also claimed that paper ephemera was a requirement for establishing cinema as more than brief entertainment in stark contrast to the prevailing attitude that otherwise limited its significance.12 My focus is on actual film preservation; to expand the archive through

9

Caroline Frick, Saving Cinema: The Politics of Preservation (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011), 36. Scott Mackenzie, Film Manifestos and Global Cinema Cultures: A Critical Anthology (Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2014), 529-530. 11 Caroline Frick, Saving Cinema: The Politics of Preservation (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011), 12. 12 Anthony Slide, Nitrate Won't Wait: A History of Film Preservation in the United States (Jefferson: McFarland & Company, Inc., 1992), 17.
10

3

paper ephemera and not necessarily to contribute to these pieces as nostalgic trivia, though they certainly serve that purpose. Atom Egoyan's Collection I am not only making a case for the necessity of preserving the paper ephemera that comes from the creation and promotion of films, generally, I am also promoting the specific example of Canadian filmmaker Atom Egoyan, whose recordkeeping allows me to examine the multiple functions paper ephemera can serve. Egoyan's donation of his own works to the Toronto International Film Festival (TIFF) is outstanding because of the vast quantity of items he gave. He included not only physical copies of his films, but many different types of paper ephemera as well. This catalogue has been worked on by one primary archivist at TIFF since the collection's inception in 1999. A finding aid was created by "T. Rowat" (representing former archivist Theresa Rowat) in August 1999.13 Alicia Fletcher, a former archivist at TIFF, provided additional information when I contacted her. The finding aid was based on a general listing created by former archivists Tania Riley and Tanya Fleet, with the information of the collection provided by Egoyan's assistant at the time. The listing was called a "finding aid" despite the work that still needed to take place; the film reference library staff was short at the time, and sufficient work on such a large collection was not possible.14 As a result, the finding aid and catalogue had separate information that was not contained in the other file: the physical files had accession numbers not found in the finding aid, for instance. Another problem is that the entire collection was not catalogued

13 14

See image 5 in image bank, page 66. Alicia Fletcher, email correspondence, April 23rd, 2018.

4

digitally. I created a digital catalogue that marries all of the loose pieces of information provided from my various sources (physical files and finding aid), and have provided additional information that was missing (such as adding more details to descriptions that were short and non-specific). I successfully put together the digital catalogue that stores all of the information attached to the textual records series in the Atom Egoyan collection, thus improving the original state of both the finding aid and the collection. I will be using this opportunity as a student intern from Ryerson University to peruse the TIFF archives. There are many ways Egoyan's textual records are beneficial to his film collection and for TIFF. I can confirm that Egoyan knew the relevance his work would have one day, hence his thorough and precise maintaining of documents. I had the opportunity to visit Egoyan at his Toronto office to confirm many of the points my thesis will propose. The office walls were completely covered in posters (either of Egoyan's own works, or of films he admires), similarly to how I decorate my own living space; this was a match that was meant to be. Furthermore, Egoyan himself has concluded that his donation was to serve a specific purpose, as he told me "I felt [the documents] would be important to somebody someday."15 How can paper ephemera and the database that is created from the results of my work best strengthen an archive? What kinds of metadata can be obtained from textual records that cannot be found within other media attached to cinema? These are the questions I hope my thesis can begin to answer. By using paper documents donated by filmmakers (in this case, Atom Egoyan) as metadata in a film archive, we can arrive at a

15

Atom Egoyan, in discussion with the author, May 4th, 2018.

5

greater understanding of the many different sides of the film industry. This helps us by providing insight into how a film gets made, as well as the historical context into which it fits. Both of these approaches can provide more precise details about a specific film while also addressing larger cultural and economic questions. This expands our overall understanding of the place of film in our society and adds to our appreciation of Atom Egoyan's films within the Canadian cultural landscape.

6

Literature survey My thesis is based on primary sources, which are the paper ephemera within the Atom Egoyan collection. I am not only finding ways to connect every file present, I am also learning more about the collection and all its facets. To understand the Atom Egoyan collection and the relevancy of the paper ephemera within it, I had to research a few fields with secondary sources. I had to become more acquainted with Egoyan and his work than I had previously been; that is, more knowledgeable of his most famous films, which I had seen. I needed to discover his influences on Canadian and international cinema from the start of his filmmaking career until the release of The Sweet Hereafter (1997), which is the final film attached to the collection I am working on. Secondly, it was essential that I reconnected with the history of the Canadian film industry to familiarize myself with the different events within it that affected any aspiring-- or established-- filmmakers. I then found it imperative to research the role that paper ephemera has had in archival institutions of varying kinds, including film archives, especially as this context strengthens the connection between Egoyan's documents and his influence on the Canadian film industry. TIFF's reference library houses not only film-related materials; it contains books as well. Fortunately, I have been able to take advantage of my opportunity as an intern by having physical books about my desired topics at my disposal. My sources for initially finding these books were through TIFF's collections online database, Google Books and Google Scholar. Atom Egoyan The primary problem with writing a thesis on a filmmaker like Atom Egoyan, who
7

is considered an auteur of some stature, is that many sources fixate on his creative decisions more than his actual filmmaking practices. With a thesis that is concerned with the documents that come from the actual filmmaking portions of a production more than aesthetic decisions, this presents a problem. While sources that were based on Egoyan's business customs were difficult to find, I did manage to locate texts that benefitted my research. Some of these sources crossed over into theoretical territories, since some critical analysts have deduced that Egoyan's working habits get reflected in his work. This includes the thematic consideration that Egoyan's works concern the issue of personal loss, including characters that cling to belongings, but also Egoyan's own preference of celluloid as a static object over digital filmmaking as digital is inherently virtual.16 In other words, Egoyan himself is a collector of (film) objects and the theme of collecting things and clinging to the past is one that he explores in many of his films. Other sources are more upfront about Egoyan's actual practices within the industry, including a proclamation that Egoyan's successes are due to his control of every aspect of his cinema in a variety of different ways and at all stages.17 Despite venturing into new territory with my thesis, which is an observation of Egoyan practically and not critically, I managed to find critical writings on the director that were relevant to my research.

Canadian Film Industry Egoyan's habits are a part of his process as a filmmaker, which is a way of dealing with the vagaries of the Canadian Film Industry. In order to understand his
16

Jennifer Burwell and Monique Tschofen, Image and Territory: Essays on Atom Egoyan (Waterloo: Wilfred Laurier Press, 2007), 25. 17 Gerald Duchovny, Film Voices: interviews from Post Script (Albany: State of New York Press, 2004), 224.

8

documents, I studied the evolution of the Canadian film industry. Through my research, I have learned about shifts in the Canada's filmmaking scene, including the origins of the Canadian Film Development Corporation and the National Film Board. Paper ephemera, in any Canadian film archive or institution, offers both a present-day perspective on what Canada's film industry was once like, and can offer a prediction of where the industry will go in the future while renewing interest in the study of Canadian cinema.18 While these sources can be used to reinvigorate interest in Canadian filmmaking and its past, the problems within the industry's history are large enough to warrant an examination, as these issues had a huge impact on its growth (or lack thereof). This includes the development of Canada as a tax shelter for private investors through the Capital Cost Allowance program, which granted "one hundred percent tax deductions".19 These deductions allowed companies and filmmakers from the United States to film in Canada, and resulted in the removal of any Canadian identity from these films; only two thirds of the cast and crew had to be Canadian for the deduction to take place, and the other third usually featured big names to attract attention. For example, American stars are featured, and any signature trait of Canada had to be removed, including street names, recognizable Canadian locations and objects (like currency).20 To understand ephemera that stemmed from Canada's film industry means it is imperative to understand why the industry operates the way it does, and what precipitates change, especially as these may influence our understanding of Egoyan's work from a practical point of view.
18

Zoë Druick and Gerda Cammaer, Cinephemera: Archives, Ephemeral Cinema, and New Screen Histories in Canada (Kingston: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2014), 10. 19 Donato Totaro, "A `Taxing' Incentive: The Capital Cost Allowance Films," Offscreen, accessed June 13th, 2018, http://offscreen.com/view/a_taxing_incentive. 20 Tom McSorley, Atom Egoyan's `The Adjuster' (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2009), 2.

9

Ephemera in Archives While I believe ephemera are beneficial to any institution, it is paramount to become aware of what professionals within the field have deduced about the significance of these objects. In the digital age, the obsession with ephemeral objects in an archive has increased, in particular due to a paradox: the tangible link to history that they create, which is now more accessible than ever is also less tangible than ever. This also plays into the notion that ephemera creates an aura of what culture and practice were once like in a specific time frame, which strengthens any art-based archive.21 This is an idealized notion that circulates about an object and its relative value at any given moment, thus not being static. The collectable items within culture or art movements-- whether they were parts of a celebrated medium, such as screenplays and notes attached to a popular film, or those items that were manufactured for the masses as promotion, such as magazine articles, and advertising flyers--serve many purposes in the internet age. For one, they become one of many contextual elements to help us understand the films.22 Of course, this begs the question of the increased sense of ephemerality within the experience of the cinema: the fleeting images on the screen to the collectibles, to digitalized images. Ephemera may remind us of our distance from an already elusive medium. In many ways, the tangible bits of paper or other ephemera become even more "precious" as a result of the increased sense of "invisibility" about how films are produced in an increasingly digitized world. Yet, that world is also where the ephemera are stored.
21

Kristy Davis, Slipping thru the Cracks: Issues with Performance Arts Ephemera (Oslo: International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions, 2005), PDF, 5. 22 Paul Grainge, Ephemeral Media: Transitory Screen Culture from Television to YouTube (London: Palgrave MacMillan, 2011), 2.

10

With all of these resources (of which a list can be seen in full in my Works Cited), I can begin to place where Atom Egoyan fits within an ever-changing film industry in Canada. I can observe why Egoyan operated within the industry in the ways that he did, and why he donated all of these textual records, which he saw as significant, to the TIFF archives. With my primary sources of over one thousand files in the Atom Egoyan textual records series, I can pair my findings with academic sources to make sense of the many purposes paper ephemera can serve in a Canadian film archive. A key example is comparing what Egoyan has stated in interviews to his business practices. For example, the inspiration for the film The Adjuster (1991) came from a house fire Egoyan experienced. An insurance adjuster came to put value on the remaining belongings "that didn't exist anymore"; Egoyan likened the experience to watching an "angel of reconstruction" find purpose in ruined and separated objects.23 The amount of invoices, correspondence, schedules and other forms of ephemera attached to The Adjuster is much larger than the documents of the previous film (Speaking Parts [1989]). Egoyan's fascination with and value for the new life of old objects brought about a new perspective based on his experience may have encouraged him to keep more documents as reference.

23

Tom McSorley, Atom Egoyan's `The Adjuster' (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2009), 1.

11

Chapter 1: History of TIFF 1.1: As a festival and an institution The Toronto International Film Festival was not always an institution; its name, of course, indicates that it was once primarily a film festival. It debuted under its original moniker, The Festival of Festivals, at the Windsor Arms Hotel in 1976, as a means of recruiting film fanatics from all over the world to Toronto.24 The creation of the festival correlates to other large events that changed Toronto within the 1970s: this includes the construction and official opening of the CN Tower to the public, and the inauguration of the Toronto Blue Jays as an official team in Major League Baseball.25 The Festival of Festivals, founded by Dusty Cohl, Bill Marshall and Henk Van der Kolk, contributed to Toronto's makeover by contrasting these other events: it was not a year -round affair, but instead ephemeral: an occasion for film viewing that existed for only a few days. This would attract people to Toronto for a "special moment" that they would miss out on otherwise. This also creates a goal for production companies to meet, since the missing of deadlines would cause submissions to be ineligible and not featured in the festival.26 To compete with similar festivals that already had audiences,27 the Festival of Festivals had to operate differently. Its initial year was considered lackluster compared to both other film festivals and represents a major contrast as to what TIFF would eventually become. The first major drawback was how the festival could not attract the
24

Alix Hall, "A Brief History of the Toronto International Film Festival," The Culture Trip, accessed March 28, 2018, https://theculturetrip.com/north-america/canada/articles/a-brief-history-of-the-toronto-international-filmfestival/. 25 Liam Lacey, TIFF: A Reel History 1976-2012 (Toronto: The Globe and Mail, 2012), 2, https://beta.images.theglobeandmail.com/static/ebooks/Tiff_A_Reel_History_-_The_Globe.pdf. 26 Brendan Kredell, Skadi Loist and Marjike de Valck, Film Festivals: History, Theory, Method, Practice (New York: Routledge, 2016), 201. 27 For an overview of the history of film festivals, see appendix "B) Rise of Festival Circuits", page 59.

12

consideration of major American production companies, since Canada was considered "too domestic" for their films; this issue could be measured by the lack of celebrity sightings outside of Canadian athletes, news anchors, and politicians, which also did not resonate well.28 By concentrating on promotions and the gradual gravitation of celebrity figures towards the festival (the first American performer to make a public appearance at the festival was Henry Winkler), American studios finally began to trust Canadian audiences to not be "parochial", and to attend their films.29 It is evidently difficult to disengage from the perception of American producers and exhibitors that Canada is part of `one's own domestic market;' it took a stern effort from the Festival of Festivals to break that imposed mold. This drive to accommodate all types of film spectators continued throughout the transition from The Festival of Festivals into the Toronto International Film Festival. Once Piers Handling became the executive director in 1994, TIFF was well-established as a competitive festival; its rebranding was seen as a strategic push to set TIFF ahead of its opposition.30 Under Handling's vision, TIFF began to ascend in the film industry by developing different functions. TIFF also became a physical location that could be visited year round for screenings, which developed into the creation of the TIFF Bell Lightbox in 2007, and further transformed the festival into a library, charity, and an archive.31 TIFF has grown into a universal attraction for film audiences and
28

Bryan Johnson, TIFF: A Reel History 1976-2012 (Toronto: The Globe and Mail, 2012), 5, https://beta.images.theglobeandmail.com/static/ebooks/Tiff_A_Reel_History_-_The_Globe.pdf. 29 Alix Hall, "A Brief History of the Toronto International Film Festival," The Culture Trip, accessed March 28, 2018, https://theculturetrip.com/north-america/canada/articles/a-brief-history-of-the-toronto-international-filmfestival/. 30 Geoff Pevere, TIFF: A Reel History 1976-2012 (Toronto: The Globe and Mail, 2012), 22, https://beta.images.theglobeandmail.com/static/ebooks/Tiff_A_Reel_History_-_The_Globe.pdf. 31 Guy Dixon, TIFF: A Reel History 1976-2012 (Toronto: The Globe and Mail, 2012), 36-37, https://beta.images.theglobeandmail.com/static/ebooks/Tiff_A_Reel_History_-_The_Globe.pdf.

13

organizations,32 and, combined with the potential of its archive, creates a strong grounding for this thesis. 1.2: The History of the Atom Egoyan Donation that Serves This Thesis While subsequent accruals have been made under the Atom Egoyan title (including the 2003 and 2010 accruals), this thesis only examines the original accrual, since it is comprised of a significant number of textual records. Atom Egoyan personally gave the items found in this donation in 1998 to the Film Reference Library at TIFF (the earliest possible opportunity for this donation to take place, as TIFF did not have an archival space previously), and the collection was created in 1999. The majority of the paper ephemera found in the collection came from the offices of Ego Films Arts (Egoyan's production company), while the earliest documents came from Egoyan' s family's home in Victoria, British Columbia. The legal status of this fonds is that it belongs to the permanent collection at TIFF. A digital record for the collection was created on January 16th, 2015 by Alicia Fletcher. This entry was an overview of the collection and not at item level record. Jason Cheung--a manager of the special collections department and a supervisor of mine--edited the entry in October of that same year. 33 Aside from this one overarching entry that covered the entire fonds in a general sense, there was not a digital catalogue of any sort. Twenty years later, the staff at TIFF has gone through many changes, and the original archivists that worked on the donation are no longer present. According to the Mimsy XG description of the initial accrual in the Atom Egoyan collection (which
32

Brendan Kredell, Skadi Loist and Marjike de Valck, Film Festivals: History, Theory, Method, Practice (New York: Routledge, 2016), 173 33 Mimsy XG, 2003.

14

contains this fonds), work was done "by Theresa Rowat"; this was the original archivist who worked on the collection, but she is no longer in the TIFF employee directory. The only possible resource within TIFF that could give some sort of explicit insight as to why the donation was made are the legal documents attached to the deal made in 1999, of which I have been informed are confidential. Luckily, Egoyan himself was able to recollect the entire process in explicit detail when I visited him. He confirmed that Rowat was the main archivist that worked on his donation. She actually visited his office and spent months going through his personal belongings with him while compiling a list of these objects with his help; this process is relatively unusual for any archivist and donor to partake in. Egoyan had just been nominated for Academy Awards (for Best Director and Best Adapted Screenplay for The Sweet Hereafter in 1998), and he "saw an opportunity" for his works to be archived.34 The collection is comprised of roughly 22.5 linear metres of textual records and around 1107 files. A number of these files fall under the same catalogue number, including nearly three hundred screenplays; under the accession number 1999-001-05.0142.35 A textual records donation was given to the University of Toronto Commons on April 16th, 2014. Egoyan met the head archivist Brock Silversides through Marc Glassman (of Ryerson University) in February of 2014, and the accrual was made around six weeks later. Silversides has said that this is a unique event, because a donor usually sticks to one institution once they have given materials to be accessioned at any time.36 The collection is much smaller than the TIFF series, and contains projection prints of his films, as well as reviews by Egoyan for the U of T school paper, reviews of
34 35

Atom Egoyan, in discussion with the author, May 4th, 2018. I ultimately gave each of these screenplays a sub-item number each to differentiate between them. 36 Brock Silversides, in discussion with the author, May 10th, 2018.

15

his own work by others, and graphic material for some of his works (mostly for the plays he directed while studying at the University of Toronto). Assistant media archivist Rachel Beattie does not believe these objects have aidd the cataloguing of the collection in terms of extrapolating metadata, and has even said that a good majority of the information used came from film related websites.37 Comparing the TIFF series to the University of Toronto series helps to showcase that this kind of experiment benefits from having a large variety of paper ephemera, as well as having a certain amount to work with. Brock Silversides has confirmed that the main purpose of the University of Toronto accrual is to allow researchers to have access to projection copies of Egoyan's films (the films in the TIFF archive are for preservation purposes). This is a point that Egoyan agreed with when I asked him about that specific donation, as he said the University of Toronto collection has more of a "film focus" and the accessibil ity that the TIFF archives do not have.38 In fact, around eight or ten months after the collection came in, there was a public screening of Ararat (2002) on 35mm that was introduced by Egoyan himself held at the University of Toronto. The media commons did not exist when the first TIFF donation was made, as it was created in 2003; this could explain why Egoyan sent all of his records to the then-new TIFF archive instead. Silversides has even mentioned that this was likely Egoyan's way of "giving back" to the University of Toronto commons, as Egoyan "knows his archival material" could be used "for scholarly research" (Egoyan also wanted to have his connection to his "alma mater"

37 38

Rachel Beattie, email correspondence, April 24th, 2018. Atom Egoyan, in discussion with the author, May 4th, 2018.

16

represented by his donation).39 The collection also contains the graphic documents that surround his feature and student works, and his written work as a student. The collection as a whole is not used too often (Silversides pointed out, when saying this, that this is common for any collection). Sometimes the cinema studies faculty at the University of Toronto screens the film prints held by the commons as special events. This collection does not have enough information if a researcher wished to discover how Egoyan functioned as a businessman and filmmaker. The University of Toronto collection is more open to the public (as the TIFF archives does not allow everyone to study there), but its purposes are centered on Egoyan as a university alumni (and the accessibility of screening prints of his major films). The main objective for Silversides is to "preserve the best possible copies that [they] have", and all of the information I received from him, Beattie and Egoyan have made this clear.40

39 40

Brock Silversides, in discussion with the author, May 10th, 2018. Brock Silversides, in discussion with the author, May 10th, 2018.

17

Chapter 2: Methodology 2.1: Practices I worked with a number of different software programs while I re-catalogued the Atom Egoyan collection. I used Microsoft Excel on a daily basis to create the spreadsheet that absorbed the previous information from the old finding aid. I then added extra information to these records by personally going through each physical file by hand. I made sure that the catalogue number on each file got recorded into the Excel chart, since the finding aid neglected to include these accession numbers; this also allowed me to make sure that the finding aid was at least in the proper order. The files in the collection are placed in metal-edged archival document boxes, with the catalogue numbers written on the outside.41 I started with boxes that contained the collection files in numerical order (starting with the box that holds the first accession numbers). Files would have the lowest catalogue number at the back and the highest number at the front, with the titles labeled and the numbers written on the front faces.42 I cross-referenced the accession number on the exterior of said file to the accession numbers I had on excel, and then saw if the file correlated to the information in the finding aid. Where information was lacking, I would create my own statements based on the evaluations I made on each file. I removed staples and paperclips that were on these documents and replaced them with PlastiklipsTM (brand name of plastic paper clips used) to ensure longevity, and kept every file in the order I found them in. Though rare, whenever documents were placed in the wrong folder, I made sure to unite the document with the correct folder. I based my decisions on what the finding
41 42

See images 1 and 2 in image bank, page 65. See images 3 and 4 in image bank, page 65.

18

aid said about the housing folder and the contents inside. I would locate the proper folder either through my own work or through the finding aid (if, for example, I had not reached a certain accession number range yet).

2.2: Cataloguing Regulations I followed the common guidelines that TIFF uses for their cataloguing information. They use a controlled vocabulary for many of their identifier fields, as this limited lexicon works as a programmed code when the catalogue is uploaded into Mimsy XG, their current collections management software of choice. While these terms can be placed in the title in other institutions (for instance, a title can be " The Sweet Hereafter: motion picture"), the TIFF archives make this clarification by series and object level rather than as a descriptor.43 For the collection I worked on, the series identifier was exclusively "textual materials", as all of the paper ephemera were encompassed by that term. The format for following the previously created accession numbers was undemanding. Each number starts with the date of when TIFF received and acquired the donation (for example, 1999-001-05.0001 means the collection was acquired in 1999). The second series of numbers is the creator number in relation to the year of creation (as Egoyan's donation was the very first of 1999, he is simply 001 at the person level). The third set is a series identifier. As I only worked with textual records, this number will always remain ".05" which abides by Mimsy XG's code system. Finally, the only number that will change is the item level number, which comes at the end of the accession number. These numbers go from "0001" to "0678". Some files are split at a
43

Harrison, Harriet W., The FIAF Cataloguing Rules for Film Archives (München: K. G. Saur), 1991, 26.

19

sub-file level, and will include a second decimal, for example, 1999-001-05.142.10 means the item is the tenth sub-file in the 142nd item file. Luckily, this project remained in the same collection and series by the same creator, so the only changing factor is the item-level numbers. The accession numbers are loosely influenced by the Library of Congress methodology of cataloguing. There are a few noticeable differences, though: numbers are moved around in order of placement, and the physical locations at TIFF depend on their location information and not their accession numbers.44 The way TIFF describes objects is influenced by the RAD (Rules for Archival Description) guidelines, which enforces that each level is strictly designated to only describe that level and nothing more. For instance, a title cannot be descriptive without an actual given or inspired title; a vague description of an object is left for the description field, and the title can even be left blank in this case.45 For the purpose of this applied project, I included titles for every object, as I relied on the original finding aid's information; there was no sense in removing labels that archivists had already grown accustomed to, but for a new collection, a lack of a title is not a problem if there is not a specific title for the object itself. However, this stipulation, instilled by RAD, will affect each subsequent field in the catalogue. Most of the sections on the attached Excel charts are basic. Every object is flagged with an "A" under the department column to signify that they are a part of the archive at TIFF. Every item is, evidently, a part of the Atom Egoyan Archive; this is the fixed terminology for any and all parts of the Atom Egoyan collection, otherwise Mimsy
44

Angela Kroeger, Library of Congress Call Numbers: A Guide for Non-Catalogers Who Suddenly Find Themselves with a Cataloging Job, accessed March 16, 2018, https://www.slideshare.net/akroeger/kroeger-lcclassification. 45 Kelly Stewart, Rad Refresher, accessed March 16, 2018, https://aabc.ca/media/5572/RADrefresher_Jan-10.pdf.

20

XG will reject the submission. Under the restriction column, you will find one of three possible letters. N means "no", which is the most common option, and means that the object is open to the public. P stands for "private", which warns any archivist to check why the object in question has been flagged, and to consider whether the request to view said object is appropriate or not. An example would be graphic images that may not be suitable for all researchers. Finally, R is "restricted". This final designation is usually requested by donors. "Restricted" forbids anyone from outside of the TIFF archives from accessing the flagged material. This option cannot be overridden by any means, unless the original donor requests that the change occur. Only one item was requested by Egoyan to be hidden from public access: His jury notes when he was a judge at the 1996 Cannes Film Festival. A few other objects have been withdrawn by Egoyan after his donation; the information from these objects is kept to signify that they were once kept at the TIFF archives. I was able to make educated decisions on a few objects that seemed questionable for the public; one prime example was a legal document that was included, where Egoyan was being summoned with a lawsuit. I do not have the authority to restrict objects myself, since I am not Atom Egoyan and he donated this object, but I did label the file as "private"; this decision is to make archivists aware of who might request to see this record and what their purposes may be. Nonetheless, any private or restricted objects will require an explanation in the archivist note field to alert other archivists. If an object is based on a film, that work is listed under the CATALOGUE.OPTION10 column; the year the film was released is subsequently

21

included under the CATALOGUE.DATE_COLLECTED column. These inclusions turn an uploaded entry into a hyperlink that further conjoins all entries related to a specific film. The extra benefit here is that a film, which is loosely related to a collection such as rejected screenplay drafts, has been submitted as a part of a certain fonds. It now works as an obtainable entryway into a new collection from a remote starting point, which can provide researchers with more information and different perspectives they may not have even known they had access to. The title field, as previously stated, has been filled for every entry, and is faithful to their original titles also in part because the physical files that housed these objects had the exact same titles labeled on them. However, one field that TIFF prefers to have at least some information for is the date field, which was actually not fully completed in the finding aid (even for some entries that had dates inscribed on them).46 TIFF welcomes the concept of circa entries: approximations of when an object was created that can have a window of many years. An example would be a rejected screenplay without a date attached to it. My broadest date ranges would be between 1980, which reflect the earliest instances of Egoyan working on feature length films, and 1999, when the donation by Egoyan was received. To narrow down the range, I conducted research to see if the screenplay was every picked up by another filmmaker and/or production company and, if so, when. Any estimation of when an object was made is better than a lack of information, especially for a researcher wishing to inspect objects of a certain time period. The most free-reign possible to describe objects in an archive is within the description field (or the CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION column). The most basic purpose
46

See image 7 in image bank, page 66.

22

of this field is to illustrate what an object is for the researcher to reflect upon. Descriptions, while without fixed terminology and regulations, are still ideally as short -- and precise--as possible, so as to not inundate the researcher with extra information. I had the liberty of deciding what parts of an object acted as a focal point. To return to the case of rejected screenplays, I had a lot of information to work with (of which was missing in the finding aid, thus propelling me to conduct my own thorough research with the actual screenplays).47 Knowing the film, film date, and title fields could cover the grounds of what works could be related to the screenplay in question, I left that information out of the description field. I also left out plot details, because I felt that the story did not add a history as to why a screenplay was rejected by Egoyan (a number of the screenplays even had hand written notes by Egoyan, which is a fact I would include when applicable). I focused primarily on who wrote the screenplay, if there was a correspondence between Egoyan and the author (or an agent/production company linked to the author), what draft the screenplay was when included (this shows one of the many stages of progression), and the way a script was received, including if it was bound in any sort of way (this prepares the researcher by telling them what form of object they will be handling). All that was left after following these many steps was to include the physical location of the object. As textual records are always stored on site (the Tiff Bell Lightbox), this field was always left as "TBLB". The boxes containing these objects were already provided with a location within the "stacks" archival room (moveable shelves locked away from public access). Veteran archivists knew where these specific files were but only from experience; the actual location was not specified in the finding aid as
47

See image 6 in image bank, page 66.

23

the fonds was not catalogued before, only a broad location description was included under Atom Egoyan's person page on Mimsy XG, which covered all of his fonds. Each item now has a specific location, including which "stack" (shelf), bay, and shelf it is located on; "box" is not included, because each box includes a range of catalogue numbers on the exterior that can be referenced. The final column is the location date field, where the year in which the item was updated is included. In the attached Excel sheets, I have not included any of the location fields for a few reasons. Firstly, the Excel sheets would be too condensed to make any of my work legible, so some columns would have to be sacrificed. Secondly, I felt as though these location columns would be the least resourceful for my thesis compared to the other fields that are included, since these fields pertain more to the archivist than to researchers that request to see files, notwithstanding of the fact that some files would have to be called in from an offsite location to be seen, which is, again, a concern more for the archivist. The result for each well-documented object in the Excel document is a thriving entry in Mimsy XG, that contains the correct, robust information in the right fields; this also affects the entries in Mimsy's list-viewing mode, which provides brief information so users can skim through multiple entries at once.48

48

See images 8 and 9 in image bank, page 67.

24

Chapter 3: Theoretical Analyses: The Function of Ephemera 3.1: Linking Series Together and Separating Their Purposes "[T]hese documents give our fledging science the time-depth it needs ­ provided we are willing to do what every historian does: learn to evaluate the evidence he [sic] has." -Alan Lomax49

Through my research, one of the initial uses for ephemera that I could plainly observe was the interconnectivity that occurred when I uploaded my cataloguing information to Mimsy XG. Entries on Mimsy XG, with enough information inputted, can gather links to other entries, files, and collections. Former TIFF archivist Alicia Fletcher describes software like Mimsy XG as a "game changer" that allowed a collection and all of its parts to be "holistic" in a way that was "previously impossible" (as every part of a collection could not be accessed from one starting point before).50 This can be seen with the main entry for the Egoyan collection on Mimsy XG. The page for the Atom Egoyan collection is connected to a variety of different pages, including the people entry for "Egoyan, Atom", and links to information on every accrual made within the collection.51 Overall, there are 976 different entries in the 1999-001-05 fonds; with this logic applied to every single entry, the catalogue now functions as a series of access points to many different parts of TIFF's database. These portals can even extend outside of each series, and are not limited to operating with a limited set of objects. Different series records at an archive like TIFF can be linked together through the

49

Scott MacKenzie, Film Manifestos and Global Cinema Cultures: A Critical Anthology (Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2014), 549. 50 Alicia Fletcher, email correspondence, April 23rd, 2018. 51 See image 10 in image bank, page 67.

25

separate archived parts; this includes graphic materials, documents (under textual records), photos, and the actual film as an object. This allows each item to receive proper attention within specialized categories, which ends up enriching its significance overall, and specifically in drawing attention to the production of these films. This opportunity to connect separate series becomes particularly useful when it comes to archiving items that were submitted together but do not fall under the same series. Even though objects function best when compared, one can only arrive at this analytical destination by first separating the objects. This circumstance is due to the fact that every object has to be studied individually, its distinct role within an archive contextualized by its initial use within a film production, even though it will be ultimately paired with other items. In fact, ephemera are of particular significance to a film archive because film and film objects are often viewed from a current perspective, and not from within the frameworks that people had during the creation of the films; paper ephemera can recuperate the lost contexts of older films and objects, like documents providing information for fragmented objects found during an archeological dig.52 Once the intention for an object has been discovered or decided upon, more information can be provided for both that object, and the other objects to which it relates. I found that many items could be linked directly to others during my cataloguing work. Screenplays often came with correspondence letters; these letters would occasionally discuss other screenplays in the collection that would be from the same writer or company, but would not have a letter. This can only mean that the screenplays were sent together, and the correspondence letter was filed with one of the screenplays only (and not included with the other screenplay). It is worth noting that there was no
52

George Melnyk, One Hundred Years of Canadian Cinema (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2004), 269.

26

noticeable pattern as to which screenplay was paired with the correspondence letter in a file. A prime example of this omission includes the two rejected screenplays sent in by writer Monte Varton: A Small Boy in Wales (1999-001-05.0142.245) and The Last Trip of the Asia (1999-001-05.0142.145). I referenced the corresponding accession number in the item description for each screenplay, so a concrete association could be made, and thus used by researchers. Another common instance was the use of cast and set photographs being attached to various documents, including cast lists, art department proposals, resumes, and location scouting reports. If a file did not have many photographs, they would all be included in the same file. If many photographs were found, they would be separated with their original documents by being placed in the photo series (outside of textual records). This is different from my previous example, because those screenplays were still under textual records. With these cases, the ephemeral documents now supply additional information to the photo series that may not have been applicable before. In cases like these ephemera are crucial because they function as another secondary source for primary material that may be researched; ephemera are "complementary" tools to guide one's study.53 Although this appears to be a special instance of ephemera reflecting on another series within the archive, the textual records series is, essentially, almost always connected to the film series, considering that most of these records were spawned from the creations of films by Egoyan. Any document relating to a specific film or project has the appropriate film title and date of release attached. This links together any files with
53

Kristy Davis, Slipping thru the Cracks: Issues with Performance Arts Ephemera (Oslo: International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions, 2005), PDF, 4.

27

these descriptor fields filled out identically, thus creating a miniature database for each of the works. With modern technology, we have different means of archiving our own events; cast or crew on a film may take to social media to share how progress is being made. However, years ago these candid experiences could not take place in the same way. Ephemera work similarly, yet they unite separate parts of a production together to tell a homogeneous tale after the film event; this serves a coincidental function to film itself, as a means to capture a fleeting moment.54 With the capability of cataloguing these items digitally, we can now not only discover the necessity of these objects to a production, but their value to an entire fonds. Some valuable examples of objects that prepare the background for a production include correspondence letters that are attached to script drafts. Unlike the rejected screenplays--in which a correspondence might detail why a script was sent or why it was rejected-- drafts showcase the evolution of a project, and the correspondence attached can tell us why a story was changed in such a way. There are numerous drafts with annotations by Allen Bell, a script supervisor who worked closely with Egoyan during the 1980s and 1990s. With Bell's notes and the correspondence that can be linked to these drafts, we now have a textual conversation between Bell and Egoyan about these screenplays. We can refer to previous drafts and later examples to see in what ways Egoyan took his own initiatives with the work, and where he listened to Bell's advice. Letters from producers can also detail what studio involvement affected a screenplay and why. In the age of the Internet, these discussions would happen via e-

54

Jennifer Burwell and Monique Tschofen, Image and Territory: Essays on Atom Egoyan (Waterloo: Wilfred Laurier Press, 2007), 101

28

mail, or otherwise would not be conducted in the same way. Sealed letters contain a certain level of intimacy reflected in the writing that may not be replicated in a quick email or a scan (faxes can be included here). Postcards and letters take time to write and much longer to receive, so information is generally more carefully provided, whereas emails can be sent at almost any time, given an internet connection is stable for both the initiator and the recipient.55 The metadata obtained from textual records can have a substantive impact to any archive, because it can replicate the literal retelling of events that took place to create a film. Not only does this metadata reflect on the initial processes taken during production, it points towards the potentially different results of a production that may not have been apparent before inspection. It is even the sole piece of evidence to some parts of the film industry-- including smaller film festivals and pre-production stages-- since it comes from very specific primary sources. Metadata thus act as missing links to databases that are void of certain facts.56 With metadata used to our advantage in such a way, we are able to move forwards with how these technologies of association can strengthen a film collection.

55

Maurice Rickards, The Encyclopedia of Ephemera: A Guide to the Fragmentary Documents of Everyday Life for the Collector, Curator, and Historian (New York: Library of Congress, 2000), 132. 56 Brendan Kredell, Skadi Loist and Marjike de Valck, Film Festivals: Theory, Method, Practice (New York: Routledge, 2016), 140.

29

3.2: Detailing the Importance of Objects and Contexts "In the entertainment industry, everything and everyone has a value." -Bastian Cleve57

Concerning the connectivity to other objects and series, metadata has proven useful as a stimulus for enhancing the status of an institution. Metadata attached to ephemera can also be convenient when considering these objects simply as objects. While comparing the use of these objects within the greater structure is ideal, it is also worth focusing on the purpose of these objects as they were initially intended. As TIFF's archive functions as a container of historical artifacts, it is worth noting not only why ephemera are necessary, but how they are necessary. The significance of these objects will implicitly be revisited when someone is conducting a search, as they will not only educate researchers on the history of these productions, they will teach why these objects are important to a production in the first place. Before we continue with the responsibilities of paper ephemera, we should actually dissect the overarching term into individual objects. The following kinds of paper ephemera are part of the textual records series in the Atom Egoyan collection: screenplays in varying drafts (including continuity scripts and dialogue-based screenplays), notes, correspondence letters (in written, typed, or faxed forms), memos, legal documents, contracts, newspaper articles and clippings, invoices and receipts, cheque records, bank statements, journals and diaries, drawings, blueprints, production design layouts, cast lists, resumes with headshots, production schedules and daily
57

Bastian Cleve, Film Production Management: How to Budget, Organize and Successfully Shoot your Film (London: Taylor & Francis, 2017), 10.

30

entries, riders, budget analyses, lab reports, log sheets, and release material attached to events (programs, flyers, booklets). After listing the copious amount and types of textual records, perhaps the significance of paper ephemera within a film production (and, as a result, a film archive) can be understood. It will then be even more advantageous to study the individual uses for each of these items. As there are so many different objects, it will be wiser to group similar objects together, especially if they hold similar purposes in a production and archive. Any form of legal documentation, including riders and contracts, can be grouped together, as their functions are comparable. Screenplays of any sort are admissible as one category. Production-related ephemera are capable of being connected together. Finally, personal papers (letters and journals) can coexist in a single classification.

3.3 Legal Documents Legal documents confirm many details about a production. As contracts create a binding agreement between people and organizations, they can be referred to as evidence of agreements. These differ from personal recounting, because contracts act as a neutral take on an event without personal bias or affected memories. 58 Looking at 1999-001-05.0156 as an example (a file aptly named "[contracts, other legal stuff]"), one can find executive decisions made concerning the film Next of Kin (1984); these include the rights to broadcast the film on television (and when this deal is effective). We can now understand how Next of Kin was handled during its theatrical run and thereafter, without a critical analysis or a series of opinions that can affect how its success is
58

Sian Barber, Using film as a source (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2015), 116.

31

described. Legal riders (otherwise known as hospitality riders) showcase the requests of performers and crew members, either on behalf of their agents and companies or of themselves, with the rider acting as a series of promises in exchange for the performer offering their talents to a production.59 In the file 1999-001-05.0301, titled "Cast" (and in relation to the film The Adjuster [1991]), a legal rider for Montréal actor, Elias Koteas is present; his behests included driving services to pick him up from airports and hotels to and from shooting locations, beverages, and meal preparations. Koteas' requests appear to be relatively standard for this kind of rider. In fact, riders can be changed on a daily basis, and as necessary, to coincide with whatever demands a day's schedule can bring. A technical rider is similar to a hospitality rider, only it is based more on what equipment should be used (as opposed to the comfort needs of a performer). Invoices and receipts are essential proofs of a business transaction having taken place.60 On a film set, invoices and receipts are evidence that a studio's financing went towards the intended targets, as well as confirmation that cast and crew have been properly compensated as was agreed upon contractually. Invoices and receipts can also be included for tax purposes (especially considering this is an archive with a tax deduction policy on donations), or to avoid prosecution (if anyone wished to proclaim that fraudulence was committed).61 There are countless receipts and invoices attached to the Atom Egoyan collection. They were categorized by department (catering,

59

Cary Gillett and Jay Sheehan, The Production Manager's Toolkit: Successful Management in Theatre and Performing Arts (New York: Routledge, 2017), 164. 60 Maurice Rickards, The Encyclopedia of Ephemera: A Guide to the Fragmentary Documents of Everyday Life for the Collector, Curator, and Historian (New York: Library of Congress, 2000), 194. 61 Maurice Rickards, The Encyclopedia of Ephemera: A Guide to the Fragmentary Documents of Everyday Life for the Collector, Curator, and Historian (New York: Library of Congress, 2000), 179.

32

production, cast, crew), filed alphabetically or chronologically (by day) depending on the department, and then organized by which payment was made first. Collecting each piece of evidence towards any form of payment can be seen as "mundane", especially in an archive,62 as a few examples often can adequately prove the point of an invoice's purpose. In the case of the extensive amounts of these kinds of ephemera in Egoyan's collection, any researcher persistent enough to pair production documents with the correlating sets of receipts and invoices can understand how money was allocated on and off set. Even filed legal debacles can serve as useful information in an archive. Of course, these kinds of documents would be rare to find in an archive, as they usually contain information that a defendant would not wish to share publicly. In the peculiar instance found in the Egoyan collection (1999-001-05.0156), a hotel company complained that a televised showing of Next of Kin negatively portrayed the hotel, and thus besmirched the company's reputation. Included in the same file is Egoyan's response to the accusation through correspondence letter, with an explanation to clear that any scenes of people fighting were far and away from the hotel in every case. For researchers, we can use this exchange as a way of understanding a possible rift in the future showings of Next of Kin, and how even televised broadcasts of films -- long after their theatrical runs -- can be susceptible to legal issues. Within an archive, these kinds

62

Zoë Druick and Gerda Cammaer, Cinephemera: Archives, Ephemeral Cinema, and New Screen Histories in Canada (Kingston: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2014), 29.

33

of personal legal documents do not hold power in regards to creating a debate, as they are merely evidence of how these kinds of proceedings work within the film industry. 63

3.4 Screenplays Screenplays serve a primary function of supplying a story, dialogue, description, and foundation for a film in its most basic form. However, in an archive, different forms of screenplays can act as bookmarks for the varying stages of a production. The early stages of a screenplay's drafts, especially with inscribed notes and correspondence attached, can signify the many decisions made to arrive at the final screenplay on which the eventual film was based. Outside of the near-300 rejected screenplays found in the Egoyan collection (which were turned down either due to personal reasons, or the inability to take on that specific film project at that time), there are the varying drafts contained there that have become the foundation for each of Egoyan's feature films; his short films and television projects are also included. These rejected scripts and nearly unrecognizable drafts are important, as Egoyan himself has stated that this is "an important part of the filmmaking process"; these kinds of attempts remind a filmmaker to take on projects that allow them many opportunities to expand on a foundation and not be confined by it.64 With Egoyan's own notes attached to a portion of these screenplays, we can discover what some of his reasons for turning down these scripts were. To cross reference these cases with his edits on his own drafts, we can understand how Egoyan's deduction process works, and what he looks for when he creates a story or
63

Maurice Rickards, The Encyclopedia of Ephemera: A Guide to the Fragmentary Documents of Everyday Life for the Collector, Curator, and Historian (New York: Library of Congress, 2000), 161. 64 TJ Morris, Atom Egoyan: Interviews (Conversations with Filmmaker Series) (Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2010), 8.

34

adaptation. Outside of the initial drafts, there are different production and post-production screenplays that are also archived. Continuity scripts are screenplays with markings to convey different meanings, including parts of a film that are already shot, and which parts connect to other parts during production; these markings are usually allocated to the left side of the script, where there is enough empty space to use.65 There are also post-production scripts with information on sound mixing and editing, changes during a shoot, editing and more. Within an archive, these kinds of screenplays serve a great purpose: not only can we see what changes were made from even the final draft of a screenplay, but filmmakers and studios can have these screenplays preserved in case they are needed for reference when these films are being restored or any part of the content needs to be used.66 The dates of when drafts or versions of screenplays were made can be crossreferenced to the other objects in the database that holds a collection. An example is the screenplay for Seven (1995) by Andrew Kevin Walker that was dated 1994 (1999001-05.0096). With the other information swirling around the collection, we can reason that Egoyan was either busy with the post-production and exhibition of Exotica (1994), or that he was in the initial stages of his Dead Sleep project, which was to be his first Hollywood film. Seven was ultimately directed by David Fincher, and released in 1995. This one screenplay's metadata now links to all searches on Fincher's film, and it gives insight to the history of the film during pre-production. With this much insight provided by one screenplay alone, the textual records series is essentially a manifestation of

65 66

Avril Rowlands, Continuity Supervisor (Burlington: Focal Press, 2013), 76. Avril Rowlands, Continuity Supervisor (Burlington: Focal Press, 2013), 182.

35

information overflowing with potential insight.

3.5 Production-Related Ephemera The actual schedules, cast and crew lists, and department records in this series can also provide context to the progression of a film's creation, as well as linear connections to other files via metadata. Tying all of these documents together under one unifying notion (these are all heavily linked to the production of a film) can be ideal, because they can all serve a similar function. With production ephemera, an indication of how the cultural and artistic movements of a society operated; these documents can remain intact within their period, and thus can be compared to other stretches of time to see how and why filmmaking worked similarly and differently in other eras.67 Production schedules can reveal many details about the construction of a film. A proposed schedule shows what processes were intended, which helps studios decide how a budget can be decided.68 A daily report can be referenced to see if these propositions are reflected the final film. If there is a discrepancy between an initial plan and the actual activities on a day, this could be for a number of reasons, all of which are even more beneficial for metadata than if they matched (as differences provide descriptions to separate the dissimilar cases from the regular). A change can occur because of emergency situations, surprise scenarios, technical difficulties, external forces (traffic circumstances, accidents, unreliable or dangerous weather), and budgetary positions (if a filmmaker can spend more money than initially presumed, or
67

Kristy Davis, Slipping thru the Cracks: Issues with Performance Arts Ephemera (Oslo: International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions, 2005), PDF, 5-6. 68 Scott MacKenzie, Film Manifestos and Global Cinema Cultures: A Critical Anthology (Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2014), 305.

36

has to deal with less money than planned). With daily reports providing their own descriptions through the notes taken, a researcher can discover many unforeseen developments that affected the end result of a film. Schedules are production documents that are tied to the legal side of a set, and cast and crew lists are no different. While contracts confirm that someone is to work on a film, proposed lists, resumes, headshots, and the correspondence attached to these documents are negotiations between filmmakers, agents, and studios. 69 In the Egoyan collection, there are numerous files that contain such documents, including "Cast List BC" (1999-001-05.0532) for The Sweet Hereafter (1997), which features the accepted resumes and headshots of cast members from British Columbia; the correspondence that confirms the approval of these members is included. These can be compared to a studio's department records of the same production to further connect how cast and crew members were assembled.

3.6 Personal Papers We finally arrive at the section that adds a heuristic touch to the information that we are receiving: the role personal documents play in an archive. The Egoyan collection not only contains correspondence letters to Egoyan, but copies of the letters he sent out to others as well. This way, we get a fuller idea of how these conversations went, since we do not have to create our own assumptions. While invoices are a record of an act of business, correspondence, which came about during the late 19th century due to the demands of commercial enterprise and the necessity for the postal service, acts as an
69

Bastian Cleve, Film Production Management: How to Budget, Organize and Successfully Shoot your Film (London: Taylor & Francis, 2017), 101.

37

understanding of how these transactions and agreements took place (or were to take place) based on the accounts of the participants involved.70 With Egoyan, who runs his own production company under Ego Arts Films, we can track the ways he conducted his own business from when he was very young (one of the earliest cases is in 1981 with the play Stumps, record 1999-001-05.0031) until his work with The Sweet Hereafter. We can get an even more intimate look at how Egoyan managed his affairs through his journals and notebooks. In fact, one journal has been flagged "restricted" from public access due to it portraying Egoyan's thoughts while he was a jury member at Cannes (file 1999-001-05.0133, titled "Cannes-3"). Outside of grouping private thoughts and working as a memory bank for busy filmmakers, journals can also be reliable for showcasing original thoughts that later grew into fuller ideas (or accomplished films). A journal is a reliable tool that has been recommended by various filmmakers, including Hal Hartley.71 The journals and notebooks attached to film productions can be used by researchers looking into films, because there is no external force that got in the way of the filmmaker's preliminary ideas; notebooks can especially be attached to "literati" (those that are heavily drawn to literature from an intelligible perspective), as hard-working creative figures can contain all of their swirling thoughts in one place, thus giving researchers an opportunity to learn more about these artists as people.72 With all of these differing types of documents and records to work with, we have

70

Maurice Rickards, The Encyclopedia of Ephemera: A Guide to the Fragmentary Documents of Everyday Life for the Collector, Curator, and Historian (New York: Library of Congress, 2000), 194. 71 Jason Wood, Talking Movies: Contemporary World Filmmakers in Interview (London: Wallflower Press, 2006), 109. 72 Maurice Rickards, The Encyclopedia of Ephemera: A Guide to the Fragmentary Documents of Everyday Life for the Collector, Curator, and Historian (New York: Library of Congress, 2000), 103.

38

the opportunity to investigate with the utmost scrutiny how these objects function. As this is a personal collection, this is a good time to narrow down how these ephemera can benefit the filmmaker behind the donation: Atom Egoyan himself.

39

Chapter 4: Theoretical Analyses: The Function of Ephemera 4.1: Understanding Egoyan as a Filmmaker and a Businessman "[W]e are not only the product of the experiences we have lived. Just as essential are the containers we use to store those experiences and the way we hold our stories." -Atom Egoyan73

After going through his entire textual records collection, it is easy to see how Atom Egoyan was well aware of the significance of his donation. Egoyan had to learn to have business acumen and a persistent drive to succeed in a complex industry, as is common for any aspiring Canadian filmmaker.74 Egoyan is attached to the new wave of Canadian filmmakers that combated the Canadian film industry due to its problematic history.75 As a result, his own self-awareness and his observation of how the film industry runs are perceptible in his textual records. I will provide examples of this through my extrapolations with his fonds and secondary sources, as well as a brief conversation I had with Atom Egoyan himself. Referring back to the documents that came from his youth, it is evident that Egoyan's experiences in an artistic academic setting prepared him for his future endeavors, and made him aware of the impact his creative processes would eventually have. His early high school theatre scripts show that he took on a plethora of responsibilities, including directing, writing, acting in, promoting, and scoring different productions, whether they were his own or those of other students. He kept the
73 74

Dimitrios Latsis, Atom Egoyan: Memory and the Machine, accessed January 31, 2018, PDF file, 40. George Melnyk, Great Canadian Film Directors (Edmonton: The University of Alberta Press, 2007), XVII-XVIII. 75 For more information on the history of Canadian cinema, see appendix, "A) Canadian Film D evelopment Corporation", page 58, and "C) Norman Jewison", page 59.

40

comments and grading sheets from his teachers with his assignments, allowing us to see how these remarks affected how he conducted his work afterwards; he has purposefully "collected everything since high school" for self-reference.76 When Egoyan moved to Toronto to study at the University of Toronto, he also shifted into the short film circuit. Instead of scripts for the theatre, Egoyan began writing screenplays. Instead of grades from teachers, reviews from professional critics were attached to these documents. Both Egoyan's high school and university works contained promotional materials in the form of flyers, but a difference can be seen between his teenage efforts and his those from early adulthood. Egoyan kept over seventy files in his family's British Columbia home related to work from his youth. Here we arrive at our first file attached to an actual feature film: 1999-001-05.0076 is a hand written script in a notebook titled Point No Point, which ultimately became the source of his third film Speaking Parts (1989). Other handwritten projects either went unrealized (including "Murmurs of the Purge," file 1999-00105.0074), or were starting points for other projects. For example, a handwritten version of Next of Kin (1984), found in 1999-001-05.0143, also has a part titled Special Delivery, which is either an original title for Next of Kin, or was an idea for a different story altogether. Egoyan's notebooks and journals, especially in these early years, have sketches included: a habit that has carried over since his years as a young adult, as is evident from a file like "Design notes" (1999-001-05.0071), dated 1981-1982. Once Egoyan started working with production companies on feature length films, we can begin to notice how he represented himself as a professional through his correspondence letters (usually under an Ego Arts Films letterhead). While Egoyan
76

Atom Egoyan, in discussion with the author, May 4th, 2018.

41

almost always maintains a kindness and witty nature in his messages to others (thus establishing relationships firmly with other personnel), there are rare instances where we can see Egoyan standing firmly to protect his projects. One prime example is under "Distribution-1" (file 1999-001-05.0158), where Egoyan sent a letter to a production company that created a stage rendition of Next of Kin. In this letter, Egoyan expressed concern that the production was turned into a politically slanted story against his wishes, and his name was attached to the credits of this play as a creator despite having nothing to do with it outside of granting permission for it to be made. His letter discussed his reputation being at stake, and his original story being altered. In an archive centered around one person's works, it is important to be reminded that filmmakers have to defend their careers and films in instances like this. In a heavily publicized industry, the hard work of a filmmaker can easily be undermined, and the defense of one's own "brand" is a part of the construction of their legacy. Egoyan cares about his stature as a filmmaker, as a Canadian auteur, and as an Armenian-Canadian. Being a spotlighted member of many communities has granted Egoyan a chance to play a more prominent role in all of these groups. Egoyan hires Armenians (including his wife Arisnée Khanjian) in the majority of his productions as cast and crew members; in fact, some of his works--including Family Viewing (1987), Calendar (1993), and Ararat (2002)--are heavily based on Armenian culture. As a figurehead for these communities and industries, Egoyan has shown his appreciation by representing his circles authentically.77 Sending these letters--both the chipper and the bold--is one way of maintaining a good name, but Egoyan has shown his importance

77

Cultural Producers in Perilous States: Editing Events, Documenting Change, edited by George E. Marcus (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997), 181.

42

within these groups by submitting textual evidence of his good nature to the TIFF archive. While observing his identity, it is clear that Egoyan kept all of these documents down to the tiniest possible detail (including every last receipt) as confirmation of how he conducts his business practices. It is worth noting that Egoyan's involvement with a new generation of filmmakers in Canada is representative of the new opportunities that Egoyan was granted that previous Canadian directors did not have; this window of opportunity allowed Egoyan to take a certain amount of control with his own works that was previously unavailable.78 The extra support Egoyan had allowed him to dabble in different positions of the arts industry, and his expertise in the following roles made him a prodigy at an early age: director, producer, and writer within the film industry (and he would then take on television and the theatre, art instillations and operas). All of his ventures before 1999 are documented in this collection, including his work on television (Sarabande [1997] and an episode of The Twilight Zone [1989]) and with operas (Salomé [1996]). As Egoyan kept working, he became more aware of what documents could be kept. The ratio of invoices and production-related ephemera in his late 1990s works, like Exotica (1994) and The Sweet Hereafter (1997), compared to his 1980s films is staggeringly different; roughly 177 files under a variety of catalogue numbers attached to Exotica is considerably larger than the eight found for Family Viewing (1987). Of course, his cast and crew were growing in number, but Egoyan's experience in the industry made him wiser about the kinds of documents he could and should keep. As a

78

Tom McSorley, Atom Egoyan's `The Adjuster' (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2009), 3.

43

result, the amount of metadata from these later films is plentiful. While each and every receipt does not benefit an archive (a topic that will be discussed in full in Chapter 5: "Issues and Complications"), the names attached to each batch of receipts is a new connection made within the archive. With all of the connections Egoyan has made personally within the Canadian film and Armenian-Canadian communities, we begin to understand how he was not only the writer of his own success, but also aware of who he was working with. This enlightens us about his biographical picture through our own examination of his personal documents. As powerful as that is in itself, we will dissect an additional benefit that Egoyan's collection at the TIFF archives has as a result of his stature: the tying of the Canadian film industry together within a Canadian film archive.

44

4.2: Functioning as a Piece within an Interconnecting Archive "Egoyan generally seems to elide the distinction between archive and collection ." -David Pike79

Atom Egoyan is obviously an established filmmaker that has worked alongside other Canadian talents. Montréal actor Elias Koteas has appeared in a number of Egoyan films, most notably The Adjuster. Egoyan's wife Arisnée Khanjian has roles in almost all of his works. Egoyan has cast Canadian greats like Christopher Plummer and Sarah Polley more than once. Every name that is attached to an Egoyan film is a part of the TIFF database.80 This essentially means that Egoyan's collection at TIFF is highly important for the likes of Canadian cinema, especially when represented by a Canadian film archive. The metadata within this textual record series strengthens the archive as a whole, and not just the Egoyan collection itself, by shortening the passageways between objects immeasurably, and tightening the TIFF archives overall. Searching through Egoyan's journals and correspondence letters to h is friends shed light on who he associates with on a more personal level and not simply as a professional. The copy of the screenplay for Crash in the "rejected screenplay" section of the collection might suggest that this was a story that Egoyan passed on. However, when tied to the correspondence letter in the same file (1999-001-05.0142.58), and his Cannes observations (even those open to the public, and not simply the restricted jury notes) between 1999-001-05.0131 and 1999-001-05.0136, it is revealed that the copy of
79

Jennifer Burwell and Monique Tschofen, Image and Territory: Essays on Atom Egoyan (Waterloo: Wilfred Laurier Press, 2007), 114. 80 Keep in mind that all aspects of a film get converted into metadata once details are submitted into an archive's database.

45

Crash (1996) was given to Egoyan by David Cronenberg not to take on the film, but to reflect on the screenplay. This shows a bond between both Canadian auteurs, especially when Egoyan's fond writings about Cronenberg in his Cannes observations are taken into account. A closeness between Egoyan and German filmmaker Wim Wenders can be seen in another Cannes related item: this time it is a notebook with journal entries titled "Cannes 1989" (file 1999-001-05.0068). There is a candid message expressing condolences to Wenders for the passing of what appears to be his brother, while he was the jury president for that year. Two years before, Wenders had won prize money at the Montreal Festival for his motion picture Wings of Desire (1987); he famously gave his winnings to a relatively fresh Atom Egoyan for the "honourable mention" of his film Family Viewing (1987).81 From these two encounters alone, we have another Canadian filmmaker (Cronenberg), and an international director (Wenders) attached to the Egoyan collection. These two cases are special for different reasons. TIFF also houses a Cronenberg collection, and the connectivity between both collections now fortifies each respectively. A researcher can find extra information--including the idea that it is from a different perspective--on particular areas of study. In regards to the significance of the Wenders example, Egoyan's series is bringing his role in festivals and amongst other esteemed filmmakers to TIFF. This is noteworthy in its own right, because TIFF started out primarily as a festival, and continues to be an influential festival within the circuit. It also suggests that the archive can expand outside of being strictly a resource for Canadian works such as its media library and archiving of books and publications;

81

Jason Wood, Talking Movies: Contemporary World Filmmakers in Interview (London: Wallflower Press, 2006), 56.

46

personal accounts and detailed primary sources in collections like Egoyan's add a different dynamic to how TIFF can provide information about the history of cinema worldwide. Personal interactions are one example of the kinds of benefits a collection on paper ephemera may have. However, correlations among collections are also a take away from this series. As previously stated, Canadian performers in Egoyan's works are gateways to other Canadian works within the collection, and with international cast and crew members, the series becomes a part of TIFF's archival whole. The strongest example is the documented rise and fall of the Dead Sleep project, as the various files related to the aborted film (1999-001-05.0099 to 1999-001-05.0127) stretch from 1992 to 1996. There are the usual types of documents that you would find attached to a film project here (screenplay drafts, cast and crew lists, production correspondence). What is most important is the correspondence to (and about) Susan Sarandon, whose 1995 Academy Award for Best Actress (for the film Dead Man Walking [1995]) affected the production of Dead Sleep. This issue can be clearly seen through the letters Egoyan sent to Sarandon (found specifically in 1999-001-05.0127), as he expresses his congratulations to her success and his thoughts on how the film will likely not continue without her as the lead (it appears that the previous negotiations were not satisfactory after her win). Through this single case, we have multiple connections. The forgotten film Dead Sleep has some light shed on it. Susan Sarandon's rise to a level of stardom she previously was not at --despite her previous successes--is evident. Extra information for Dead Man Walking can be extracted. Any other cast or crew member attached to the
47

project can be linked. Metadata is present, obtainable, and resourceful, even for a film that never came to fruition. Egoyan is highly respected in the film industry: enough so that he even appears in other collections at TIFF. He has been a significant writer for a variety of academic books and publications due to his stature. An example in the Mike Hoolboom accrual is Egoyan's foreword in the book Inside the Pleasure Dome: Fringe Film in Canada (2017009-04.0005.27, not in the excel sheets attached), where he discusses the importance of experimental filmmaking nationwide. Egoyan's contributions to the writings of independent cinema in Canada may be his way of acknowledging a marginalized community, as he feels any filmmaker deserves a supportive voice, whether to discuss a film or movement, or to put a value on why these works are important.82 As a fan of cinema, Egoyan utilizes his position as a big name in the industry to help other communities in the same ways he himself has been helped; he leaves a mark on these different parts of the industry as a result. This is in part due to the fact that he was a member of an influential new wave Canadian filmmakers, and has become one of the "prime examples" of what Canadian cinematic content looks like for international audiences.83 Researchers working on these other collections can stumble upon the writings of Egoyan that are then attached to his larger, more plentiful collection. Egoyan's power within the Canadian film industry is seen even in the series of other filmmakers, and it shrinks the distances between objects in a thriving archive. The capabilities of metadata are endless when it is extracted from its source and recontextualized.

82 83

José Arroyo, "The Alienated Affections of Atom Egoyan," Cinema Canada, October 1987, 17. Tom McSorley, Atom Egoyan's `The Adjuster' (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2009), 3.

48

Chapter 5: Issues and Complications I Encountered One of the rewards one can get from conducting an experiment of any kind is encountering an obstacle and then gaining insights by overcoming it. Some of these burdens can be figured out and avoided in future research, but important lessons can also be derived from the issues I could not get past, whether it was through time or resource constraints. This chapter is meant to provide a starting point for those who have encountered similar problems, and to air some issues for those who feel they may have solutions or want to cover some additional bases before continuing. One main factor to take note of is that Egoyan's donation was accessioned in 1999. This automatically limits the benefits of an ephemera-geared database, since the films created after this donation will not benefit from the database in the same way. While this seems like a small problem at first, a deeper consideration unveils the true downsides of this fact. The interactivity between a newer object and an older object will only be partially realized; the metadata from Egoyan's films before 1999 will strengthen the works afterwards, but not vice versa. With Mimsy XG as a primary database software, there are some slight complications with using this program for metadata from ephemera as a primary focus. Implementing the data is easy, as an excel document with the proper codes in the correct fields (usually the columns) will allow all of the information from these sheets to be attached to the right fields on Mimsy XG. However, the fields are very specific in nature and are usually not flexible; these include the standard sets of fields including title, date made, location, and creator. Much of the information found from an object will be placed within the description field, which is useful for researchers and archivists to

49

refer to; connecting to other artifacts through the description field is impossible, however, and any form of connectivity there would have to be made by the person researching externally and not by the program (or the researcher and archivist internally within the program). Alicia Fletcher brought up an excellent point when I asked her opinion on the software, even though she supports the use of software in cataloguing. She discussed the idea that using electronic media creates a "general overreliance on surrogates" to complete entries. She also mentioned that technological assurance inadvertently causes cataloguing "to stop dead in its tracks", as "collection discoveries are less likely to be made"; within a series as large as the Egoyan textual records series, there is a low likelihood of anyone going through virtually each entry one by one, confirming Fletcher's point.84 The advancement in technology, especially the accessibility of the internet, has also affected both the need for paper ephemera and the obtainable nature of these records for research purposes. Of course, the internet has replaced correspondence of any sort by e-mail. Even newspaper articles and magazines can be found legally online now, thus removing the need to have a paper version of a publication for the purpose of records. We live in an age of immediate delivery when it comes to connecting to other people; with non-physical storage and rapid speed, the absolute need for paper forms of correspondence is much less useful now.85 This is not because letters, postcards, or even faxes are useless: this is due to what Paul Innis calls a "bias of time" and a "bias of space", where time-based ephemera make a statement about existing (a heavy object for instance) and space-sensitive ephemera are more reliant on being effortless (a light
84 85

Alicia Fletcher, email correspondence, April 23rd, 2018. Paul Grainge, Ephemeral Media: Transitory Screen Culture from Television to YouTube (London: Palgrave MacMillan, 2011), 3.

50

object, or, in the case of the digital age, a non-physical object).86 The introduction of the internet has gotten rid of both kinds of ephemera to an extent; it has redefined what ephemera can mean now. Researchers have to observe how ephemera has been changed by the dawning of the digital age, including the actual reception of older ephemeral objects through digital archives (as anything reachable by the internet can be immediately replaced by the object that is clicked on next, and thus making these objects, once again, ephemeral, hence my earlier comments on pages 9 and 10).87 In conversation, Atom Egoyan himself expressed a preference towards physical records. He said that digital files and programs always have to be updated or converted in order to work, and there is an "anxiety" attached to digital media that is not present with physical documents.88 With this in mind, all of these objects are now much more difficult to get a hold of for researching. While objects like these are usually donated, it will actually be more of an effort to print these documents out, organize them, and file them with their corresponding objects than to just donate the physical forms of communication as was done previously. Many transactions are conducted electronically, especially when it comes to budgeting and production. These are prominent documents that archives will start to lack when it comes to the accessioning of more modern films, because these types of logs and contracts provide information to film archives that cannot be found from other sources (this is the most basic form any primary source can be). With all of these factors considered, ephemera in an archive are still not without
86

Paul Grainge, Ephemeral Media: Transitory Screen Culture from Television to YouTube (London: Palgrave MacMillan, 2011), 156-157. 87 Zoë Druick and Gerda Cammaer, Cinephemera: Archives, Ephemeral Cinema, and New Screen Histories in Canada (Kingston: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2014), 10. 88 Atom Egoyan, in discussion with the author, May 4th, 2018.

51

issues. The Egoyan textual records series is a rare case of an archive accepting as much as possible, since it was the first donation TIFF's archive ever received. Had this donation been made today, a much different protocol would have to take place. There are so many different kinds of ephemera now--with different types being classified and considered still--that it is nearly impossible to accept all types of paper ephemera; thorough accessioning and culling processes would have to take place.89 With the Egoyan collection, many smaller pieces of paper ephemera, including receipts, are kept within similar groupings. It serves no real purpose to keep each and every single receipt or invoice at an archive, because a historical statement for the use of these objects can be sensed with only a few examples. In fact, an overwhelming amount of clutter can make it difficult to find more significance for a file outside of a general purpose for said objects: it is hard to find specific purposes for keeping certain invoices when there are so many to sift through. According to writer Paolo Cherchi Usai, the selection process enhances the notion of posterity, because it is our input that determines what objects deserve to experience legacies; it is important that we decide what is important, instead of making every artifact important.90 This is not the only way that the Egoyan textual records series is a special case. While conducting a thesis on this series has been advantageous, it is wise to consider that this is a very specific example. Not every series that is heavy with ephemera will produce results the same way. If anything, some additional work may have to be done depending on the ephemera and the subject matter (i.e., whose ephemera is it, and

89

Kristy Davis, Slipping thru the Cracks: Issues with Performing Arts Ephemera (Oslo: International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions, 2005), PDF, 2. 90 Scott MacKenzie, Film Manifestos and Global Cinema Cultures: A Critical Anthology (Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2014), 558.

52

what does this ephemera represent?). I arrived at TIFF with a series already physically accessioned that required a catalogue and a refined finding aid. This was beneficial for me in terms of writing this thesis. In many cases, where a subject may not be as wellknown and the amount of ephemera may not be as large (and, if so, it would likely require some trimming down), the work required to get these results would likely be more difficult. I asked Alicia Fletcher about the importance of still having a finding aid in an institution that relies on a digital catalogue, and the main single reason she could point out was that archivists benefit from having a portable guide (which contains the same information that can be found in the catalogue).91 Nonetheless, a refined finding aid with limited use is better than an outdated and insufficient finding aid. With these complications to consider, there is still room to grow when it comes to implementing paper ephemera in an archive. There are voids that need to be filled. Yet, this does not mean that textual records in a film archive are a lost cause. We still need paper ephemera to find histories within the films that we watch and study, because we will only understand films as historical artifacts in this way. This notion is especially prevalent when it comes to archives that specialize in specific types of films. In regards to the TIFF archives, it is essential to keep these records in order to emphasize the transposing nature of the history of cinema in Canada, because it not only shows the public where Canada's film history once was (and how it shaped our ci nematic culture), but where we still need to go (and how to progress in a competitive market).92 This is a contentious issue that not everyone agrees on. One can say that these records help and provide an important aspect to our understanding of Canadian film culture and
91 92

Alicia Fletcher, email correspondence, April 23rd, 2018. Zoë Druick and Gerda Cammaer, Cinephemera: Archives, Ephemeral Cinema, and New Screen Histories in Canada (Kingston: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2014), 323.

53

should not be overlooked, but grand statements need to be proven. However, I believe that my thesis is a successful attempt to contribute to this story. This thesis serves as both an ode to the wonders that ephemera can provide an archive, but also a time stamp on how ephemera are being utilized in 2018. It is as much a means of insisting on the growth of ephemera in archives, as it suggests the need to further refine the protocol and development of preserving the documents that came from the production and promotion of films.

54

Conclusion In the digital age, cinema is once again ephemeral; instead of being thrown out, it is being displaced by moving on from one medium to the next as each "page" is opened through a click. The other main difference is that our information is digitally stored and protected. With the entry of films and film information being greater than it has ever been before, nothing has to be held onto by viewers; the database has done the work for them. Film is as momentary as it once was, yet it is not being discarded so much as its life is being briefly lived.93 This also conveys the central importance of having a permanent place for film and its history within archives. The documents attached to films provide a context for this medium generally as well as for specific examples, as an archive has transformed an erstwhile film into a definitive resource for those studying cinema. With a set goal as to what one wants to discover and the proper preparation, an archive can provide information that is unobtainable anywhere else.94 Atom Egoyan's collection at the TIFF archives is a rare example of how resourceful paper ephemera can be. Egoyan himself learned about the creation of cinema through an archive: I looked at Raging Bull over and over again, trying to see how those fight scenes were designed. It was my education. Going to the CBC archives, and going through all the old For the Records. That allowed me to make a living, and learn through the actual process of filmmaking.95

93

Zoë Druick and Gerda Cammaer, Cinephemera: Archives, Ephemeral Cinema, and New Screen Histories in Canada (Kingston: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2014), 10. 94 Sian Barber, Using Film as a Source (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2015), 131. 95 Mario Falsetto, Personal Visions: Conversations with Contemporary Film Directors (Los Angeles: Silman-James Press, 2000), 130.

55

With the knowledge of what insight a film archive could bring, Egoyan himself submitted his many records to TIFF to, perhaps, inspire other film students to utilize archives as a derivation for their work. Egoyan personally told me that he sees paper documents as indicators of the shifts in independent film, especially since modern careers and industries are hinged on "the access to technologies".96 Nonetheless, this collection is an exemplar for how paper ephemera can be used to strengthen the metadata within an archive. The metadata from ephemera can provide the background for how film productions are organized and, essentially, how films are made. It can distinguish the roles that each different document performs within the film industry. It can create an insight as to who the filmmakers are within the archive, and how they function as business operators. It can refine other collections within an archive through interconnectivity. Within Canada, where the film industry is complicated by combating concepts of what Canadian identity is and how our films should be created, it is imperative to have ephemera to supply evidence as the basis for how the Canadian film industry once was, how it is currently, and how it may end up in the future.97 According to Gene Walz, the heritage of Canadian cinema has previously survived because of "second-hand, paper history" in a way that written accounts have been accounted for more than the films "experienced."98 Head archivist Brock Silversides (of the University of Toronto commons) expressed to me a preference for a "bulk of articles" in a film archive over a collection that focused strictly on film, because more can be discovered

96 97

Atom Egoyan, in discussion with the author, May 4th, 2018. Zoë Druick and Gerda Cammaer, Cinephemera: Archives, Ephemeral Cinema, and New Screen Histories in Canada (Kingston: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2014), 10. 98 Eugene P. Walz, Canada's Best Features: Critical Essays on 15 Canadian Films (Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2002), xvi.

56

through these documents about a filmmaker's history, than a subjective medium like cinema.99 Ephemera are a gauge for film, a media object that, according to Paul Grainge, "operate within cycles of time and circuits of value." 100 Within a shifting industry, the metadata extracted from textual records is valuable because it may not be this accessible with future film productions. This thesis is meant to showcase the urgency for implementing ephemeral materials in film archives, as can be seen in the case of Atom Egoyan's collection. The likeliness of this thesis being published electronically through Ryerson may prove my case. This is an electronic document that was enriched by physical research done with actual paper documents at TIFF. The majority of this thesis was fulfilled by working with these documents as primary resources. You benefit from reading this document online, but this information would not be serviceable to you without the access to the TIFF archives that I had. We live in a digital age, but we depend on the physical to progress.

Brock Silversides, in discussion with the author, May 10th, 2018. Paul Grainge, Ephemeral Media: Transitory Screen Culture from Television to YouTube (London: Palgrave MacMillan, 2011), 3.
100

99

57

Appendices

A) Canadian Film Development Corporation Even though parliament enforced the National Film Board of Canada in 1939, the Canadian Film Development Corporation (which is more prominent for the purpose of this thesis) was founded in 1967 by the Canadian Government, with a budget of ten million dollars; this budget would increase to twenty five million yearly around ten years later.101 Through the increase of budgeting over the years and the desire to turn Canada into a film industry mogul, a tax shelter scheme was created through the Capital Cost Allowance (CCA), which "allowed investors to write off 60 percent of their investment in a film against their personal income taxes" rather than donations.102 As this was a means to attract American producers and filmmakers, any Canadian identity had to be removed from films (with locations being turned into American locations, for instance), and American performers were ideally the leads of these films to attract viewers. 103 The attempt was considered an "embarrassment" and an infantile attempt to replicate other film industries (and the films made during this era considerably lower in quality), and the CCA tax shelter scheme was folded in 1981.104 Afterwards, the Canadian Film Development Centre was renamed Telefilm in 1984, with the intention to make Canadian films as "authentically Canadian" as possible, as a means of retaliation against the previous lack of Canadian content.105 Between the 1980s and 1990s, Canadian filmmakers rebelled against both the CCA and Telefilm notions by being
101 102

George Melnyk, One Hundred Years of Canadian Cinema (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2004), 247. George Melnyk, One Hundred Years of Canadian Cinema (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2004), 113-114. 103 Tom McSorley, Atom Egoyan's `The Adjuster' (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2004), 2. 104 George Melnyk, One Hundred Years of Canadian Cinema (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2004), 121. 105 Tom McSorley, Atom Egoyan's `The Adjuster' (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2004), 2-3.

58

inspired by European art house, and avant-garde cinema, thus paving the way for the "Toronto New Wave" and Quebec film scenes.106

B) Rise of Festival Circuits The first notable annual film festival was the Venice Film Festival, created by the Italian dictator Benito Mussolini; the Cannes Film Festival was created as a means to combat the fascist undertones of the Venice Film Festival.107 The initial purpose of the Venice Film Festival was to bring artists and filmmakers to Italy to witness its illustrious cinema circuit, and, as a result, strengthen its identity within cinema worldwide.108 The genesis of Cannes Film Festival sparked an interest in many filmmakers vowing to be a part of that festival, to the point that the urgency created to make pictures for this festival helped to push the European art house movements.109 Ever since, festivals have served both cultural (a cinematic identity) and economic (lucrative) purposes, as many nations have followed suit (including the Toronto International Film Festival). 110

C) Norman Jewison The Academy Award winning Canadian filmmaker Norman Jewison created the Canadian Film Centre organization (CFC) in 1988 to act as a catalyst for helping the Canadian film industry grow; stationed in Toronto, the CFC aims to help Canadian film

106 107

Tom McSorley, Atom Egoyan's `The Adjuster' (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2004), 3. Richard Porton, Dekalog 3: On Film Festivals (New York: Wallflower Press, 2009), 40. 108 Richard Porton, Dekalog 3: On Film Festivals (New York: Wallflower Press, 2009), 39-40. 109 Brendan Kredell, Skadi Loist and Marjike de Valck, Film Festivals: History, Theory, Method, Practice (New York: Routledge, 2016), 18. 110 Brendan Kredell, Skadi Loist and Marjike de Valck, Film Festivals: History, Theory, Method, Practice (New York: Routledge, 2016), 104.

59

makers find like-minded craftsmen work together through education.111 Perhaps the controversy, despite Jewison's honest notion, is that his films are identifiably American through production and means; his award winning film In the Heat of the Night (1967) being a United Artists production, for instance.112 Due to a major Canadian film industry only being created in 1967 through the Canadian Film Development Corporation Canada, and the struggles to find an identifiable nature in Canadian cinema until the dismantling of the Capital Cost Allowance, filmmakers like Jewison--who found work in the United States--emerged; their success outside of Canada is seen as another way that Canadian cinema was misguided.113 Aside from the controversy, the CFC has remained authentically Canadian, and has been involved with many Canadian productions.

111 112

George Melnyk, One Hundred Years of Canadian Cinema (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2004), 147-148. David L. Pike, Canadian Cinema Since the 1980s: At the Heart of the World (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2012), 50. 113 David L. Pike, Canadian Cinema Since the 1980s: At the Heart of the World (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2012), 19.

60

Image Bank

Image 2

Image 1

Image 3

Image 4

61

Image 5
Image 1

Image 6

Image 7 62

Image 8

Image 10

Image 9 63

Data Terminology CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBER: Accession number CATALOGUE.CATEGORY1: Series (always "textual materials") CATALOGUE.FLAG3: Department (always "A" for archive) CATALOGUE.FLAG1: Whether or not the item is restricted from public access CATALOGUE.ACCESS_RESTRICTIONS: Purpose for marked restriction CATALOGUE.CREDIT_LINE: Collection name (always "Atom Egoyan Archive") CATALOGUE.OPTION10: Related film/media if applicable CATALOGUE.DATE_COLLECTED: Date of related film/media if applicable CATALOGUE.ARRANGEMENT: Object type according to MWEB terminology (always "research file") CATALOGUE.ITEM_NAME: Grouping of object types CATALOGUE.TITLE: The extracted title of the object used to identify the object CATALOGUE.DATE_MADE: When the object was made CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION: A brief yet detailed description of what the object is CATALOGUE.NOTE: Public notes for extra information if necessary CATALOGUE.PROCESSING_INFO: Private information only for archivists to see if necessary LOCATION.LOCATION: The designated building (always "TBLB") LOCATION.LOC_LEVEL1: The storage room (always "FRL Stacks") LOCATION.LOC_LEVEL2: The set of shelves the item can be found on

64

LOCATION.LOC_LEVEL3: The specific shelving unit the item can be found on LOCATION.LOC_LEVEL4: The specific shelf the item can be found on LOCATION.DATE: The date when the item was catalogued and placed

65

Excel Spreadsheets

66

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name

file title

date made

1999-001-05.0001

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

textual records circa 1973and research files [Miscellaneous]-1 1981

1999-001-05.0002

textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

textual records and research files [Miscellaneous]-2 1975-1977 textual records and research files [Miscellaneous]-3 circa 1977

1999-001-05.0003

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0004

textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

textual records and research files textual records and research files

[Clippings scrapbook]

circa 1976

1999-001-05.0005

A

N

research file

A Fool's Dream

1973

1999-001-05.0006

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0007

A

N

1999-001-05.0008

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

textual records and research files

The Doll

1974-1975

Description Compilation file containing programs, tickets, posters, clippings related to Atom Egoyan's early play writing, directing, performance, and film activities; early handwritten literary works by Atom Egoyan in notebook; correspondence and critiques signed: Click and Marjorie Plays and other literary works by classmates, including Colin Skinner, Alastair Greg, Reginald Rose, typed scripts, mimeographed Various ideas, notations, sequences, scenes by Atom Egoyan; handwritten in bound notebook Compiled to document high school period dramatic productions; clippings, production stills in colour and b+w ephemera Play by Atom Egoyan; typed script (original and 2 photocopies) program; characters: A, B, Commentator Play by Atom Egoyan; 3 typed script photocopies with mimeographed covers; correspondence; Drama Festival program 1975; characters: Man in Black, A, B, C, D

research file

research file

1999-001-05.0009

textual materials

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0010

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0011

A

N

1999-001-05.0012

A

N

1999-001-05.0013

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

research file

research file

research file

1999-001-05.0014

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

1999-001-05.0015

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

1999-001-05.0016

textual materials textual materials

A

N

67

research file

textual records circa 1971- Film by Atom Egoyan; typed scenario and research files Lusts of a Eunuch 1979 original; poster for screening By Gilbert and Sullivan; guitar textual records The Pirates of performance by Atom Egoyan; poster, and research files Penzance 1975 published music Play by Atom Egoyan; typed script (4 mimeographed copies); unsigned textual records critique attached; characters: Mr., and research files Manx 1975 Mrs., Auctioneer Play by Atom Egoyan; handwritten script received as copy on thermal paper and preservation photocopy made 1999; unsigned critique attached; typed script (2 mimeographed copies); characters: Miss Mitchell, Miss Hemming, Miss Harper, Miss Jiggins, Miss Mortisha, Miss Homely, Miss Magoo, Miss textual records Griffin, Patience, Angel, Mother and research files The School 1975 Nature, Kangaroo Instructor Play by Atom Egoyan; typed script (4 textual records copies); unsigned critique attached; and research files The Cell 1975 characters: Chris, John, Priest, Justice Play by Atom Egoyan; typed script textual records mimeographed; characters: Nurse, and research files The Prayer 1976 Miss Bavarder, Doctor Play by Atom Egoyan; typed script, textual records four mimeographed copies; and research files Blind Alley 1976 characters: Man, Rat, Drunk Play by Atom Egoyan; original typed script, and 4 copies; 2 typewritten critiques, unsigned; characters: Howard Boyle, Boy, Mr. Hardwick, Mr. textual records Botlitch, Mr. Dosso, Jerome, Peter, and research files Profit by Proxy 1977 Brian Play by Atom Egoyan; original typed script (2 copies); program; correspondence with critiques from New Play Centre dated 1978; textual records The End of characters: The General, The Scientist, and research files Solomon Grundy 1977-1978 Woman, Woman 2 Film by Atom Egoyan; original typed synopsis and shot list with dialogue, textual records plus two photocopies of same; and research files The Garden Party 1979 audition notice textual records and research files Film by Atom Egoyan; typed script containing shot list and dialogue

1999-001-05.0017

A

N

research file

The Cloister

1980

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

file title

date made

1999-001-05.0018

A

N

research file

Beach Heads

1980

1999-001-05.0019

A

N

research file

Beach Heads

1980

1999-001-05.0020

A

N

research file

Beach Heads

1980

1999-001-05.0021

A

N

research file

Beach Heads

1980

1999-001-05.0022

textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0023

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

textual records and research files textual records and research files

Beach Heads

1980

Description Play by Atom Egoyan; typed script original; characters: Gunner, Wayne, Karen, Les, Suzy Play by Atom Egoyan; typed script photocopy; characters: Gunner, Wayne, Karen, Les, Suzy Play by Atom Egoyan; typed script photocopy; characters: Gunner, Wayne, Karen, Les, Suzy Play by Atom Egoyan; typed script photocopy; characters: Gunner, Wayne, Karen, Les, Suzy Part of a play, and film by Atom Egoyan; handwritten in bound notebook; inscribed inside front cover: Beaver; title inscribed at second section: FILM; characters first section: L, W, G, S; characters film section: Harry Sharif, Rick, Sean, Tim, P, student, professor

research file

Beach Heads

1999-001-05.0024

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

textual records and research files

Beach Heads

1999-001-05.0025

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

textual records and research files

[Beach Heads, Stumps, ...]

1999-001-05.0026

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

textual records and research files

Stumps

1999-001-05.0027

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

textual records and research files

Stumps

1999-001-05.0028

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

Stumps

1999-001-05.0029

A

N

research file

Stumps

1999-001-05.0030

A

N

research file

Stumps

Poster, press release, clippings, program Correspondence Atom Egoyan and Guy Sprung; handwritten play section in notebook; typed script original, Act II pages 47-56; handwritten 1980 comments/critique, unsigned Binder with slide sleeves compiled as photo album; dismounted by archivist and resleeved; slides, programs and ephemeral material related to early plays; paper ephemera removed to circa 1980 file folder Play by Atom Egoyan; handwritten script and/or sections of script inscribed title: The Wicket Keepers; characters: Randal, Mr. Walker, Mr. 1981 Auld, Mrs. Auld, Mr.Gleg Play by Atom Egoyan; handwritten script; inscribed title: Thin Ties/The Wicket Keepers; characters: Foster, Trill, Mrs. Trill, Stride, Midgley, 1981 Kingston Play by Atom Egoyan; several loose pages removed from typed script; characters: Foster, Trill, Mrs. Trill, 1981 Stride, Midgley, Kingston Play by Atom Egoyan; typed script photocopy; characters: Foster, Trill, 1981 Mrs. Trill, Stride, Midgley, Kingston Play by Atom Egoyan; typed script photocopy; characters: Foster, Trill, 1981 Mrs. Trill, Stride, Midgley, Kingston 1980

1999-001-05.0031

A

N

research file

Stumps

1981

1999-001-05.0032

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

[Convention]

1982

1999-001-05.0033

A

N

research file

Convention

1982

1999-001-05.0034

A

N

research file

Convention

1982

1999-001-05.0035

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

Woyzeck

1983

1999-001-05.0036

A

N

68

research file

[Fetish]

1983

1999-001-05.0037

A

N

research file

Fetish

1983

Clippings, program, correspondence Play by Atom Egoyan; handwritten in pencil in bound notebook; inscribed inside cover: Background 1982; characters: Michael, Sharon, Philip Play by Atom Egoyan; typed script; removed from binder; characters: Michael, Sharon, Philip Play by Atom Egoyan; typed script bound; characters: Michael, Sharon, Philip Play by Georg Buchner; Atom Egoyan acting role of the Doctor in Trinity College Dramatic Society production; program, rehearsal schedule, poster Play by Atom Egoyan; handwritten script in bound notebook characters: Harold, Angela, Patrick Play by Atom Egoyan; typed script; inscribed on cover: First Draft; characters: Harold, Angela, Bruce

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name

file title

date made

Description
Play by Atom Egoyan; typed script cerlox bound; inscribed on cover: First Draft; characters: Harold, Angela, Bruce

1999-001-05.0038

textual materials

A

N

research file

textual records and research files

Fetish

1983

1999-001-05.0039

textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0040

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

textual records and research files textual records and research files

Fetish

1983

research file

Tender

1983

1999-001-05.0041

textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

textual records and research files textual records and research files

Tender

1983

1999-001-05.0042

A

N

research file

Tender

1983

1999-001-05.0043

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0044

A

N

1999-001-05.0045

A

N

1999-001-05.0046

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

Open Arms

1984

Handwritten and typed sets of comments and critiques; one signed: W Play by Atom Egoyan; two handwritten scripts; characters: Allan, Gordon, Clea, Harold Play by Atom Egoyan; handwritten script and typed script removed from binder; characters: Allan, Gordon, Clea, Harold Play by Atom Egoyan; typewritten script cerlox bound; characters: Allan, Gordon, Clea, Harold Play by Atom Egoyan; handwritten script inscribed title: Scraps; typed script inscribed title: Open Arms; characters: Garo, Mardik, Azad, Zaven, Shushnan Correspondence, small format posters, programs Play by Atom Egoyan; annotated script with stage directions in 3-ring binder with notes attached to cover Play; Handwritten script and typed script; characters: Susan, Russell, David

research file

Open Arms

1984

research file

Open Arms

1984

research file

textual records Everything Must and research files Go

1986

1999-001-05.0047

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

textual records and research files

Shorts press clippings

Clippings; two newspaper articles and one scanned article from Belgium; references the shorts "Open House", "Howard in Particular", "Peep Show", 1982-1991 and "Men (A Passion Playground) Programs, posters, and release letters from Atom Egoyan; shorts involved circa 1979- include "Howard in Particular", "After 1981 Grad with Dad", Peep Show", "Manx" Film by Atom Egoyan; publicity material, including posters, onesheets; correspondence with National 1979-1983 Archives re film print Film by Atom Egoyan; typed script titled The Garden Party; credits listing, 1980 catalogue description Development, film analysis for course credit; correspondence, articles, and 1981 certification

1999-001-05.0048

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

textual records and research files

[Shorts ephemera]

1999-001-05.0049

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

textual records and research files

Howard in Particular

1999-001-05.0050

A

N

research file

textual records After Grad with and research files Dad textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

1999-001-05.0051

A

N

research file

Peep Show

1999-001-05.0052

A

N

research file

Peep Show Open House proposal

1981

Reactions, notices, letters Grant application; script; tentative production schedule Handwritten and typed scripts; handwritten and typed storyboards Preproduction, budget, etc.; correspondence, original contracts, budget Edge coding log; continuity notes; sound reports; paperwork found with film materials

1999-001-05.0053

A

N

research file

1982

1999-001-05.0054

A

N

research file

Open House

1982

1999-001-05.0055

A

N

research file

Open House

1982

1999-001-05.0056

A

N

research file

textual records Open House and research files [mixing sheets] textual records and research files

1982

1999-001-05.0057

A

N

research file

Open House

1982

Media clippings, reactions

69

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
textual records and research files textual records and research files

file title

date made

Description

1999-001-05.0058

A

N

research file

Open House

1982

Stills, photocopies

1999-001-05.0059

A

N

research file

Open House

1982

1999-001-05.0060

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

textual records and research files

1999-001-05.0061

A

N

research file

Men: a passion playground / [development] Men: a passion textual records playground / and research files reaction, letters textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

1985

Festivals, awards; CBC correspondence Film by Atom Egoyan, performance poetry; correspondence, grant application, financial records; storyboard Correspondence letters; newspaper articles Hand written treatment in spiral bound notebook

1985 circa 19801985

1999-001-05.0062.1

A

N

research file

Amphibia

1999-001-05.0062.2

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0063

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0064

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0065

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0066

A

N

research file

Inscribed: Moscow-Yerevan July 1991; handwritten notes in bound notebook Handwritten treatment in bound circa 1980- notebook; second title: People and Fidotel 1989 Animals Handwritten in bound notebook; Dreams of Such circa 1980Crash Course notes; D.O.S.T.; Things 1989 Showroom Handwritten in bound notebook; Genies response/reaction plus other Genies response 1991 notes Handwritten in spiral notebook; dated Valladolid 1994; letter retained by Headhunter 1994 Atom Egoyan [Moscow 1991] 1991 [Civitecca Ranieri] Handwritten notes from Italy in bound notebook; dated 1997 Handwritten in bound notebook; journal entries Handwritten notes in coil-bound notepad; with Atom Egoyan's observations on viewing Ghost, made 13 July 1990 Handwritten shot list in coil-bound notepad Hard-bound notebook containing sketches and notes by Atom Egoyan related to costumes, sets, lighting, staging of various plays DIA, New York, Atom Egoyan notes for panel discussion Correspondence letters between Atom Egoyan and the Royal Ontario Museum

1999-001-05.0067

A

N

research file

1997

1999-001-05.0068

A

N

research file

Cannes 1989

1997

1999-001-05.0069

textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

textual records and research files Notes on Ghost textual records and research files

1990 circa 19801999

1999-001-05.0070

A

N

research file

Friday: Curse

1999-001-05.0071

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

textual records and research files textual records and research files

Design notes

1981-1982

1999-001-05.0072

A

N

research file

DIA lecture

1990

1999-001-05.0073

A

N

research file

textual records and research files ROM installation textual records Murmurs of the and research files Purge textual records and research files

1994

1999-001-05.0074

A

N

research file

circa 1980- Script and shot ideas; handwritten on 1999 lined paper notepad Handwritten notes in hard-bound notebook dated Paris April 14 1987 Handwritten script in hard-bound notebook titled Point No Point; dated May 30-June 1 1987; notes for Looking for Nothing

1999-001-05.0075

A

N

research file

Anatolia

1987

1999-001-05.0076

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

Speaking Parts

1987

1999-001-05.0077.1

A

N

research file

Speaking Parts

circa 1987

Galleys for Coach House Press book

1999-001-05.0077.2

A

N

research file

Speaking Parts

circa 1987

Galleys for Coach House Press book

70

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
textual records and research files

file title

date made

Description
Speaking Parts essay and Calendar ideas

1999-001-05.0078

A

N

research file

Paris notebook

1992

1999-001-05.0079

textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

textual records and research files Sight and Sound

1999-001-05.0080

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0081

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

Correspondence with Sight and Sound; magazine issue with eventual Egoyan 1997 article about The Sweet Hereafter Correspondence with Sight and Sound; textual records magazine issue with eventual Egoyan and research files Sight and Sound 1993-1994 article Correspondence with Take One [Take One magazine; typed out interview textual records Cronenberg between Atom Egoyan and David and research files interview] 1993 Cronenberg textual records [Unidentified circa 1980and research files script segment] 1999 textual records and research files Alaska Highway textual records and research files The Crowded Room Handwritten script, with characters Ted, Mr. Willoby, Wilma, Bob, Ani Script by Sakke Varvenpaa; correspondence

1999-001-05.0082

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0083

A

N

research file

1993

1999-001-05.0084

A

N

research file

1996

Script by Todd Graff; cover letter

1999-001-05.0085

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0086

A

N

1999-001-05.0087

A

N

1999-001-05.0088

A

N

1999-001-05.0089

A

N

1999-001-05.0090

A

N

1999-001-05.0091

A

N

1999-001-05.0092

A

N

1999-001-05.0093

A

N

1999-001-05.0094

A

N

1999-001-05.0095

A

N

1999-001-05.0096

A

N

1999-001-05.0097

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

textual records and research files

Early Return

1989

Typed script by David Fraser; directed by Atom Egoyan; correspondence

research file

textual records A Few Comedies, and research files a Few Tragedies textual records and research files textual records and research files

1994

Treatment/screenplay by Ted Allen Story outline by Martin O'Malley; correspondence Script by Stephen Rivele and Christopher Wilkinson; cover letter Screenplay by Linda Griffiths; cover letter, correspondence, budget Book by Margaret Atwood; minor highlighting Contemplation, notes for treatment; hand written in bound notebook dated December 1988

research file

research file

Giant Mine Killer Spy [The Aldrich Ames Story)

1994

1996

research file

textual records and research files Life Before Man 1988-1989 textual records and research files Life Before Man textual records and research files Life Before Man textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files The Mitchell Brothers

research file

1995

research file

1988

research file

1995

By Henry Bean; typed script By Mark Behrn; typed script, correspondence By Norman Snider; file includes copy of June 1994 Saturday Night

research file

Ploy

1992-1993

research file

Rated X

1994

research file

textual records The Secret of the and research files World textual records and research files textual records and research files

1993

By Ted Allan; play, correspondence

Seven

1995

research file

Seven The Wedding Band

1994

By Andrew Kevin Walker By Ted Allan; typed script, correspondence

research file

1993

71

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name

file title

date made

Description
By Joyce Carol Oates; typed script, cover letter

1999-001-05.0098

A

N

research file

textual records You Must and research files Remember This textual records and research files textual records and research files

1989

1999-001-05.0099

A

N

Dead Sleep

research file

Casting

1995-1996

Casting sheets for Dead Sleep film

1999-001-05.0100

A

N

Dead Sleep

research file

1999-001-05.0101

textual materials textual materials

A

N

Dead Sleep

research file

Crew sheets for Dead Sleep film Various correspondence letters in regards to Dead Sleep; production textual records [Correspondence companies include Miramax, Icon and and research files ] 1995-1996 Warner Brothers script / screenplay

Crew

1995-1996

1999-001-05.0102

A

N

Dead Sleep

research file

Dead Sleep

1992

Typed script dated December 1992 Item apparently retained by Atom Egoyan in bound notebook with hand written annotations by Atom Egoyan and scene sketches (diary dated 01.07.95 removed and retained by Atom Egoyan Typed script dated October 1995, correspondence

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0104

A

N

1999-001-05.0105

A

N

1999-001-05.0106

A

N

1999-001-05.0107

A

N

1999-001-05.0108

A

N

1999-001-05.0109

A

N

1999-001-05.0110

A

N

1999-001-05.0111

A

N

1999-001-05.0112

A

N

1999-001-05.0113

A

N

1999-001-05.0114

A

N

1999-001-05.0115

A

N

1999-001-05.0116

A

N

1999-001-05.0117

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

Dead Sleep

research file

textual records and research files script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay textual records and research files

Dead Sleep

1992

Dead Sleep

research file

Dead Sleep

1995

Dead Sleep

research file

Dead Sleep

1995

Typed script dated July 1995

Dead Sleep

research file

Dead Sleep

1995

Typed script dated August 1995

Dead Sleep

research file

Dead Sleep

1995

Typed script dated October 1995

Dead Sleep

research file

Dead Sleep

1995

Typed script dated October 1995

Dead Sleep

research file

Dead Sleep

1995

Typed script dated October 1995 Typed script dated October 1995, heavily annotated by AE

Dead Sleep

research file

Dead Sleep

1995

Dead Sleep

research file

Dead Sleep

1995

Typed script dated November 1995

Dead Sleep

research file

Dead Sleep

1995

Typed script dated November 1995

Dead Sleep

research file

Dead Sleep

1995

Typed script dated November 1995

Dead Sleep

research file

Dead Sleep

1996

Typed script dated February 1996

Dead Sleep

research file

Dead Sleep

1996

Typed script dated February 1996 Typed script dated February 1996; correspondence with Icon Correspondence messages; receipts; faxes

Dead Sleep

research file

Dead Sleep

1996

Dead Sleep

research file

Dead Sleep

1996

72

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive All jury notes have been marked as "restricted"

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

file title

date made

Description

1999-001-05.0118

A

N

Dead Sleep

research file

Dead Sleep

1996

Typed script dated March 1996

1999-001-05.0119

A

N

Dead Sleep

research file

Dead Sleep

1996

Typed script dated March 1996

1999-001-05.0120

A

N

Dead Sleep

research file

Dead Sleep

1996

Typed script dated March 1996

1999-001-05.0121

A

N

Dead Sleep

research file

Dead Sleep

1996

1999-001-05.0122

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

Dead Sleep

research file

textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

ICM

1995

Director's Pass, typed script Clippings pertaining to Dead Sleep; correspondence letters; articles pondering about Egoyan's possible transfer to Hollywood Handwritten notes in bound notebook pertaining to Dead Sleep Correspondence, notes, tear sheets enclosed with Journal Handwritten notes on hotel note pad; note pad from Century Plaza; dated Oct. 2, 1992; states Los Angeles

1999-001-05.0123

A

N

Dead Sleep

research file

Journal -1

1995

1999-001-05.0124

A

N

Dead Sleep

research file

Journal -2

1995

1999-001-05.0125

A

N

Dead Sleep

research file

1999-001-05.0126

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

Dead Sleep

research file

[Los Angeles 1992] [Miscellaneous correspondence textual records and printed and research files matter] textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

1992

1999-001-05.0127

A

N

Dead Sleep

research file

1999-001-05.0128

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0129

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0130

A

N

research file

Academy Awards 1996; programs, invitations, correspondence Correspondence; articles and clippings based on Sarandon's Academy Awards Susan Sarandon 1996 win Correspondence, agendas, minutes, Advisory Council annual reports relating to participation 1 1991-1997 on the Advisory Council Correspondence, agendas, minutes, Advisory Council annual reports relating to participation 2 1991-1998 on the Advisory Council Correspondence, agendas, minutes, Advisory Council annual reports relating to participation 3 1991-1999 on the Advisory Council 1996 Jury-related material, clippings from Canada and Hollywood Reporter Invitations, menus, social events, letters

1999-001-05.0131

A

N

research file

Cannes - 1

1996

1999-001-05.0132

A

N

research file

Cannes - 2

1996

1999-001-05.0133

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

R

1999-001-05.0134

A

N

1999-001-05.0135

A

N

1999-001-05.0136

A

N

1999-001-05.0137

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

Cannes - 3

1996

Atom Egoyan's jury notes

research file

Cannes - 4

1996

Printed matter removed from kitbag Printed matter removed from kitbag; noted "Time capsule" 2 copies of Cannes catalogue; various magazines Annotated catalogue; correspondence; programs; magazines; notes

research file

Cannes - 5

1996

research file

Cannes - 6

1996

research file

Sundance

1995

73

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name

file title

date made

Description
Correspondence; film production jury; dated February 8th, 1990 Appraisal letters in support of Canada Council applicants; Ne plus jamais domir, typed script

1999-001-05.0138

A

N

research file

textual records and research files Canada Council -1

1990

1999-001-05.0139

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0140

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

textual records [Canada Council] and research files -2 1990 [Correspondence and textual records miscellaneous and research files documents] 1985-1997 textual records and research files script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay [Parts of stage plays]

Various correspondence letters Various stage play scripts and script excerpts Written by Leonard Fisher Jr.; typed script; first draft; dated January 1991 Written by John Frizzell; typed script; dated November 1989 Written by Paul Morris; typed script; dated May 15th, 1991; with correspondence letter; typed script Written by Jean Marc Larivie re; typed script; "version 4"; dated June 29, 1991 Written by Herag Hamboyan; typed "diary" by Hamboyan; dated October 23, 1993; includes handwritten correspondence Written by Paul Shrader; typed script; adaptation of the Russell Banks novel of the same name; dated September 23, 1994, Egoyan received script April 17 1995; correspondence letter Written by Bob Gale; typed script; first draft; dated May 27, 1997; correspondence letter Written by Eric Weinthal; typed script; first draft; correspondence Sent by Darryl Beckmann; dated August 25, 1996; correspondence letters, posters, still images, and concept art for hypothetical film. Written by Standford Whitmore and Larry Gross; typed script; dated February 16, 1993; revised first draft Written by Anne Meredith; typed script; dated September 16th, 1996; second draft; correspondence letters, scanned articles and interviews; hand written notes Written by Christopher Bertolini; typed script; dated 1993 Written by Philippe Caland and Andy Weiss; dated May 23 1997; correspondence Novel written by Paul Lake; scanned pages of novel; correspondence Written by Éric-Emmanuel Schmitt; adaptation of the novel Angel by Elizabeth Taylor; typed script in French; dated April 30, 1997; correspondence Written by Alvin Sargent; typed script; dated August 11, 1997

1999-001-05.0141

A

N

research file

1982-1983

1999-001-05.0142.1

A

N

research file

2B OR NOT 2B

1991

1999-001-05.0142.2

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.3

A

N

research file

3 DAYS MAX 5 PSYCHOPATHS GO TO VANCOUVER ABSENCE, L' (BEFORE GRACE)

1989

1991

1999-001-05.0142.4

A

N

research file

1991

1999-001-05.0142.5

textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay

ADVENTURE & ENLIGHTENMENT

1993

1999-001-05.0142.6

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.7

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.8

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

Affliction

1997

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

AFFLICTION AFTER THE VISITATION

1994

research file

1997

research file

ALEEN ALEXANDER THE MAN WHO KNOWS

1993

1999-001-05.0142.9

textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

1996

1999-001-05.0142.10

A

N

research file

ALICIA'S BOOK

1993

1999-001-05.0142.11

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.12

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.13

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.14

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

ALL SHE WANTED

1997

research file

ALREADY DEAD

1993

research file

research file

AMERICAN TRASH AMONG THE IMMORTALS, A VAMPIRE

1997

1994

1999-001-05.0142.15

textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.16

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file Anywhere but Here

script / screenplay script / screenplay

ANGE ANYWHERE BUT HERE

1997

1999

research file

1997

74

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

file title
AQUIRED TASTE, An ARM OF THE CARNIVORE, The ARM OF THE CARNIVORE, The AURORA BOREALIS

date made

Description
Written by Graham Yost; typed radio play; dated March 9, 1981 Written by Douglas Cooper; typed script; dated 1989; correspondence Written by Douglas Cooper; typed script; dated 1992

1999-001-05.0142.17

A

N

research file

1981

1999-001-05.0142.18

A

N

research file

1989

1999-001-05.0142.18

A

N

research file

1992

1999-001-05.0142.19

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.20

A

N

Babyface

1998

research file

1999-001-05.0142.21

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.22

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.23

textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.24

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file Best Laid Plans

script / screenplay script / screenplay

circa 19801999 Theatre piece; act and play structures Written by Sharon Corder and Jack Blum; typed script; dated 31 October, BABYFACE 1994 1994 Written by Christopher Holland; typed script; dated 9 January 1992; BARRIER, The 1992 correspondence Written by Rita Davies; typed script; BAVARIAN circa 1980- dated "Wed. Jun 1"; notes; no date GENTIANS 1999 provided Written by Sarkis S. Vartan; typed script in French, bound; correspondence letter dated BEDJO, LE November 4th 1992; correspondence; PASSENGER DES paperwork for filmmaker Douglas LIMBRES 1992 Porter circa 1980- Written by Theodore M. Griffin; typed 1999 script; no date provided Full title: "Between Hell and Rebirth Stories from Century on the brink"; written by Marie Mouchel-Blaisot and BETWEEN HELL circa 1980Richard Magnien; typed project AND REBIRTH ... 1999 proposal, bound; no date provided Written by Jeffrey Abrams; typed script; dated January 22, 1996, BEYOND VIOLET 1996 received by Egoyan January 23, 1996 circa 1980- Written by David Birke; typed script; 1999 no date provided Written by Daniel Pyne; typed script; dated February 12, 1997; 1997 correspondence

1999

research file

BEST LAID PLANS

1999-001-05.0142.25

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.26

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.27

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.28

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.29

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.30

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

research file

research file

BLACK ANGEL

research file

research file

research file

1999-001-05.0142.31

textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file Blood & Donuts

script / screenplay script / screenplay

1999-001-05.0142.32

A

N

1995

research file

Written by Richard Boutet; typed script, bound; dated June 1988 Written by Laura King; typed script; BLESSING IN dated September 1989; DISGUISE 1989 correspondence Written by Gerald Peary, adapted from The Blithdale Romance by Nathaniel BLITHEDALE circa 1980- Hawthorne; typed script, bound; no ROMANCE, The 1999 date present Written by Andrew Rai Berzins; typed script, bound; dated 1988; BLOOD N DONUTS 1988 correspondence 1988 Written by "THE MAROONS", Michael Lee Dryden and R. Scott Gemill; typed script; dated August, 1987; third draft; full title: BLOOD WEEKEND IT'S NOT A PARTY UNTIL SOMEBODY DIES Novel written by Alex Austin; pages scanned from original novel; correspondence; correspondence date: December 20, 1993 Written by Jean Pierre Lefebvre; typed outline, synopsis, introduction and proposal in French; dated March 1987 Written by Lewis W. Lehman; typed script, bound; dated 1987

BLAMELESS BLANC DE MÉMOIRE (BLANK OUT)

1999-001-05.0142.33

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay

BLOOD WEEKEND...

1987

1999-001-05.0142.34

textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay

BLUE GUITAR, The

1993

1999-001-05.0142.35

textual materials textual materials

A

N

La boite à soleil

1988

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

BOITE À SOLEIL, La

1987

1999-001-05.0142.36

A

N

75

research file

BROTHERS, The

1987

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Deadly Betrayal: The Bruce Curtis Story

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name

file title

date made

Description
Written by Keith Ross Leckie; typed script; dated February 25, 1990; second draft; full title: THE BRUCE CURTIS STORY: JOURNEY INTO DARKNESS Written by Jim Makichuk; typed script; dated May 21, 1987 Written by L.M. Kit Carson; typed script; correspondence; correspondence dated March 30, 1995 Written by Don McKellar, based on the story by Roger Larry; typed script, bound; dated November 1991; first draft Written by Hugh W. McCall; typed script, bound; dated February 1989; second draft; correspondence Written by Patricia Rozema; typed script; dated 22 June 1992; correspondence Written by Margaret Atwood, with credit attached to P. Rozema; typed script; dated 12 December 1991 Written by Amnon Buchbinder; typed script; dated March 13, 1995; version 7.3; correspondence and forms

1999-001-05.0142.37

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.38

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.39

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

1991

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

BRUCE CURTIS STORY, The...

1990

research file

BURGER ZOMBIES BUTCHER, The (LE BOUCHER) BUTTERFLY EFFECT, The Pilot Program for FORMULAE

1987

research file

1995

1999-001-05.0142.40

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

1991

1999-001-05.0142.41

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.42

A

N

research file

BUYING TIME CASE OF THE MISSING MOTHER, The

1989

1992

1999-001-05.0142.43

A

N

research file

CAT'S EYE

1991

1999-001-05.0142.44

A

N

research file Chainsaw Love

CATCHFIRE

1995

1999-001-05.0142.45

A

N

1985

research file

CHAINSAW LOVE

1999-001-05.0142.46

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.47

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.48

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.49

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

City of Dark

1997

research file

research file

Written by Brad Fraser; typed script and outline; copyright dated 1982 Written by Joan Hopper; typed script; correspondence; correspondence CHERRY PICKING 1994 dated April 20 1994; notes Written by William Gough; typed script; dated July 20, 1990; full title: "CHIPS & GRAVEY" A Ghostly Love Story, original title: "CHIPS & GRAVEY" (A Magical Tale); note: not copyCHIPS & GRAVEY 1990 edited yet Written by Bruno Lazaro Pacheco; typed script; dated March 1991; CITY OF DARK 1991 labeled second draft Written by R. Carson Durven and circa 1980- Calvin Green; typed script, bound; no CLOUD LOVERS 1999 date included 1982 Written by Russell Banks; typed novel, split into five different folders under the same catalogue number; dated February 20, 1997; correspondence Written by Cameron Bailey; typed script; dated April 30, 1991; outline, proposal, and budget estimations Written by Lee Gowan; typed script; dated September 1996; correspondence; magazine and newspaper faxes/scans Written by Russel Banks; script typed, bound; correspondence; correspondence dated 31 August 1995; two scripts split into two folders under the same catalogue number "Rewrite" by Ann Biderman; typed script; dated April 14, 1993 Written by Ron Burnett; typed novel, bound; correspondence; correspondence dated January 9, 1992 and July 12, 1992; script copyright date: 1991; two copies of the same novel split into two folders under the same catalogue number

1999-001-05.0142.50

textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.51

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

CLOUDSPLITTER

1997

research file

COLD FRONT

1991

1999-001-05.0142.52

textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay

CONFESSION

1996

1999-001-05.0142.53

textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.54

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

CONTINENTAL DRIFT

1995

Copycat

1995

research file

COPYCAT

1993

1999-001-05.0142.55

textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.56

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

76

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

COUNTRIES OF THE MIND

1991 to 1992

research file

COUPLE IN LOVE

circa 1980- Written by Lisa Blaushild; typed script; 1999 no date included

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
script / screenplay

file title
COURAGE MY LOVE

date made

Description
Written by Clive Holden; typed script; correspondence; correspondence dated October 31, 1987 Written by David Cronenberg, based on the novel by J. G. Ballard; typed script, bound; dated September 1, 1994; second draft; correspondence

1999-001-05.0142.57

A

N

research file

1987

1999-001-05.0142.58

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

Crash

1996

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

CRASH

1994

1999-001-05.0142.59

A

N

research file

CRASHTOWN

1999-001-05.0142.60

A

N

research file

CRIME, The

1999-001-05.0142.61

textual materials

A

N

Crime and Punishment

research file

script / screenplay

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT

1999-001-05.0142.62

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.63

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.64

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

CROWDED ROOM, The CRY OF THE OWL, The

Written by Paul Gross; typed script; revision dated September 1991 Written by Hrant Alianak; typed script; bound; dated November 1994; second 1994 draft Written by Arthur Hopcraft, based on the novel by Fydor Dostoyevsky; typed script, bound; revision dated 7th 1996 January 1996 Can be linked to 1999-001-05.0084; according to 1999-001-05.0084, script is written by Todd Graff; typed script; script dated November 19 1990; first draft; correspondence; 1990-1996 correspondence dated August 27 1996 1991 Written by Patricia Highsmith; novel scanned; novel published 1989 Written by John Lansing and Bruce Cervi; typed script; dated October 1994 Written by Nick Sheehan; typed script; dated 1990; previously titled "THE TIME SOLDIER or The Secret History of World War Two"; correspondence Written by Susie Landau; typed script; full title: DARK IS YOUR HEART, VENUS (The Story of Wanda and Leopold vonSacher Masoch); correspondence; correspondence dated June 18-19 1997 Written by Christopher Atamian; typed script; dated June 26 1992; correspondence Written by Paul Chaderjian; typed script, bound; full title: "dEAD aIR dIARIES, pART tWO"; dated spring 1992; correspondence; resume of Chaderjian Written by Muriel Teodori and Jacques Kebadian; typed script in French, bound; proposal and outline attached; proposal dated May 4 1992; two scripts split into two folders under the same catalogue number Written by Sharon Riis; script typed, bound; third draft; no date attached Written by Patrick Smith Kelly, based on Dial M For Muder by Frederick Knott; typed script; dated June 13, 1995; revised draft Written by Hrant Alianak; typed script, bound; dated 1991; scanned photograph Written by Timothy Southam; typed script in both English and French; correspondence, outlines and personal statements (in both English and French); correspondence dated July 10, 16, 1991 Written by David Fraser; typed script, bound; revised version dated February 1990 Written by Andrew Kevin Walker; typed script; dated May 6 1997; correspondence

research file

1989

research file

CYBERTRYX

1994

1999-001-05.0142.65

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay

DARK ANGEL

1990

1999-001-05.0142.66

textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.67

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

DARK IS YOUR HEART, VENUS

1997

research file

DARKROOM, The

1992

1999-001-05.0142.68

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay

DEAD AIR DIARIES

1992

1999-001-05.0142.69

textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.70

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

DEMAIN

1992

research file

DEVIL'S circa 1980PUNCHBOWL, The 1999

1999-001-05.0142.71

textual materials textual materials

A

N

A Perfect Murder

1998

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

DIAL M FOR MURDER DIFFICULT WOMEN

1995

1999-001-05.0142.72

A

N

research file

1991

1999-001-05.0142.73

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.74

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.75

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

Dober Man

1993

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

DOBER MAN

1991

research file

EARLY RETURN EIGHT MILLIMETER EIGHTEEN THOUSAND DEAD IN GORDON HEAD

1990

77
8mm 1999 research file

1997

1999-001-05.0142.76

textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay

1990

Written by Clive Holden; typed script; dated 1990

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
script / screenplay script / screenplay

file title

date made
circa 19801999

1999-001-05.0142.77

A

N

research file

EL PASO

Description Written by Donald Cammell and William Gray; typed script; no date attached

1999-001-05.0142.78

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.79

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.80

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.81

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

research file

Written by Matthew Bright; typed script; dated February 27 1995 Written by Clive Holden; typed scripts (one unbound, one bound); correspondence ; earliest correspondence dated 1987 and 1988; scripts and correspondence letters ELECTRIC BEACH, separated into two files under the A STATE OF MIND 1987-1988 same catalogue number Written by Patrick Smith Kelly; typed ELEVATOR TO script; dated September 19, 1997; THE GALLOWS 1997 correspondence EL FUTURA 1995 Written by Avrum Jacobson; typed script; dated July 16, 1991; synopsis Written by Bogdan Denitch; printed book, bound; dated February 23 1990; full title: The End of the Cold War: END OF THE COLD European Unity, Socialism, and the WAR, The 1990 Shift in Global Power Full title: Entre Enfer et Renaissance Histoires d'un Siècle en bascule; typed ENTRE ENFER ET circa 1980- film ideas in French, bound; no date RENAISSANCE... 1999 attached ENCHANTED 1991 Written by Alan Zdinak; typed script; dated 1993 Written by Gavin Lambert, based on the novel Brainwash by John Wainwright; typed script; dated 1987 January 1987; correspondence No name, date or other affiliation attached to the script, aside from its circa 1980- Alliance Entertainment Corporation 1999 cover; typed script 1993

research file

1999-001-05.0142.82

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay

1999-001-05.0142.83

textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

1999-001-05.0142.84

A

N

research file

EVERLASTING

1999-001-05.0142.85

textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay

EYE OF THE SPIDER

1999-001-05.0142.86

textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay

FAITH HEALER, The FAMOUS IQALUIT SLEEP DISORDER MURDER DEFENSE, The

1999-001-05.0142.87

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.88

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.89

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.90

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

Sleep Murder

2004

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

research file

research file

research file

1999-001-05.0142.91

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay

1999-001-05.0142.92

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

1999-001-05.0142.93

A

N

research file The First Season The Five Senses

1999-001-05.0142.94

A

N

1989

research file

1999-001-05.0142.95

A

N

1999

78

research file

Written by David Fraser as part of a 3Day Novel Writing Contest; typed 1989 novel, bound; dated 1989 Screenplay treatment written by Hugh Graham; typed treatment; dated FAT MAN, The 1991 September 24, 1991 FATTENING Written by Stephen Cole and Geoff FROGS FOR circa 1980- Pevere; typed script, bound; no date SNAKES 1999 attached Written by Frank Moore; typed script FERTILE for television film; dated July 27, 1993; DILEMMA, A 1993 first draft Written by Marquise Lepage, "avec la collaboration de Atom Egoyan"; typed script and treatment in French; dated February 1991; scripts split into two FILM D'UNE VIE, folders under the same catalogue Le 1991 number Written by George F. Walker; typed script; correspondence; correspondence dated December 5, FILTHY RICH 1991 1991 Written by Sharon Buckingham; typed circa 1980script, bound; dated July 8, 1988; FIRST RUN 1999 second draft; correspondence Written by Victor Nicolle; typed script; FIRST SEASON, dated July 15, 1988; first draft; The 1988 correspondence Written by Jeremy Podeswa; typed script; dated March 26, 1997; second FIVE SENSES, The 1997 draft Written by Mark Steinberg; typed script; dated January 1997

1999-001-05.0142.96

A

N

research file

FLEA BATH

1997

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
script / screenplay

file title

date made

Description
Written by David Masiel; typed script; dated 1996; notes on front cover Written by Munro Ferguson and Eo Sharp; two typed scripts, bound; full title: THE FOOD INSPECTOR (A comedy of bad manners); dated July 1, 1993; correspondence Written by Mary Margaret Hoogasian; typed script; dated March 20, 1995; correspondence Written by Roger Evan Larry; typed television treatment, bound; relates to 1999-001-05.0142.40; date from related file: 1991 Written by Scott Frost and Miguel Tejada-Flores; typed script, notes and cover sheet, faxed; date attached October 31, 1991; correspondence Written by Carter Blanchard & Joshua Stern; script typed; dated June 5, 1995 Written by David Himmelstein, with revisions by Mark Montgomery; typed script; dated February 24, 1995

1999-001-05.0142.97

A

N

research file

FOG HARBOR

1996

1999-001-05.0142.98

textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.99

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

FOOD INSPECTOR, The FOREVER ONE DAY

1993

research file

1995

1999-001-05.0142.100

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay

FORMULAE

circa 1991

1999-001-05.0142.101

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.102

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.103

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.104

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.105

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

FREE FALL FRIGID & IMPOTENT GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, The GETTING UP AGAIN

1991

research file

1995

research file

1995

research file

research file

1999-001-05.0142.106

textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.107

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

Written by Toby Zeldin; typed script; dated June 29, 1987; first draft Written by Mark Krebs; typed script, outline and treatment; dated May, GOLEM, The 1991 1991 No author, date or affiliation attached GOODBYE CRUEL to this script; typed script; full title: WORLD OR GOODBYE CRUEL WORLD or WHIMPER WHIMPER OR circa 1980- or LAST NIGHT (I didn't get to sleep at LAST NIGHT 1999 all) 1987 circa 1980- Written by John Penney and Daryl 1999 Haney; typed script; no date attributed Written by Peg Forbes; typed story, outline and resume; dated May 4 1996; full title: THE GREAT TAXIPHOTE GREAT MYSTERY or "Our Man in Egypt"; TAXIPHOTE magazine clippings; yellow duo tang MYSTERY, The 1996 folder GUILT BY Written by Alan Aylward; typed script, OMISSION (A bound; dated August 1988; final script PSYCHOLOGICAL revision; typed synopsis; THRILLER) 1988 correspondence GRAVE AFFAIR circa 1980- Written by Alan DiFiore; typed script; 1999 no date attached Written by Eric Tipton and Sasha Gelbart; typed script; dated April 5 1996 1996

research file

1999-001-05.0142.108

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay

1999-001-05.0142.109

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

1999-001-05.0142.110

A

N

research file

GUY IN THE SKY

1999-001-05.0142.111

A

N

research file

HALFBACK

1999-001-05.0142.112

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay

1999-001-05.0142.113

textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay

1999-001-05.0142.114

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.115

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.116

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

Hard Core Logo

1996

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

79

research file

HAMLET'S ROOM (A SHAKESPEAREAN circa 1980- Written by Neil Munro; typed script; ACCOMODATION) 1999 no date attached Written by Sharon Cavanagh; typed script; handwritten correspondence; correspondence dated January 25 HANDSOME NED 1991 1991; Atom Egoyan's boarding pass Written by Noel S. Baker; typed scripts; first script dated December 15, 1994; first draft; second script dated July 27, 1995; two scripts split into two folders under the same catalogue HARD CORE LOGO 1994-1995 number Written by Doug Hughes; typed script; HARD OF dated November 22, 1992; HEARING 1992 correspondence circa 1980- Written by Death Waits; typed script; 1999 no date attached

research file

HARSH

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

1999-001-05.0142.117

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.118

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.119

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.120

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.121

A

N

research file

Description Written by Jacqueline Samuda; typed HEAVEN AND script, bound; dated August 14, 1989; EARTH 1989 written correspondence Written by Irene Dische; typed script; circa 1980- no date attached; Cannes booklet; HER JEWESS 1999 photocopied image insert Written by Rodrigo Dorfman and Ariel HIDE AND SEEK, A Dorfman; typed script; dated SHORT FILM 1995 September 1995; first draft Written by Rudy Thauberger; typed script; correspondence; HISTORY LESSONS 1989 correspondence dated April 10, 1989 Written by Martin Lavut & Jaron Summers, and Barry Healy; typed HOLLYWOOD 1986 script; dated August 25, 1986
Written by Benjamin Ratner; typed script, bound; correspondence; correspondence dated January 24, 1991 Written by Stephen J. Rivele and Christopher Wilkinson; typed script; dated April 25, 1997; fourth draft; correspondence Written by Christopher Canaan, based on the short story by Dashiell Hammett; typed script; dated April 21, 1995; correspondence Written by David Gustav Fraser; typed script; dated July 1, 1996; first draft Written by Morgan Fisher; typed script; dated 1993; hand written correspondence Treatment and proposal written by Mitchell Loch; typed; dated September 23, 1992 Written by David Wellington; typed script; dated February 18, 1992; final draft

file title

date made

1999-001-05.0142.122

textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay

HOTEL HELIUM

1991

1999-001-05.0142.123

textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay

HOUDINI

1997

1999-001-05.0142.124

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

HOUSE ON TURK STREET, The HOW TO EXECUTE A WILL

1995

1999-001-05.0142.125

A

N

research file

1996

1999-001-05.0142.126

A

N

research file

HUNTERS POINT

1993

1999-001-05.0142.127

A

N

research file

I SMELL A MAN! I LOVE A MAN IN UNIFORM

1992

1999-001-05.0142.128

A

N

research file

1992

1999-001-05.0142.129

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.130

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.131

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.132

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.133

A

N

research file

circa 1980- Written by Michael Maguire; typed 1999 script and proposal; no date attached Novel written by Dinitia Smith; typed novel; dated February 1997; ILLUSIONIST, The 1997 correspondence Written by Hugh Whitemore; typed IN A SUMMER script, bound; dated May 1995; revised SEASON 1995 draft Novel written by Ken Dryden; novel scanned, bound; dated August 8, 22, IN SCHOOL 1995 1995; correspondence Written by Jacqueline Swartz; typed script; correspondence; IN SHATILA 1993 correspondence dated April 27, 1993 IDIOT, The INTO THE EYE OF THE CANDLE Written by Bruce Bell; typed script; dated April 4, 1990; draft Written by Paul Shrader; typed script; dated May 8, 1987 Written by Howie Wiseman; script typed, bound; dated April 30, 1994; handwritten correspondence; typed resume; magazine scan

1999-001-05.0142.134

A

N

research file

1990

1999-001-05.0142.135

A

N

research file

INVESTIGATION

1987

1999-001-05.0142.136

textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay

IRON CURTAIN

1994

80

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Ted Allan: Minstrel Boy of the Twentieth Century

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

file title

date made

1999-001-05.0142.137

A

N

research file

JAZZ AGE, The

1995

Description Written by David Wellington; typed proposal; dated May 24, 1995; article scans
Written by Lori Lansens; typed script; dated January 1996; correspondence Written by Keith Opper; typed script; dated May 26, 1994; first draft Written by Matthew Stone, based on the novel by Gore Vidal; typed script; dated June 12, 1996; revised first draft Written by Ryan Murphy; typed script; dated February 14, 1997; first draft Written by John Byrum; typed script; dated April 6, 1995 Written by Margaret Hollingsworth; typed script; dated August 18, 1988; correspondence Synopsis written by Micha Shagrir; synopsis typed; correspondence; correspondence dated April 2, 1989 Written by Monte Vanton; typed story; correspondence; correspondence dated February 28, 1997; relates to 1999-001-05.0142.245

1999-001-05.0142.138

A

N

research file

JESUS FREAKS

1996

1999-001-05.0142.139

A

N

research file

JOE'S RULE

1994

1999-001-05.0142.140

A

N

research file

KALKI KEEPER OF THE FLAME

1996

1999-001-05.0142.141

A

N

research file

1997

1999-001-05.0142.142

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.143

A

N

research file

KILLER'S KISS LAST DEMISE OF ADRIAN WHITTAKER, The LAST DROP OF LAUGHTER, The

1995

1988

1999-001-05.0142.144

A

N

research file

1989

1999-001-05.0142.145

textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay

LAST TRIP OF THE "ASIA", The

1997

1999-001-05.0142.146

textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.147

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

2002

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

research file Liar Liar: Between Father and Daughter

LEAVE THEM LAUGHING, A FILM ABOUT TED ALLAN 1991 LEGENDARY HANK FORTUNE, circa 1980The 1999

Written by Merrily Weisbord; typed script; dated July 1991; first draft Written by Sharon Cavanagh; typed script; no date attached Written by N.J. (Nancy) Isaak; typed script; dated August 18, 1991; revised; correspondence Written by David Thomas; typed script; dated June 3, 1994 Written by Charles Kay Kassatly; typed script, bound; dated October 1996; first draft; correspondence Written by Amos Poe; typed script; dated May 1994; third draft Novel written by Peter Gadol; typed novel; dated 1996 Written by William Darrid; typed script; dated January 16, 1990

1999-001-05.0142.148

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1993

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

LIAR, LIAR LIBOR'S ANGSTTRUTH PREVAILS

1991

1999-001-05.0142.149

A

N

research file

1994

1999-001-05.0142.150

A

N

research file

LIE!, The

1996

1999-001-05.0142.151

A

N

research file

LISTENER, The

1994

1999-001-05.0142.152

A

N

research file

LONG RAIN, The LONG WAY HOME, The

1996

1999-001-05.0142.153

A

N

research file

1990

1999-001-05.0142.154

textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay

1999-001-05.0142.155

textual materials textual materials

A

N

Lost Souls

2000

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

1999-001-05.0142.156

A

N

research file

Written by James W. Nichol; typed outline and resume; correspondence; LOST IN FLORIDA 1993 dated January 6, 1993 Written by Pierce Gardner, story by Pierce Gardner & Betsy Stahl; typed script; dated May 16, 1997; second LOST SOULS 1997 draft; correspondence Written by Jonathan Gems, based on LOVE AMONG circa 1980the book by Wright Morris; typed THE CANNIBALS 1999 script; no date attached

81

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name

1999-001-05.0142.157

textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

file title date made Description LOVE POTION, A Written by Richard Paris; typed script; STORY OF dated December 1991; SENSUAL correspondence; notes by Atom INTRIGUE 1991 Egoyan
LOVE POTION NO. 9 Written by Richard Paris; typed script; dated October 1991; first draft Written by Ken Hixon, based on the books "Ordeal" and "Out of Bondage" by Linda Lovelace and Mike McGrady; typed script; dated May 20, 1997; first rewrite; correspondence Written by Harold Crooks; typed script, bound; dated May 1993; first draft; correspondence Written by Hrant Aliank; typed script, bound; dated 1988 Written by Hrant Alianak; typed script, bound; dated August 26, 1989; third draft

1999-001-05.0142.158

A

N

research file

1991

1999-001-05.0142.159

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.160

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.161

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.162

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.163

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

Lovelace

2013

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

LOVELACE LOVING STRANGERS

1997

research file

1993

research file

research file

LUCKY STRIKE MADNESS AND DEATH AKA FOUR GRIM MEN

1988

1989

research file The Man from Elysian Fields

MAGIC MAN FROM ELYSIAN FIELDS, The MAN WHO WENT HOME AGAIN, The

circa 1980- Written by Robert Schenkkan; typed 1999 script; no date attached Written by Philip Jayson Lasker; typed script; correspondence; correspondence dated August 20, 1997 Written by Charles Tidler; typed script; dated 1994; handwritten character list, faxed Written by Srinivas Krishna; typed script; no date attached Written by Rodrigo Dorfman and Ariel Dorfman, based on the novel by Ariel Dorfman; typed scripts; dated June 1996; two scripts split into two folders under the same catalogue number Written by Peter Mettler; typed outline, synopsis, and proposal; dated March 1990 Novel written by Lawrence Shainberg; novel scanned; correspondence; correspondence dated July 1997 Written by Margaret Hollingsworth, based on the novel by Jane Rule; typed script; dated July 1989; first draft Written by Douglas Cooper; typed script, bound; dated 1990; correspondence

1999-001-05.0142.164

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

2001

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

1997

1999-001-05.0142.165

A

N

research file

1994 circa 19801999

1999-001-05.0142.166

A

N

Masala

1991

research file

MASALA

1999-001-05.0142.167

textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.168

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

MASCARA MATING GAME, The

1996

research file

1990

1999-001-05.0142.169

textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay

MEMORIES OF AMNESIA

1997

1999-001-05.0142.170

textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

MEMORY BOARD MEYER AND THE MINOTAUR

1989

1999-001-05.0142.171

A

N

research file

1990

1999-001-05.0142.172

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.173

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.174

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

Tentatively created by David MayburyLewis; date estimated between 1980 and 1992, in relation to when the show MILLENNIUM, was created; no information attached TRIBAL WISDOM to the document, additional research AND THE circa 1980- was conducted; typed synopsis and MODERN WORLD 1992 outline, bound; program MIND FOR THE GAME, A circa 19801999 Written by Karen Stillman; typed script; no date attached; first draft Written by Jeri Craden; typed outline, bound; dated 1988; correspondence Written by Carol Lindsay Shore; typed script, bound; dated February 21, 1989; scanned books and images included; correspondence Written by Denise Robert and various others; full title: MONTRÉAL VU PAR... LES HIVERS SONT LONGS; typed proposal and ideas in French; typed outline, scenes and other ideas in French and English; outline dated April 26 1989; correspondence letters in French; film notes and correspondence letters split into two folders under the same catalogue number

research file

research file

MIRACLES

1988

1999-001-05.0142.175

textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay

MISS HELEN

1989

82
Atom Egoyan Archive

1999-001-05.0142.176

textual materials

A

N

Montréal vu par...

research file

script / screenplay

MONTRÉAL VU PAR...

1989

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
script / screenplay

file title

date made

Description
Written by Aaron J. Shuster; typed script; dated 1991; first draft Written by Albért Kodagolian, based on the novel by Shahé Mankerian; typed script; dated April 28, 1995; first draft; handwritten correspondence Written by David B. Parker; typed script, bound; dated 1997; second draft; correspondence; various faxes and scans Written by Paul Auster, Philip Haas and Belinda Haas; typed script; dated March 1996 Play written by Nicholas Wright; published play; correspondence; scanned newspaper articles Written by Dan Algrant; typed script; dated June 22, 1990; first draft; correspondence Written by Ann Marie Fleming; typed script and drawn storyboard, bound; dated October 1989; second draft; correspondence Written by Kim Goldberg; typed script; dated March 1994; handwritten, scanned character list Written by Anthony Tatossian; typed script with the last few pages hand written; handwritten correspondence; correspondence dates July 20, 1991

1999-001-05.0142.177

A

N

research file

MORE THAN RAIN

1991

1999-001-05.0142.178

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay

MOSES WEST

1995

1999-001-05.0142.179

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

Motel

1998

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

MOTEL

1997

1999-001-05.0142.180

A

N

research file

MR. VERTIGO

1996

1999-001-05.0142.181

A

N

Mrs. Klein Naked in New York

1995

research file

MRS. KLEIN NEW YORK PROJECT

1994

1999-001-05.0142.182

A

N

1993

research file

1990

1999-001-05.0142.183

textual materials textual materials

A

N

New Shoes

1993

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

NEW SHOES NO IMMEDIATE DANGER

1989

1999-001-05.0142.184

A

N

research file

1994

1999-001-05.0142.185

textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.186

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file The Notebook

script / screenplay script / screenplay

NONCOMFORMIS T, The

1991

2013

research file

NOTEBOOK, The

1999-001-05.0142.187

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

NOVEMBER

circa 1980- Novel written by Agota Kristof; novel 1999 pages scanned; no date attached Title on the actual document and in the correspondence: SOMETHING; written by Aaron J. Shuster; dated 1994 1994; correspondence Written by Hrant Alianak; typed treatment; dated 1989 Written by Ann Biderman; typed script; dated September 5, 1993 Written by Natalie Pawlenko; typed script; dated 1985; typed comments Written by Marcel Beaulieu, adapted from the novel by Luis Sepulveda; translated by Tomasin Whitaker and Alexandra Whitaker; typed script; dated October 11, 1995 Written by Paul Gross; typed script; dated June 1990 Written by Karen Croner, based on the novel by Anna Quindlen; typed script; dated January 7, 1996; second draft Written by Steven Zaillian, based on the book "A Civil Action" by Jonathan Harr; typed script; dated March 20, 1996; first draft Written by David Young; typed script, bound; dated 1993; second draft Created by Dan Halperin, David Wesley Wachs and Scott J. T. Frank; ideas and paintings printed, bound; correspondence; correspondence dated October 26, 1994

1999-001-05.0142.188

A

N

research file

NOWHERE

1989

1999-001-05.0142.189

A

N

research file

O'KEEFFE

1993

1999-001-05.0142.190

A

N

research file

OLD FRIENDS

1985

1999-001-05.0142.191

textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.192

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

OLD MAN WHO READ LOVE STORIES, The

1995

research file

OLD MEXICO, The

1990

1999-001-05.0142.193

textual materials

A

N

One True Thing

1998

research file

script / screenplay

ONE TRUE THING

1996

1999-001-05.0142.194

textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

ORPHANS & DOGS PAINT ME A PICTURE

1996

1999-001-05.0142.195

A

N

research file

1993

1999-001-05.0142.196

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive

83

research file

script / screenplay

PAINTED WORD, The

1994

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name

file title

date made

Description
Written by L.E. McCullough; typed short stories, bound; correspondence; correspondence dated October 5, 1992 Written by Thomas Lackey; typed script; dated November 1, 1990; typed budget costs and appraisal letter Written by Arial Dorfman and Rodrigo Dorfman; typed script; dated 1993 Written by Anthony Pedram; typed outline, proposal and script; "due date" for film: March 10, 1992; possible assignment for York University's film department Written by Ronald Bass; typed script; dated April 12 1993; third draft; correspondence

1999-001-05.0142.197

textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay

PALOOKAVILLE

1992

1999-001-05.0142.198

textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

PAPER CAMERA

1990

1999-001-05.0142.199

A

N

research file

PARADISE II

1993

1999-001-05.0142.200

textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.201

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file Passion of Mind

script / screenplay script / screenplay

PASSING IMAGES PASSION OF MIND

1992

2000

research file

1993

1999-001-05.0142.202

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.203

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.204

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.205

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.206

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

PENTHOUSE PERFECTION OF BEAUTY, The PERFECTLY NORMAL PHANTOM OF THE MALL PHANTOM SKATER, The

research file Perfectly Norman

1990

research file

research file

Written by Jacques Holender: original story, Hugh Graham: screenplay; three script drafts typed, bound; dated October 16th 1988, August 26 1988, July 18 1989; budgeting; three drafts split into three folders under the same 1988 catalogue number Written by Richard Paris; typed script; dated Mary 26, 1992; second draft; 1992 correspondence Written by Eugene Lipinski and Paul circa 1980- Quarrington; typed script, bound; no 1990 date attached Written by Scott J. Schneid and Tony Michelman; typed script; dated 1986 November 2, 1986 Written by Aaron Bushkowsky; typed script; dated 1995; handwritten notes Written by Brian Helgeland, based on the novel by David Brin and the screenplay by Eric Roth; typed script; dated March 11, 1994 Written by Deborah Serra; typed script; dated February 14, 1995; "Polish draft" Written by Kevin McMahon; typed script, bound; dated April 28, 1992; fourth draft Written by René-Daniel Dubois; typed script in French, bound; dated 1994; correspondence

research file

1995

1999-001-05.0142.207

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

The Postman

1997

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

POSTMAN, The

1994

1999-001-05.0142.208

A

N

research file

PRIMAL PRIMITIVES, A TRAGICOMEDY QUAND LA GUERRE SERA FINIE.... QUARANTINE USED TO MEAN 40 DAYS, NOW, 40 YEARS... QUILLS A GRAND GUIGNOL

1995

1999-001-05.0142.209

A

N

research file

1992

1999-001-05.0142.210

A

N

research file

1994

1999-001-05.0142.211

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

1988

Novel written by Byron Ayanoglu; typed novel, bound; dated 1988

1999-001-05.0142.212

A

N

Quills

2000

research file

1999-001-05.0142.213

A

N

RPM

1998

research file

R.P.M.

1999-001-05.0142.214

A

N

research file

RECOUNT, The

Written by Doug Wright; typed script; dated January 10, 1996 Written by J.P. Gardner & Roger circa 1980- Roberts Avary; typed script; no date 1999 attached Written by David Fraser; typed script, bound; correspondence; 1992 correspondence dated January 1 1992 1996 Written by Don McKellar and François Girard; typed script with printed images; dated October 1995; third draft Written by Greg Klymkiw; typed script; dated 1994

1999-001-05.0142.215

textual materials textual materials

A

N

The Red Violin

1998

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

RED VIOLIN, The

1995

1999-001-05.0142.216

A

N

research file

REEL LOVE

1994

84

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

file title

date made

Description
Written by Gavin Scott; typed script, bound; dated July 1990; third draft

1999-001-05.0142.217

A

N

research file

REGIME

1990

1999-001-05.0142.218

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.219

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.220

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.221

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.222

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.223

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.224

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

circa 1980- Written by Brooke Wolff; typed script; 1999 no date attached Novel written by John Burnham RESERVATION Schwartz; typed novel; dated August ROAD 1997 23, 1997; correspondence Written by Phil Savath; typed script, bound; dated April 1, 1987; typed RICOCHET 1987 outline and notes Treatment written by Razmik Melkomyan; typed treatment with colour images; handwritten RIDICULOUS correspondence; correspondence DREAM OF MAN 1993 dated September 27, 1993 RENDEZVOUS Written by John Logan; typed script; dated March 11, 1997; correspondence Written by James Powers; typed script; dated April 9, 1994; second draft Written by Henry Griffin; typed script; dated January 14, 1997; revised draft Written by Daniel Maclvor, Daniel Brooks, Nadia Ross and Death Waits; typed proposal ,outline and budget plan; dated February 14, 1992; correspondence Written by Gregory Poirier, based on the novel by John Grisham; typed script; dated June 16, 1997; correspondence Written by Marilyn Levy; typed script; dated February 23, 1995; revised Written by Joe Eszterhas; typed script; dated January 1992; correspondence Written by Armen Kazazian; typed script; dated December 2nd, 1994; third draft

RKO 281

1999

research file

RKO 281

1997

research file

ROCK OF AGES ROCK SCISSORS PAPER

1994

research file

1997

1999-001-05.0142.225

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay

ROOSTER

1992

1999-001-05.0142.226

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

RUNAWAY JURY, The

1997

1999-001-05.0142.227

A

N

research file

SABINA

1995

1999-001-05.0142.228

A

N

research file

SACRED COWS

1992

1999-001-05.0142.229

A

N

research file

SCARS

1994

1999-001-05.0142.230

A

N

research file

SCORCHED EARTH

circa 1980- Written by Rand Ravich; typed script; 1999 no date attached Written by David Fraser, typed script, dated 1989 Written by Rafael Yglesias, based on the novel by Donna Tartt; dated April 9, 1997; first draft; correspondence

1999-001-05.0142.231

A

N

research file

SCOTFREE

1989

1999-001-05.0142.232

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.233

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.234

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.235

A

N

research file

SECRET HISTORY, The 1997 SELF-PORTRAITS OF SOMEONE circa 1980- Written by Death Waits; typed script; ELSE 1999 no date attached; third draft Written by Blake Brooker and Jim Millan; typed script; dated August 16 SERPENT KILLS 1992 1992 SESSIONS, AN EPISODE OF SILK Written by Paul Chaderjian; typed STALKINGS 1993 script, bound; dated March 1993

1999-001-05.0142.236

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay

SEVERED, THE TRUE STORY....

1996

Written by Laurie McQuillan, based on the book by John Gilmore; typed script; dated December 5 1996; correspondence; original novel; script and novel are split into two folders under the same catalogue number

85

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
script / screenplay

file title

date made

1999-001-05.0142.237

A

N

research file

SHOCK!

1997

Description Written by Guy Hibbert; typed script; second draft; correspondence; correspondence dated June 2 1997
Typed proposal; no writer information attached; dated 1988; correspondence; names attached to the project: Michel Oullette, Panuksmi Hardjowirogo Written by Arto Paragamian; typed script with notes, budget plan, outline, curriculum vitae and images, bound; dated 1990 Written by G.N.W. Gransden; typed script; dated 1994; handwritten letters Written by Jeremy Podeswa; typed outline, bound; proposal Play written by David Hare; play scanned; correspondence; correspondence dated February 7, 1997 Written by Lisa Katzman; typed script; dated 1993; typed proposed cast; handwritten correspondence Written by David Churchill; typed script; no date attached Written by Monte Vanton; typed story, bound; relates to 1999-001-05.0142.145 LAST TRIP OF THE "ASIA", The; date relates to date attached to LAST TRIP OF THE "ASIA", The

1999-001-05.0142.238

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay

SHORT LENGTH VIDEO SERIES

1988

1999-001-05.0142.239

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

SHORTCOMINGS SIP OF LEMON VODKA, A

1990

1999-001-05.0142.240

A

N

research file

1994

1999-001-05.0142.241

A

N

research file

SKY SHRINKS, The

1986

1999-001-05.0142.242

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

Skylight

2014

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

SKYLIGHT

1997

1999-001-05.0142.243

A

N

research file

SLAP, The SLEEPING DOG, The

1993 circa 19801999

1999-001-05.0142.244

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.245

textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.246

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

SMALL BOY IN WALES, A

1997

research file

SO HUMAN

1999-001-05.0142.247

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

SO MUCH HAS HAPPENED

circa 1980- Written by Ronen Itzhaki; typed script; 1999 no date attached Written by Avi Zev Weider; typed script; dated 1995; correspondence; two scripts split into two folders under 1995 the same catalogue number Written by Jim Millan; script typed; dated Fall 1987; handwritten notes Written by L.E. McCullough; typed script, bound; dated 1992; typed synopsis Written by Daniel C. Melnick; typed script; no date attached Written by William McCranor Henderson; typed script; no date attached

1999-001-05.0142.248

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.249

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.250

A

N

research file

SOUTH OF HEAVEN 1987 SPLENDID VOYAGE OF KITTY DOYLE, The 1992 SPRING 1915: AND THE WORLD Circa 1980KEPT SILENT 1999 STARK RAVING ELVIS STOMPING GROUND STRANGE NEW WORLD circa 19801999

1999-001-05.0142.251

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.252

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.253

A

N

research file

circa 1980Written by Denis Hamill and John 1999 Hamill; typed script; no date attached Written by Becky Johnston; typed script; dated May 22, 1992; first draft; 1992 correspondence circa 19801999 Written by Dennis E. Bolen; typed script; no date attached Written by Brent Forrester; typed script on multicoloured paper; dated 1995 March 14, 1995; revised second draft Written by Piers Handling; typed circa 1980- script; no date attached; handwritten 1999 notes

1999-001-05.0142.254

A

N

research file

STUPID CRIMES

1999-001-05.0142.255

A

N

The Stupids

1996

research file

STUPIDS, The SUMMER INTERLUDE

1999-001-05.0142.256

A

N

research file

86

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
script / screenplay

1999-001-05.0142.257

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.258

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.259

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.260

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.261

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

research file

Description Written by L.E. McCullough; typed script, bound; dated 1992; typed SWEET CAROUSEL 1992 synopsis Written by John Krizanc, based on the play by John Krizanc and Richard Rose; typed script with colour images, circa 1980bound; no date attached; TAMARA 1999 correspondence Written by Patrick Smith Kelly, based on the novel by David Martin; typed TAP TAP 1996 script; dated February 26 1996; draft
Author name indecipherable; typed script; dated October 27 1992; draft Written by David Gustaf Fraser; typed Circa 1980- script and images, bound; no date TESLA ELECTRIC 1999 attached Original text written by Antonin Artaud; book pages scanned; no THEATRE AND ITS circa 1980- correspondence, date, or any other DOUBLE, The 1999 form of identification present TEARS OF JOY 1992 THEY CAME circa 1980- Novel written by Byron Ayanoglu; FROM THE NORTH 1999 typed novel, bound; no date attached Written by John Frizzell; typed script; dated December 14, 1989 Written by Aaron J. Shuster; typed scripts; first script dated 1993, final draft; second script dated July 22, 1997, final draft; correspondence; two THROUGH THE scripts split into two folders under the SKIN 1993 same catalogue number Written by Muriel Teodori and Jacques circa 1980- Kebadian; typed script, bound; no date TOMORROW 1999 attached Written by Alexandra Seros, based on the novel by Austin Wright; typed TONY AND SUSAN 1995 script; dated February 7, 1995 Written by Peter Mettler; typed scripts, two bound and one paper clipped; dated December 15, 1985, March 1985, and February, 1987; three scripts have been split into three TOP OF HIS folders under the same catalogue HEAD, The 1987 number THREE DAYS MAX 1989 circa 1980- Written by Don Owen; typed script; no 1999 date attached Written by Jim Garrard; typed script; dated August 1992; draft Written by William Marshall, Peter Jobin and Richard Beattie, based on the novel by Richard B. Wright; typed script, bound; dated February 6, 1992 Written by G. Allen Hatcher and Damian Hatcher; typed script, bound; dated January 14, 1996; correspondence; newspaper Written by James W. Nichol; typed script, bound; dated September 1988; correspondence

file title

date made

research file

research file

1999-001-05.0142.262

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

1999-001-05.0142.263

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.264

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.265

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.266

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.267

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

research file

research file

1999-001-05.0142.268

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.269

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.270

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

The Top of His Head

1989

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

research file

TORMENT

research file

TOUCH MY LIPS

1992

1999-001-05.0142.271

textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay

TOURISTS TSANTSA HEAD HUNTING IN THE 90'S

1992

1999-001-05.0142.272

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

1996

1999-001-05.0142.273

A

N

research file

TURNING APRIL

1988 circa 19801999

1999-001-05.0142.274

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.275

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.276

A

N

87

research file

Written by Stephen Storer; typed script; no date attached Written by Mark Montgomery and John Montgomery; typed script; dated UNDERTOW 1992 January 13, 1992; second draft No identifiable information attached Circa 1980to this document; typed script in [unknown title] 1999 French TUSCALOOSA

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
script / screenplay

1999-001-05.0142.277

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.278

textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

1999-001-05.0142.279

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0142.280

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.281

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.282

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.283

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.284

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file Waiting for Michelangelo

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

Description Written by Peter Hinton and Jim circa 1980- Millan; typed script and outline; no URBAN VOODOO 1999 date attached Novel written by Martin Booth; novel scanned; correspondence; VERY PRIVATE correspondence dated September 15, GENTLEMAN, A 1997 1997 Written by Alexandra Gill; typed script; dated July 1990; handwritten VIOLIN LADY, The 1990 note Novel written by Marilyn Bowering; typed novel; correspondence; correspondence dated August 5 1997; novel split up into two folders under VISIBLE WORLDS 1997 the same catalogue number
Written by Margrit Ritzmann and Curt Truninger; typed script; dated 1993 Written by Walter Newman, based on WAITING FOR circa 1980the novel by J.M. Coetzee; typed THE BARBARIANS 1999 script, bound; no date attached Written by Doyle Avant; typed script, WATCHING bound; dated September 8, 1992; 2rd KRISTINE WASH 1992 draft polish; correspondence Written by Donna Lypchuk; typed script, bound; dated March 4, 1992; WEST OF LUNCH 1992 written notes 1993 Written by Paul Quarrington; typed scripts; second draft dated April 3 1991; correspondence; correspondence dated December 18 1990; two scripts split into two folders 1990-1991 under the same catalogue number Written by Patricia Rozema; typed script; dated March 27, 1993 Written by Amy Holden Jones; two scripts; dated February 17, 1994, and February 28, 1995; two scripts split into two folders under the same catalogue number Written by E. Max Frye; typed script; dated 1/8/96; revised Written by Hugh Graham; typed script, bound; dated December 3 1995 Written by Donna Dottley Powers and Wayne Powers, based on the novel by Gloria Murphy; typed script; dated June 27, 1994; handwritten outline Written by Dennis Potter, based on the novel "Cara Massamina" by John MacDowell; typed script; dated November 1993 Written by Patricia B. Rozema; typed script, bound; dated January 1989; typed proposal Written by Christopher Kearney; typed script; dated December 1995; first draft revised WAITING FOR MICHELANGELO

file title

date made

1996

research file

research file

research file

research file

1999-001-05.0142.285

textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.286

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

Whale Music When Night is Falling

1994

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

WHALE MUSIC WHEN NIGHT IS FALLING

1995

research file

1993

1999-001-05.0142.287

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.288

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.289

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file Where the Money Is

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

WHEN SHE WAS GOOD WHERE THE MONEY IS WHERE THE SUN DON'T SHINE

1994

2000

research file

1996

research file

1995

1999-001-05.0142.290

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay

WHISPER IN THE ATTIC, A

1994

1999-001-05.0142.291

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

WHITE CLOUDS WHITE ROOM, The WHITE STONE DAYS

1993

1999-001-05.0142.292

A

N

White Room

1990

research file

1989

1999-001-05.0142.293

A

N

research file

1995

1999-001-05.0142.294

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.295

A

N

1999-001-05.0142.296

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

Written by Judith Thompson, based on the novel by Susan Swan; typed scripts, bound; first draft dated April 29 1994, second script dated January 22 1997; handwritten correspondence; two scripts and correspondence split WIVES OF BATH, into two folders under the same The 1994-1997 catalogue number WORLD OF HARMS, A Written by Mark A. Klein; typed script; dated April, 1994 Written by Rand Ravich; two typed scripts; date received: May 16 1997; correspondence

88

research file

1994

research file

WRATH

1997

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
script / screenplay

file title

date made
circa 19801999

Description
Written by David Rotenberg; typed script; no date attached

1999-001-05.0142.297

A

N

research file

YYZ

1999-001-05.0142.298

textual materials

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0143

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

Written by Cynthia Cidre, based on the novel by Joseph Finder; typed script; ZERO HOUR, The 1997 dated April 3, 1997; correspondence Hand written in bound notebook; treatment and sketches for Next of textual records Next of Kin, circa 1984Kin; with notations titled Special and research files Special Delivery 1985 Delivery script / screenplay textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files script / screenplay script / screenplay textual records and research files textual records and research files 2x copies of typed synopsis with budget, for grant application?

1999-001-05.0144

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

Dependents

1982

1999-001-05.0145

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

Next of Kin

1983

Original typed treatment in dialogue

1999-001-05.0146

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

Next of Kin

1983

Copy of typed treatment in dialogue Hand written outline dated Christmas 1983/84 Original typed script dated 1984; with undated typed treatment

1999-001-05.0147

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

Next of Kin

1983-1984

1999-001-05.0148

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

Next of Kin

1984

1999-001-05.0149

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

Next of Kin

1984

Copy of typed script dated 1984 Marked continuity script, with sound transfer reports

1999-001-05.0150

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

Next of Kin

1984 circa 19841985

1999-001-05.0151

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

1999-001-05.0152

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

1999-001-05.0153

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

Hand written scene by scene breakdown on 40 index cards Various segments, character notes and to-do lists, hand written in bound textual records circa 1984notebook; notes on EFX XFERS and research files [Next of Kin] 1985 enclosed Hand written script found on verso of script / Reminders [Next typed script titled Reminders dated screenplay of Kin] 1983 1983, with clipping and other notes Next of Kin textual records and research files

1999-001-05.0154

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

[Art for cover]

1982

Dependents

1999-001-05.0155

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N Includes legal debacle

Next of Kin

1985

research file

textual records and research files

Casting

circa 19841985

Casting lists; correspondence

1999-001-05.0156

A

P

Next of Kin

1985

research file

textual records Contracts, other and research files legal stuff 1984-1992 textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

Screenings, broadcasts, licensing A series of logs with daily information provided

1999-001-05.0157

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

Daily log

1984

1999-001-05.0158

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

Distribution - 1

1999-001-05.0159

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

Distribution - 2

circa 1987- Distribution reports; correspondence 1993 letters Programs; curation; correspondence; circa 1984- schedules; clippings with John Paizs' 1989 "Crime Wave" circa 19841991 Clippings; correspondence; budget analyses

1999-001-05.0160

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

Distribution - 3

89

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
textual records and research files textual records and research files

file title

date made
circa 19891995

Description

1999-001-05.0161

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

Distribution - 4 Donations and gifts

Correspondence letters and faxes

1999-001-05.0162

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

1986

Invoices; receipts; correspondence

1999-001-05.0163

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

textual records Festivals, awards and research files -1 1984-1988

Correspondence; programs

1999-001-05.0164

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

1999-001-05.0165

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

textual records Festivals, awards Programs; clippings; correspondence; and research files -2 1984-1985 all pertaining to the 1985 Genie Awards Media releases; newspaper articles; textual records Festivals, awards promotional material; tour schedule; and research files -3 1986 programs

1999-001-05.0166

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

textual records Festivals, awards circa 1985and research files -4 1990 textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files Financing, insurance, etc. Grant Applications

Programs; clippings; schedules; handouts Grant applications, budget, permits, releases Applications, typed summaries ; correspondence Insurance policies; faxes; correspondence

1999-001-05.0167

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

1984

1999-001-05.0168

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

1983 circa 19861987

1999-001-05.0169

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

Insurance

1999-001-05.0170

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

Mixing Sheets

circa 19841985 Paperwork found with film materials

1999-001-05.0171

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

Press

1984-1985

Article and review clippings Archival material found with Media and press clippings Various promotional material hand outs and clippings

1999-001-05.0172

A

N

Next of Kin

1985

research file

Press clippings

1984-1986

1999-001-05.0173

A

N

Next of Kin Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing

1985

research file

Publicity

1984-1985

1999-001-05.0174

A

N

1987

research file

textual records The Lost circa 1986and research files Kingdom of Ted 1987 script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

Hand written on foolscap pad

1999-001-05.0175

A

N

1987

research file

Crash Course

1985 circa 19861987

Typed script dated 1985

1999-001-05.0176

A

N

1987

research file

Family Viewing

Hand written script on foolscap pad Hand written script on foolscap pad dated October 1985 Original typed script dated October 1985 Typed script, First Draft, dated 1985, cerlox bound Typed script dated 1985 with annotations by Allen Bell dated February 1986

1999-001-05.0177

A

N

1987

research file

Family Viewing

1985

1999-001-05.0178

A

N

1987

research file

Family Viewing

1985

1999-001-05.0179

A

N

1987

research file

Family Viewing

1985

1999-001-05.0180

A

N

1987

research file

Family Viewing

1985-1986

90

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

file title

date made

Description
Hand written script on foolscap pad, dated February 1986 Second Draft, typed script dated March 1986 Second Draft typed script dated 1986, with Allen Bell notations Second Draft dated 1986, typed script with Atom Egoyan notations Handwritten script on foolscap pad, dated May 1986

1999-001-05.0181

A

N

1987

research file

Family Viewing

1986

1999-001-05.0182

A

N

1987

research file

Family Viewing

1986

1999-001-05.0183

A

N

1987

research file

Family Viewing

1986

1999-001-05.0184

A

N

1987

research file

Family Viewing

1986

1999-001-05.0185

A

N

1987

research file

Family Viewing

1986

1999-001-05.0186

A

N

1987

research file

textual records circa 1986and research files Family Viewing 1987 textual records circa 1986and research files Family Viewing 1987 textual records and research files Family Viewing

Typed synopsis

1999-001-05.0187

A

N

1987

research file

Handwritten edit notes in steno pad Hand written notes and story board drawings in bound notebook Binder containing annotated script, frame sketches

1999-001-05.0188

A

N

1987

research file

1986

1999-001-05.0189

A

N

1987

research file

textual records circa 1986and research files Family Viewing 1987 textual records and research files textual records and research files

1999-001-05.0190

A

N

1987

research file

Accounting

1985-1986

Budgets; planning; correspondence

1999-001-05.0191

A

N

1987

research file

Call sheet

circa 1987

Day 15

1999-001-05.0192

A

N

1987

research file

textual records Cash reports / art and research files department textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files Cash reports / cash receipts Cash reports / catering Cash reports / crew Cash reports / misc.

1986

Receipts; invoices

1999-001-05.0193

A

N

1987

research file

1986

Checks; payment history

1999-001-05.0194

A

N

1987

research file

1986

Checks; receipts

1999-001-05.0195

A

N

1987

research file

1986

1999-001-05.0196

A

N

1987

research file

1986

Completed reports Locations, office expenses, equipment, rentals, grip, transportation, etc.

1999-001-05.0197

A

N

1987

research file

1999-001-05.0198

A

N

1987

research file

textual records Cash reports / and research files petty cash reports Cash reports / textual records post production and research files and lab costs textual records and research files textual records and research files Cash reports / promotion

1986

Receipts; petty cash reports

1986

Invoices

1999-001-05.0199

A

N

1987

research file

1986

Invoices Performance contracts; remittance statements

1999-001-05.0200

A

N

1987

research file

Casting

1986

91

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name

file title

date made

1999-001-05.0201

textual materials

A

N

Family Viewing

1987

research file

textual records and research files

Continuity binder -1

1986

1999-001-05.0202

textual materials

A

N

Family Viewing

1987

research file

textual records and research files

Continuity binder -2

1986

1999-001-05.0203

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing

1987

research file

textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

Continuity binder -3 [Continuity marked script] Contracts, agreements, invoices

1986

1999-001-05.0204

A

N

1987

research file

1986

Description With marked script, daily logs, slate and scene reports, production information in scene order; removed from binder With marked script, daily logs, slate and scene reports, production information in scene order; removed from binder With marked script, daily logs, slate and scene reports, production information in scene order; removed from binder Titled "Sex. Death. Freedom. A World of Trivial Pursuits."; Family Viewing title on second page
Various forms of contracts, invoices, and insurance Crew info sheets; checks; invoices; receipts; contracts

1999-001-05.0205

A

N

1987

research file

1986

1999-001-05.0206

A

N

1987

research file

Crew

1986

1999-001-05.0207

A

N

1987

research file

textual records Daily Production and research files Reports textual records and research files textual records and research files

1986

Fifteen files in total

1999-001-05.0208

A

N

1987

research file

Equipment Grant applications

1986

Invoices

1999-001-05.0209

A

N

1987

research file

1985-1986

Correspondence; applications

1999-001-05.0210

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0211

A

N

1999-001-05.0212

A

N

1999-001-05.0213

A

N

1999-001-05.0214

A

N

1999-001-05.0215

A

N

1999-001-05.0216

A

N

1999-001-05.0217

A

N

1999-001-05.0218

A

N

1999-001-05.0219

A

N

1999-001-05.0220

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts

1987

research file

textual records and research files

Locations

1986

Permits; correspondence; notes

1987

research file

textual records and research files Mixing cue sheets textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

1986

Paperwork found with film materials Contracts; music business book; applications Guidelines; news releases; agreements

1987

research file

Music

1986

1987

research file

OFDC

1986

1987

research file

Press Production papers

1986-1988

1987

research file

circa 1987

Clippings; scans; flyers Tax exemption certificates; order forms; directories; outline titled "Nature Show"; no date attached Posters; programming; releases in multiple languages Untitled; hand written in bound notebook Annotated script, mounted photographs, hand written notes; in albums 8.5 x 14 inches Hand written script in bound notebook; also inside title I Can't Quit You Outline Draft, unbound; inscribed: August 1987 Victoria

1987

research file

Publicity

1987-1988

1989

research file

textual records and research files [Speaking Parts] circa 1989 textual records and research files script / screenplay script / screenplay

1989

research file

1989

research file

Speaking Parts A Bed of Wild Roses / Speaking Parts

1987

1987

1989

research file

Mad For You

1987

92

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

file title

date made

Description
Outline Draft, coil-bound; inscribed: August 1987 Victoria Outline Draft, inscribed: August 1987 Victoria

1999-001-05.0221

A

N

1989

research file

Mad For You

1987

1999-001-05.0222

A

N

1989

research file

Mad For You

1987

1999-001-05.0223

A

N

1989

research file

I Can't Quit You

1988

Treatment Draft Treatment Draft, coil bound; Copy No. 1

1999-001-05.0224

A

N

1989

research file

I Can't Quit You

1988

1999-001-05.0225

A

N

1989

research file

Speaking Parts

1988

First Draft, original typewritten First Draft with notations by Allen Bell, Script Editor; coil bound First Draft with notations and rewrites by Atom Egoyan; reduced copy in 8.5 x 11 sketch pad First Draft with character Lisa notations, plastic bound

1999-001-05.0226

A

N

1989

research file

Speaking Parts

1988

1999-001-05.0227

A

N

1989

research file

Speaking Parts

1988

1999-001-05.0228

A

N

1989

research file

Speaking Parts

1988

1999-001-05.0229

A

N

1989

research file

Speaking Parts

1988

Second Draft Second Draft with notations by Allen Bell Director's Shooting script, with notes, sketches, photos, blocking; bound 8.5 x 14

1999-001-05.0230

A

N

1989

research file

Speaking Parts

1988

1999-001-05.0231

A

N

1989

research file

Speaking Parts Phil Donahue notebook

1988 circa 19881989

1999-001-05.0232

A

N

1989

research file

Notes from television talk show

1999-001-05.0233

A

N

1989

research file

Mad For You

1987

Handwritten script Report summaries; budget outlines; correspondence

1999-001-05.0234

A

N

1989

research file

Accounting

1989

1999-001-05.0235

A

N

1989

research file

ACTRA

1989

Contracts

1999-001-05.0236

A

N

1989

research file

Budget

1989

Budgets; expenses Day 1-23 November 14 to December 14 1988

1999-001-05.0237

A

N

1989

research file

1999-001-05.0238

A

N

1989

research file

1999-001-05.0239

A

N

1989

research file

Call sheets Camera & production reports Camera & production reports Camera lab reports

1989

1989

Day 1-14

1989

Day 15-23

1999-001-05.0240

A

N

1989

research file

1988-1989

Completed reports

93

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
textual records and research files textual records and research files

file title

date made

Description

1999-001-05.0241

A

N

1989

research file

Channel 4

1988-1991

1999-001-05.0242

A

N

1989

research file

Cinephile

Correspondence; cost reports Cineplex box office statements; sales agency agreements; correspondence; 1989-1991 distribution reports A copy of the final draft of Speaking Parts with notes and sketches

1999-001-05.0243

A

N

1989

research file

textual records Continuity lined and research files script textual records Continuity notes and research files 1 textual records Continuity notes and research files 2 textual records Continuity scene and research files order -1 textual records Continuity scene and research files order -2 textual records and research files

1988

1999-001-05.0244

A

N

1989

research file

1988

Filled out continuity forms

1999-001-05.0245

A

N

1989

research file

1988

Filled out continuity forms

1999-001-05.0246

A

N

1989

research file

1988

Script and forms with notes

1999-001-05.0247

A

N

1989

research file

1988

Script and forms with notes Script and contract, director, producer, music

1999-001-05.0248

A

N

1989

research file

Contract

1988

1999-001-05.0249

A

N

1989

research file

textual records [Correspondence, Cards, letters, postcards; appear to be and research files misc.] -1 1988-1990 director's files textual records Correspondence and research files 2 1988-1990 textual records Correspondence and research files 3 textual records Correspondence and research files 4 textual records Crew contracts + and research files pay - 1 textual records Crew contracts + and research files pay - 2 textual records and research files

1999-001-05.0250

A

N

1989

research file

Letters, cards, releases

1999-001-05.0251

A

N

1989

research file

1989

Letters, cards Letters; coin found amongst letters in donation

1999-001-05.0252

A

N

1989

research file

1989

1999-001-05.0253

A

N

1989

research file

1988

Letters; property permits; agreements

1999-001-05.0254

A

N

1989

research file

1988 circa 19881989

Agreements

1999-001-05.0255

A

N

1989

research file

Cue Sheets

1999-001-05.0256

A

N

1989

research file

textual records Daily production and research files reports textual records and research files

1988

filled out reports

1999-001-05.0257

A

N

1989

research file

Insurance

1989

Documents; correspondence

1999-001-05.0258

A

N

1989

research file

textual records and research files Insurance 1988-94 1988-1994 textual records and research files

Documents; correspondence

1999-001-05.0259

A

N

1989

research file

Lab reports

1988

Filled out reports

1999-001-05.0260

A

N

1989

research file

textual records and research files Location permits 1988-1989

Filled out permits; correspondence

94

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

file title

date made

Description

1999-001-05.0261

A

N

1989

research file

OFDC Original documents Petty cash reports / art department Petty cash reports / art department Petty cash reports / office, set & craft services Petty cash reports / out of pocket expenses Petty cash reports / wardrobe

1988-1991

Financing agreements;

1999-001-05.0262

A

N

1989

research file

1988

Cast lists; correspondence

1999-001-05.0263

A

N

1989

research file

1988

Filled out daily cash reports

1999-001-05.0264

A

N

1989

research file

1988

Filled out daily cash reports

1999-001-05.0265

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts

1989

research file

textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

1988

Filled out daily cash reports

1999-001-05.0266

A

N

1989

research file

1988

Filled out daily cash reports

1999-001-05.0267

A

N

1989

research file

1988

Filled out daily cash reports

1999-001-05.0268

A

N

1989

research file

Reactions

1988-1989

Letters, essays, interviews

1999-001-05.0269

A

N

1989

research file

textual records Slate & scene log and research files -1 textual records Slate & scene log and research files -2 textual records Slate & scene log and research files -3 textual records and research files

1988

Filled out daily edge coding log sheets

1999-001-05.0270

A

N

1989

research file

1988

Filled out daily shot forms Filled out daily edge coding log sheets; shipping forms Notes; filled out sound reports; mixing cue sheets; dialogue sheets Filled out daily sound reports and sound transfer sheets; purchase exemption certificates Annotated script; colour snapshots; storyboard-style sketches

1999-001-05.0271

A

N

1989

research file

1988

1999-001-05.0272

A

N

1989

research file

Sound reports

1988

1999-001-05.0273

A

N

1989

research file

textual records Sound reports, and research files transfer script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay Show and Tell / The Adjuster

1988 circa 19881990 circa 19881990 circa 19881990

1999-001-05.0274

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

1999-001-05.0275

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

Show and Tell

Handwritten in coil bound notepad

1999-001-05.0276

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

[Untitled] Some Scenes in a Forest

Handwritten script on lined notepad Handwritten in coilbound notepad; dated 10 December 1989 First Draft; typed script with annotations

1999-001-05.0277

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

1989 circa 19901991

1999-001-05.0278

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

Show and Tell

1999-001-05.0279

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

Show and Tell

1990

Original typed script; dated 1990

1999-001-05.0280

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

Show and Tell

1990

Original typed script

95

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay textual records and research files script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

file title

date made

Description

1999-001-05.0281

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

Show and Tell

1990

Typed script; coilbound Treatment in dialogue, coil bound; dated February 1 1990 Treatment in dialogue, possibly 2 copies; dated February 1 1990 Typed script with annotations by Atom Egoyan

1999-001-05.0282

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

Show and Tell

1990

1999-001-05.0283

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

1999-001-05.0284

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

Show and Tell Show and Tell/Relative Comfort

1990

1990

1999-001-05.0285

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

Show and Tell

1990

Final Draft; typed script Shooting Draft; original printout typed script

1999-001-05.0286

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

Show and Tell

1990 circa 19901991

1999-001-05.0287

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

[Untitled]

Typed script Possibly 2 copies of typed script with annotations dated 9 December 1991

1999-001-05.0288

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

[Untitled]

1991 circa 19901991

1999-001-05.0289

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

[Untitled]

1999-001-05.0290

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

Peter Wollen A Physical Education The Adjuster / Show and Tell

1999-001-05.0291

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

Handwritten in lined notepad; segments of script Hand written notes; heading reads: circa 1990- Peter Wollen technology film and 1991 architecture Hand written script with notes; with circa 1990hand written script in coilbound 1991 notebook Typed script with extensive annotations Typed script with annotations by Allen Bell

1999-001-05.0292

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

1990

1999-001-05.0293

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

The Adjuster

1990

1999-001-05.0294

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

[Untitled]

circa 1990- Typed script with annotations by Atom 1991 Egoyan circa 19901991

1999-001-05.0295

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

[Untitled]

Segment of typed script

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive

The Adjuster

1991

research file

Script

I Want You

Hand written script in bound oversized album

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0296

A

N

1999-001-05.0297

A

N

1999-001-05.0298

A

N

1999-001-05.0299

A

N

1999-001-05.0300

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

The Adjuster

1991

research file

textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

none

Potential cast and crew party; no file material, photos only

The Adjuster

1991

research file

Alliance

1990

Correspondence with Alliance

The Adjuster

1991

research file

The Adjuster

1991

research file

The Adjuster

1991

research file

The Adjuster

1991

96

research file

Budget / accounting Call sheets, textual records production and research files reports Camera report, textual records sound report, and research files wild sound - 1 Camera report, textual records sound report, and research files wild sound - 2

1990

Budget planning; notes One line schedule; filled out daily call sheets; program From binder; shot notes; filled out daily logs Negative reports; filled out camerasound lab reports; notes

1990

1990

1990

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
textual records and research files textual records and research files

file title

date made

Description
Performer contracts; riders; head shots and filmographies Correspondence; guidelines; citizenship forms Continuity script with markings; daily shooting and tape logs Complete cost reports; budget planning

1999-001-05.0301

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

Cast

1990

1999-001-05.0302

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

CAVCO / OFIP

1990-1991

1999-001-05.0303

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

textual records Continuity lined and research files script textual records and research files

1990

1999-001-05.0304

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

Cost reports

1990

1999-001-05.0305

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

textual records Credits, post and research files production, misc. 1990-1991 textual records and research files textual records and research files

Correspondence; guidelines

1999-001-05.0306

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

Crew list

1990

Crew lists; correspondence; resumes

1999-001-05.0307

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

Festivals

1991-1992

Correspondence

1999-001-05.0308

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

textual records and research files Festivals / Cannes textual records and research files Festivals / Moscow

1991

Correspondence

1999-001-05.0309

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

1991

Correspondence

1999-001-05.0310

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0311

A

N

1999-001-05.0312

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

The Adjuster

1991

research file

Presentation portfolio by Eureka illustrating locations; colour snapshots textual records circa 1990- mounted on mat board; panoramaand research files Location photos 1991 style; with textile container bag textual records and research files textual records and research files Memos; budgets; summaries; progress report;

The Adjuster

1991

research file

Locations

1990

The Adjuster

1991

research file

OFDC

1990-1991

Agreements; correspondence;

1999-001-05.0313

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0314

A

N

1999-001-05.0315

A

N

1999-001-05.0316

A

N

1999-001-05.0317

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

The Adjuster

1991

research file

textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

Publicity

1991

Synopsis; statements Dialogue changes; scene lists; statements 2 diskettes with French subtitling left in file; dialogue in French Correspondence; conditions; agreements

The Adjuster

1991

research file

Script-1

1990

The Adjuster

1991

research file

Script-2

1991

The Adjuster Montréal vu par...

1991

research file

Telefilm

1990-1991

1991

research file

Misc.

1991

1999-001-05.0318

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

Montréal vu par... Montréal vu par... Montréal vu par...

1991

research file

textual records and research files textual records and research files script / screenplay

[Production binder]

1991

Clippings, pictograms Script for "En Passant" portion of Montréal vu par; contacts; service sheets; documents vary between English and French

1999-001-05.0319

A

N

1991

research file

[Script]

1989

Drafts; pictograms; dialogue cues

1999-001-05.0320

A

N

1991

research file

[Script]

1989

Final draft Mar 1991

97

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name

file title

date made

1999-001-05.0321

textual materials

A

N

Montréal vu par...

1991

research file

textual records and research files

[Script]

1989

Description Handwritten in album; includes photographs, pictograms, annotated typed script pasted in; storyboardstyle sketches

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0322

A

N

A

N

1999-001-05.0323

A

N

1999-001-05.0324

A

N

1999-001-05.0325

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

research file Gross Misconduct

textual records and research files script / screenplay textual records and research files

1993

research file

Production script

1992

Script and credits

research file Gross Misconduct Gross Misconduct Gross Misconduct

Publicity

1993

research file

textual records and research files Publicity, media script / screenplay textual records and research files Script / Gross Misconduct Script / Gross Misconduct

1993

Articles; clippings; correspondence

1993

research file

1991

Second revision

1993

research file

1999-001-05.0326

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0327

A

N

1999-001-05.0328

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

Gross Misconduct Gross Misconduct Gross Misconduct

1993

research file

textual records Script / Spinner and research files Spencer textual records and research files textual records and research files

Complete 4th draft, with casting information Annotated typed script pasted in; Polaroid snapshots taped in; storyboard-style sketches; production circa 1992- documentation, call sheets attached at 1993 back 1992

1993

research file

Swiss prize -1

1993-1997

Article; magazines; correspondence

1993

research file

Swiss prize -2

1995

Correspondence Inscribed: Armenia 1992; handwritten journal with watercolour and oil pastel sketches; some sketch pages cut from album and inserted loose Handwritten in bound notebook; includes script Greener Pastures, marker drawings of architecture, AE's father and others; notes on Next of Kin Hand written script outline in black bound notebook Head shots; filmographies; correspondence; casting lists Correspondence relating to entry in Genie awards, misc.

1999-001-05.0329

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive

Calendar

1993

research file

textual records and research files [Creative journal]

1992

1999-001-05.0330

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0331

A

N

1999-001-05.0332

A

N

1999-001-05.0333

A

N

1999-001-05.0334

A

N

1999-001-05.0335

A

N

1999-001-05.0336

A

N

1999-001-05.0337

A

N

1999-001-05.0338

A

N

1999-001-05.0339

A

N

1999-001-05.0340

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

Calendar

1993

research file

textual records and research files Greener Pastures textual records and research files textual records and research files

1987 circa 19921993

Calendar

1993

research file

[Calendar]

Calendar

1993

research file

Actresses

1993

Calendar

1993

research file

textual records "The Armenian and research files Project" textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files Armenia / Zadoyan

1993

Calendar

1993

research file

1988-1992

Correspondence

Calendar

1993

research file

"Bible"

1992

Paperwork found with film materials

Calendar

1993

research file

Brokers

1992

Correspondence

Calendar

1993

research file

Calendar

1993

research file

Budget Contracts / textual records Armenia cast & and research files crew

1992

Budget and notes for production Correspondence in Armenian; article in Armenian

1992

Calendar

1993

98

research file

textual records and research files Contracts / music 1992-1993 Correspondence; invoices; agreements textual records and research files Production notes and agreements in German; correspondence in German

Calendar

1993

research file

Contracts / ZDF

1982-1993

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name

file title

date made

Description

1999-001-05.0341

A

N

Calendar

1993

research file

textual records Correspondence - circa 1992and research files 1 1993 textual records Correspondence and research files 2 1992-1993 textual records Correspondence and research files / ZDF 1992-1995 textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

Hand written letter

1999-001-05.0342

A

N

Calendar

1993

research file

Various letters

1999-001-05.0343

A

N

Calendar

1993

research file

Contracts; correspondence

1999-001-05.0344

A

N

Calendar

1993

research file

Credits, titles

1993

Drafts of head and tail credits

1999-001-05.0345

A

N

Calendar

1993

research file

CRTC

1992

Correspondence; applications

1999-001-05.0346

A

N

Calendar

1993

research file

Festivals

1992-1994

Correspondence Correspondence, brochures, catalogues Correspondence, brochures, catalogues Different insurance policies; correspondence

1999-001-05.0347

A

N

Calendar

1993

research file

textual records and research files Festivals / Berlin textual records and research files textual records and research files Festivals / San Francisco

1992

1999-001-05.0348

A

N

Calendar

1993

research file

1992-1993

1999-001-05.0349

A

N

Calendar

1993

research file

Insurance

1992-1994

1999-001-05.0350

A

N

Calendar

1993

research file

textual records and research files Mixing cue sheets circa 1992 textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay Production information

dialogue, music, FX

1999-001-05.0351

A

N

Calendar

1993

research file

1992

1999-001-05.0352

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

Exotica

1992

Correspondence Handwritten notes in steno pad; cover inscribed: Exotica First Sketches Paris T.O. Nov. 1992 Exotica babysitter conversation; handwritten notes in lined pad First Draft dated February 1992; original typed script

1999-001-05.0353

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

Exotica

1991

1999-001-05.0354

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

Trigger

1992

1999-001-05.0355

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

Trigger

1992

First Draft dated February 1992

1999-001-05.0356

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

Trigger

1992

First Draft dated February 1992

1999-001-05.0357

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

Trigger

1992

First Draft dated February 1992

1999-001-05.0358

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

Birds of Paradise circa 1990- Typed script on tractor-feed computer / Exotic Pets 1999 paper Birds of Paradise circa 1990- Typed script on tractor-feed computer / Exotic Pets 2000 paper Typed script, heavily annotated by Atom Egoyan, dated at end 22 March Exotica 1993 1993

1999-001-05.0359

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

1999-001-05.0360

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

99

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
script / screenplay script / screenplay

file title

date made

Description

1999-001-05.0361

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

Exotica

circa 1990- Typed script, heavily annotated with 2000 revisions by Atom Egoyan Copy Number 5: typed script, annotated by Atom Egoyan Revision Draft; typed script, coil bound; with annotations by Atom Egoyan; typed title Final Draft; hand written annotation on cover: Revision Draft First Draft with annotations by Atom Egoyan First Draft with annotations by Atom Egoyan; possibly two copies scrambled Shooting Draft original typed script dated 18 May 1993

1999-001-05.0362

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

Exotica

1993

1999-001-05.0363

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0364

A

N

1999-001-05.0365

A

N

1999-001-05.0366

A

N

1999-001-05.0367

A

N

1999-001-05.0368

A

N

1999-001-05.0369

A

N

1999-001-05.0370

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

Exotica

1994

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

Exotica

1993

Exotica

1994

research file

Exotica

1993

Exotica

1994

research file

Exotica

1993

Exotica

1994

research file

Exotica

1993

Exotica

1994

research file

Exotica

1993

Final Draft original typed script

Exotica

1994

research file

Exotica

1994

research file

Exotica [Archival textual records material found and research files with photos]

1993

Final Draft original typed script Source material, and hand written script section on notepad

1992-1994

Exotica

1994

research file

1999-001-05.0371

textual materials textual materials

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

1999-001-05.0372

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

textual records circa 1990- Annotated script, photos, production and research files Exotica [album] 1999 schedule attached at back Bank statements and cancelled textual records cheques (x10 Speaking Parts Ltd., O/A Exotica, 30 and research files files) 1993 September 1993 year end Bound cheques and receipts split into textual records Bank / third part three different boxes under the same and research files cheques 1/3-3/3 1993 catalogue number

1999-001-05.0373

textual materials

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

textual records and research files

Cast (x19 files)

1993

1999-001-05.0374

textual materials

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

textual records Crew / daily crew and research files non-union Crew / Directors textual records Guild of Canada and research files (x18 files)

1993

Alphabetically by individuals' names; payroll documentation Payroll documentation; split into three files in alphabetical order by name (1: A-F, 2: G-N, 3: O-Z) under the same catalogue number

1999-001-05.0375

textual materials

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

1993

1999-001-05.0376

textual materials

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

textual records and research files Crew / non-union

1993

1999-001-05.0377

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

Exotica

1994

research file

textual records and research files

Crew / payroll (x9 files)

1993

Alphabetically by individual's names Alphabetically by individual's names; 17 files under different titles with the same catalogue number; involves both union and non-union documents 9 files by individual's name : Irwin Figueira; Remi Hoz; Brent Kelly; Roscoe (Ross) Kerr; Joseph Micomonaco; Celeste Sansregret; Roland Schlimme; Sidney Sproule; Andres Vosu

1999-001-05.0378

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

textual records Expense reports and research files (x38 files) textual records and research files

1993

38 files in order alphabetically by individual's name

1999-001-05.0379

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

Extras

1993

17 files in alphabetical groupings 4 files; statements; correspondence; report costs; invoices

1999-001-05.0380

A

N

Exotica

1994

100

research file

textual records Final accounting and research files / 1-4

1994

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name

file title

date made

Description

1999-001-05.0381

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

1999-001-05.0382

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

textual records Final accounting and research files / current filing Final accounting textual records / final cost report and research files + A/P

1994

Invoices; statements; correspondence

1994

Statements Split into two files under the same catalogue number; contents in first file: budget, cash flow, financing, cost reports, post sched. / Dolby; contents in second file: Alliance, OFDC, Telefilm

1999-001-05.0383

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0384

A

N

1999-001-05.0385

A

N

1999-001-05.0386

A

N

1999-001-05.0387

A

N

A

N

1999-001-05.0388

A

N

1999-001-05.0389

A

N

1999-001-05.0390

A

N

1999-001-05.0391

A

N

1999-001-05.0392

A

N

1999-001-05.0393

A

N

1999-001-05.0394

A

N

1999-001-05.0395

A

N

1999-001-05.0396

A

N

1999-001-05.0397

A

N

1999-001-05.0398

A

N

1999-001-05.0399

A

N

1999-001-05.0400

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

Exotica

1994

research file

textual records Final accounting and research files / financial binder textual records Final accounting and research files / T4As 1994

1993

Exotica

1994

research file

1994

Statements; correspondence

Exotica

1994

research file

textual records and research files Alliance releasing 1993-1994 textual records and research files Bank statements 1993-1994 textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

Proofs of payment Displays the production's financial account activity Twenty four days worth of completed call sheets used on set

Exotica

1994

research file

Exotica

1994

research file

Call sheets

1993

Exotica

1994

research file

Cannes

1994

correspondence, clippings

Exotica

1994

research file

CIBC bank

1993-1994 Balance sheets; correspondence; scans Thirteen files under the same catalogue number

Exotica

1994

research file

textual records Cost reports (x13 and research files files) textual records EGO Film Arts / and research files expense textual records and research files

1993

Exotica

1994

research file

1993

Correspondence; invoices

Exotica

1994

research file

Exotica

1994

research file

Exotica

1994

research file

Exotica

1994

research file

[Ephemera] circa 1993 Family Viewing textual records Productions Ltd. and research files / expense 1993-1994 GST / Speaking textual records Parts and EGO and research files Films 1993-1994 Kudlow & textual records McCann and research files accountants 1993 textual records and research files textual records and research files Locations / general Locations / Canada Square

Coasters and silhouettes

Invoices

Forms; reports; receipts;

Balance sheets; cost reports

Exotica

1994

research file

1993

Accounts

Exotica

1994

research file

1993

Accounts

Exotica

1994

research file

textual records Locations / FRD and research files Holdings textual records and research files OFDC / expense textual records Paid accounts (30 and research files files) textual records Performers' work and research files permits

1993

Accounts

Exotica

1994

research file

1993

Scanned cheques

Exotica

1994

research file

1993

Alphabetically organized

Exotica

1994

research file

1993

Completed work reports; notes

101

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name

file title

date made

Description
Correspondence; T4A-NR and T4A summaries

1999-001-05.0401

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

textual records Receiver General and research files for Canada taxes textual records and research files textual records and research files

1993

1999-001-05.0402

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

T4, T4A,T4A NR Telefilm / expense

1993

Various taxation documents

1999-001-05.0403

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

1999-001-05.0404

textual materials

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

1999-001-05.0405

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

Exotica

1994

research file

1999-001-05.0406

textual materials textual materials

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

Agreements and receipts Continuity script with continuity notes; removed from original 3-ring textual records Marked script / binder; split into three folders under and research files continuity 1993 the same catalogue number Call sheets, production reports, continuity sheets, camera sheets, film inventory, lab reports, ACTRA reports; removed from two original 3-ring textual records Daily production binders; split into six folders under and research files reports 1993 the same catalogue number Notes on lined paper removed from 3ring binder; bound spiral notebook; textual records split into two files under the same and research files Rushes notes circa 1993 catalogue number textual records and research files Camera reports

1993

1999-001-05.0407

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

1993

1999-001-05.0408

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

1999-001-05.0409

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

textual records Continuity log / and research files slate order 1993 Daily production textual records reports / top and research files sheets 1992-1993 Paperwork found with film materials textual records and research files

Paperwork found with film materials Paperwork found with film materials; contents taken from 3-ring binder; split into two files under the same catalogue number

1999-001-05.0410

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

Dialogue edit

1993

Paperwork found with film materials

1999-001-05.0411

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

textual records and research files Edge coding log textual records and research files

1999-001-05.0412

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

Lined script

Paperwork found with film materials Paperwork found with film materials; split into two files under the same circa 1993 catalogue number

1993

1999-001-05.0413

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

textual records Reel continuity and research files and breakdown textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files script / screenplay textual records and research files

1993

Paperwork found with film materials Cards found with film materials; split into two envelopes

1999-001-05.0414

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

[Scene cards]

circa 1993

1999-001-05.0415

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

Sound reports Sound + sound Xfer The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

1993

Paperwork found with film materials

1999-001-05.0416

A

N

Exotica The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

1994

research file

1999-001-05.0417

A

N

1997

research file

1999-001-05.0418

A

N

1997

research file

1999-001-05.0419

textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0420

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

1997

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay

The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

Paperwork found with film materials by Neal Jimenez, based on the novel by Russell Banks; revised first draft 1992 dated 20 November 1992 Scenario and dialogue notes by Atom Egoyan; handwritten in coil-bound circa 1992 notebook Typed script, no cover but possibly First Draft, with annotated revisions by Atom Egoyan; 2x steno pads with handwritten segments of dialogue by circa 1995 Atom Egoyan First Draft by Atom Egoyan dated May 1995

1993

1997

research file

1995

102

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
script / screenplay script / screenplay

file title
The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

date made

Description
First Draft by Atom Egoyan dated May 1995; printout on tractor feed paper First Draft by Atom Egoyan dated May 1995, No.6; handwritten note with copy 1-10 assignments First Draft by Atom Egoyan dated May 1995, No.9 with handwritten annotations and covering note by Allen Bell removed from red 3-ring binder First Draft by Atom Egoyan dated May 1995, No.7; with correspondence from Russell Banks, Juliette Sales, Michèle Halberstadt First Draft by Atom Egoyan dated August 1995; with annotations, accompanying handwritten notes, and cover note dated 7 August 1995 possibly by Allan Bell First Draft by Atom Egoyan dated August 1995; cerlox bound with annotations and handwritten notes by what appears to be someone by the name of Marcus Koeuen; Paris, October 1995 First Draft by Atom Egoyan dated August 1995; with annotations possibly from Atom Egoyan, including proposed casting First Draft by Atom Egoyan dated August 1995, No. 20 First Draft by Atom Egoyan dated August 1995 First Draft by Atom Egoyan dated August 1995, No.4 with annotations by what appears to be someone by the name of Camelia Frieberg November 1995 issue of Harper's with article by Katie Roiphe, "Making the Incest Scene : in novel after novel writers grope for dark secrets" Second Draft by Atom Egoyan dated December 1995 with annotations by Atom Egoyan dated 2 April 1996 Second Draft by Atom Egoyan dated December 1995 with annotations by Niv Fichman Second Draft by Atom Egoyan dated March 1996

1999-001-05.0421

A

N

1997

research file

1995

1999-001-05.0422

A

N

1997

research file

1995

1999-001-05.0423

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

The Sweet Hereafter

1997

research file

script / screenplay

The Sweet Hereafter

1995

1999-001-05.0424

textual materials

A

N

The Sweet Hereafter

1997

research file

script / screenplay

The Sweet Hereafter

1995

1999-001-05.0425

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive

The Sweet Hereafter

1997

research file

script / screenplay

The Sweet Hereafter

1995

1999-001-05.0426

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

The Sweet Hereafter

1997

research file

script / screenplay

The Sweet Hereafter

1995

1999-001-05.0427

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

1997

research file

script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

1995

1999-001-05.0428

A

N

1997

research file

1995

1999-001-05.0429

A

N

1997

research file

1995

1999-001-05.0430

textual materials

A

N

The Sweet Hereafter

1997

research file

script / screenplay

The Sweet Hereafter

1995

1999-001-05.0431

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

1997

research file

textual records and research files script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay script / screenplay

Harper's Magazine The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

1995

1999-001-05.0432

A

N

1997

research file

1995

1999-001-05.0433

A

N

1997

research file

1995

1999-001-05.0434

A

N

1997

research file

1996

1999-001-05.0435

A

N

1997

research file

1999-001-05.0436

A

N

1997

research file

1999-001-05.0437

A

N

1997

research file

By Atom Egoyan dated 3 May 1996 with typed comments unsigned Final Revised Draft by Atom Egoyan with handwritten annotations by an 1996 unknown person Director's script; typed script taped into album, annotated, storyboardcirca 1997 style sketches; photos taped in 1996

1999-001-05.0438

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive

The Sweet Hereafter

1997

research file

1999-001-05.0439

textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0440

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

1997

research file

Faxes and letters from various individuals related to the development stage of The Sweet textual records circa 1994- Hereafter script; readers' comments; and research files Correspondence 1996 copies of magazines, articles, clippings The Limits of Law: Litigation, Lawyers and the Search for Justice in Russell Bank's The Sweet Hereafter by textual records circa 1994- Margaret J. Fried and Lawrence A. and research files Essay 1996 Frolik textual records and research files

103
1997 research file

Crew lists

1996

Various directories

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name

file title

1999-001-05.0441

textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0442

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

1997

research file

textual records and research files textual records and research files

The Sweet Hereafter

Description Copies of the book in English, French and Greek; an additional Robert Browning poetry book and "The Game" by Frances Liardet; books split into two files under the same circa 1997 catalogue number
circa 19961997

date made

1997

research file

A-frame plans

Photocopies

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0443

A

N

1999-001-05.0444

A

N

1999-001-05.0445

A

N

1999-001-05.0446

A

N

1999-001-05.0447

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

1997

research file

textual records and research files

Accident site, exterior

8 col snapshots, mounted

1997

research file

1997

research file

textual records circa 1996and research files Airplane seating 1997 Airplane set, textual records interior, circa 1996and research files goosebumps 1997 textual records and research files textual records and research files

Faxes; correspondence Plans, correspondence, colour photocopy

1997

research file

Airport

circa 1996- 17 colour snapshots mounted on file 1997 folder circa 19961997 circa 19961997

1997

research file

1997

research file

Airport Airport arrivals, textual records baggage, and research files washroom

5 colour snapshots, mounted

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0449

A

N

1999-001-05.0450

A

N

1999-001-05.0451

A

N

1999-001-05.0452

A

N

1999-001-05.0453

A

N

1999-001-05.0454

A

N

1999-001-05.0455

A

N

1999-001-05.0456

A

N

1999-001-05.0457

A

N

1999-001-05.0458

A

N

1999-001-05.0459

A

N

1999-001-05.0460

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

1997

research file

textual records and research files textual records [Art Department circa 1996and research files misc.] 1997 [Art department textual records identification circa 1996and research files template] 1997 textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files BC Film Commission -1 BC Film Commission -2

1997

research file

Notes; clippings

1997

research file

Overhead acetate; photocopy

1997

research file

1996

Correspondence

1997

research file

1996

Printed matter; in a pamphlet box

1997

research file

BC info pics

1996

Various dimensions

1997

research file

textual records and research files BC license plates textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

1997

research file

Bear

Correspondence; number plate identification Various photographs likely for promotional work in relation to film; circa 1996 shot by Lincoln Clarkes Photography 1996

1997

research file

Billy's

circa 1996

Plans; notes

1997

research file

Billy's door Burnell house reference

circa 1996

Plans

1997

research file

circa 1996

Magazine clipping

1997

research file

1997

research file

Burnell's Calendar pages textual records [and other and research files ephemera]

1996

Plans 1996 calendar; Bide-a-wile Motel postcards, copy photos

circa 1996

104

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
textual records and research files textual records and research files

file title
[Captions, enclosures]

date made

Description
Photograph envelopes of varying sizes and styles Colour photographs of a car wash station

1999-001-05.0461

A

N

1997

research file

circa 1996

1999-001-05.0462

A

N

1997

research file

Car wash

circa 1996

1999-001-05.0463

A

N

1997

research file

textual records and research files Car wash graphics textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files Community centre

1996

Signage

1999-001-05.0464

A

N

1997

research file

circa 1996

Plans

1999-001-05.0465

A

N

1997

research file

Dolores house

circa 1996

Plans

1999-001-05.0466

A

N

1997

research file

Fair

circa 1996 Plans; graphics; items from fairground

1999-001-05.0467

A

N

1997

research file

[Fairground]

circa 1996

Plans; poster

1999-001-05.0468

A

N

1997

research file

Fairs

circa 1996

Colour photocopies, plans

1999-001-05.0469

A

N

1997

research file

Floor plans

circa 1996

Plans

1999-001-05.0470

A

N

1997

research file

Garage

circa 1996

Plans Colour photocopies, plans; handwritten letter

1999-001-05.0471

A

N

1997

research file

textual records Interior airplane and research files set textual records and research files

circa 1996

1999-001-05.0472

A

N

1997

research file

Interior airport

circa 1996

Plans

1999-001-05.0473

A

N

1997

research file

textual records and research files Interior car wash circa 1996 textual records Highland Valley and research files Copper Mine textual records and research files textual records and research files

Plans

1999-001-05.0474

A

N

1997

research file

circa 1996

Print outs; pamphlet

1999-001-05.0475

A

N

1997

research file

Logan Lake

circa 1996

Maps; article

1999-001-05.0476

A

N

1997

research file

Motel

circa 1996

Plans

1999-001-05.0477

A

N

1997

research file

textual records and research files Motel reception circa 1996 textual records Motel reception and research files keys textual records and research files textual records and research files

Original captions for photographs

1999-001-05.0478

A

N

1997

research file

circa 1996

1999-001-05.0479

A

N

1997

research file

Motel register

circa 1996

Bide-a-wile motel keys and key tags Handwritten register with journal entries used as props in motel reception; titled Bide-a-wile Motel Colour printouts of composite portrait for fair performance

1999-001-05.0480

A

N

1997

research file

Nicole' banner

circa 1996

105

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
textual records and research files

file title
[Photograph enclosures]

date made

Description
Original enclosures with any title or caption information Including original captioned sleeves for photographic prints

1999-001-05.0481

A

N

1997

research file

1996

1999-001-05.0482

A

N

1997

research file

textual records and research files Picture vehicles textual records and research files Samples for Otto's

circa 1996

1999-001-05.0483

A

N

1997

research file

circa 1996

Notes Printed out information; pamphlet information

1999-001-05.0484

A

N

1997

research file

textual records and research files Spences Bridge textual records and research files Subpoena BC pasteup

circa 1996

1999-001-05.0485

A

N

1997

research file

circa 1996

Subpoena-to-witness forms

1999-001-05.0486

A

N

1997

research file

textual records W.A.C. Bennett & and research files Beautiful BC circa 1996 textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

Printed matter

1999-001-05.0487

A

N

1997

research file

West Park West Park Hospital

circa 1996

Drawn map on top of a folder Plans; hospital paint samples in envelope

1999-001-05.0488

A

N

1997

research file

circa 1996

1999-001-05.0489

A

N

1997

research file

Wood stoves

circa 1996

1999-001-05.0490

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

1997

research file

textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

ASC/FTL

Printed out image Computer printouts of ASC/FTL files (original shot logs of transfer as supplied by Mag North to import into circa 1996 Lworks) Continuity binder split into three files and three catalogue numbers Continuity binder split into three files and three catalogue numbers Continuity binder split into three files and three catalogue numbers

1999-001-05.0491

A

N

1997

research file

Continuity-1

1995-1996

1999-001-05.0492

A

N

1997

research file

Continuity-2

1996

1999-001-05.0493

A

N

1997

research file

Continuity-3

1996

1999-001-05.0494

A

N

1997

research file

textual records Dailies screening and research files log textual records DAT stereo cue and research files sheets

1996

Hand written notes Completed take sheets; completed dubbing charts

1999-001-05.0495

A

N

1997

research file

1997

1999-001-05.0496

A

N

1997

research file

textual records Dubbing sheets / Additional digital recording: Reel 1 AB and research files ADR circa 1997 to Reel 6 AB textual records Dubbing sheets / and research files Foley circa 1997 textual records Dubbing sheets / and research files SFX circa 1997 textual records and research files textual records and research files Feedback comments

1999-001-05.0497

A

N

1997

research file

Ree; 1 to reel 6: 57 sheets Sound effects cue sheets; Reel 1 to Reel 6

1999-001-05.0498

A

N

1997

research file

1999-001-05.0499

A

N

1997

research file

1997

Screening fine cut 22 January 1997

1999-001-05.0500

A

N

1997

research file

Final conform

1997

Removed from binder

106

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files script / screenplay textual records and research files textual records and research files

file title

date made

Description

1999-001-05.0501

A

N

1997

research file

Key codes

1996

Completed daily rushes reports

1999-001-05.0502

A

N

1997

research file

Log sheets -1

1996-1997

for dailies, removed from binder

1999-001-05.0503

A

N

1997

research file

Log sheets -2

1996

Removed from binder

1999-001-05.0504

A

N

1997

research file

Marked script

1996

Removed from binder

1999-001-05.0505

A

N

1997

research file

Memos Misc. Paul's notes, sound

1996-1997

Removed from binder Edit notes from Paul Winestock regarding sound

1999-001-05.0506

A

N

1997

research file

circa 1997

1999-001-05.0507

A

N

1997

research file

textual records and research files Script continuity 1996-1997 script / screenplay script / screenplay

Various screenings

1999-001-05.0508

A

N

1997

research file

Shooting script -1

1996

Removed from binder

1999-001-05.0509

A

N

1997

research file

Shooting script -2

1996

1999-001-05.0510

A

N

1997

research file

textual records Transfer status and research files reports textual records and research files

1996-1997

Titled "Susan Shipton" Sealed envelop; marked "Magnetic North", "transfer dailies + sound to 3/4"'

1999-001-05.0511

A

N

1997

research file

1999-001-05.0512

A

N

1997

research file

1999-001-05.0513

A

N

1997

research file

ADR script 1997 Paperwork found with film materials Camera reports / textual records cutting room circa 1996and research files copies -1 1997 Paperwork found with film materials Camera reports / Paperwork found with film materials; textual records cutting room split into two files under the same and research files copies -2 1996 catalogue number textual records Conform cut lists and research files (not locked) -1 textual records Conform cut lists and research files (not locked) -2 textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

1999-001-05.0514

A

N

1997

research file

1997

Paperwork found with film materials

1999-001-05.0515

A

N

1997

research file

1997

Paperwork found with film materials

1999-001-05.0516

A

N

1997

research file

Continuity -1

1996

Paperwork found with film materials

1999-001-05.0517

A

N

1997

research file

Continuity -2

1996

Paperwork found with film materials

1999-001-05.0518

A

N

1997

research file

Continuity -3

1996

Paperwork found with film materials

1999-001-05.0519

A

N

1997

research file

Dialogue

1997

Paperwork found with film materials

1999-001-05.0520

A

N

1997

research file

[Sound notes]

circa 19961997 Paperwork found with film materials

107

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
textual records and research files

file title

date made

Description
Contracts; correspondence; casting lists Contact information; schedule; crew lists

1999-001-05.0521

A

N

1997

research file

ACTRA

1996

1999-001-05.0522

A

N

1997

research file

textual records Accommodation and research files Merritt textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

1996

1999-001-05.0523

A

N

1997

research file

BC equipment

1996

Various equipment lists

1999-001-05.0524

A

N

1997

research file

BC Info

1996

Correspondence; location information

1999-001-05.0525

A

N

1997

research file

BC Misc.

1996

Reference material for BC locations

1999-001-05.0526

A

N

1997

research file

textual records and research files BC original forms textual records and research files [BC services info] textual records and research files textual records and research files

1996

Schedules; contact information Correspondence; directories, maps, and flyers

1999-001-05.0527

A

N

1997

research file

1996

1999-001-05.0528

A

N

1997

research file

BC Tel

1996

Correspondence

1999-001-05.0529

A

N

1997

research file

Bus - Cardinal

1996

Correspondence Correspondence; scans; Polaroid pictures in envelope

1999-001-05.0530

A

N

1997

research file

textual records Bus ownership / and research files shipping textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

1996

1999-001-05.0531

A

N

1997

research file

Call sheets

1996

Completed call sheets; map Head shots; correspondence; cast information Printed out emails; work permit applications

1999-001-05.0532

A

N

1997

research file

Cast list BC

1996

1999-001-05.0533

A

N

1997

research file

Cast memos

1996

1999-001-05.0534

A

N

1997

research file

Casting -1

1996

Resumés attached to casting photos Resumés attached to casting photos: Alison and Jenny and others

1999-001-05.0535

A

N

1997

research file

Casting -2

1996

1999-001-05.0536

A

N

1997

research file

Catering

1996

Faxes; correspondence; work histories

1999-001-05.0537

A

N

1997

research file

Contact list

1996

Directories

1999-001-05.0538

A

N

1997

research file

Contact list BC

1996

Directories; pamphlet

1999-001-05.0539

A

N

1997

research file

textual records and research files Correspondence textual records and research files Credit applications

1996

Printed out emails; faxes; postcard

1999-001-05.0540

A

N

1997

research file

1996

Correspondence; filled out forms

108

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
textual records and research files

file title

date made

Description

1999-001-05.0541

A

N

1997

research file

Crew list

1996

Directories

1999-001-05.0542

A

N

1997

research file

textual records and research files Extras breakdown textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

1996

Time sheets, complete breakdowns

1999-001-05.0543

A

N

1997

research file

Extras

1996

Time sheets, release forms Correspondence; forms; insurance certifications

1999-001-05.0544

A

N

1997

research file

Faxes in

1996

1999-001-05.0545

A

N

1997

research file

Floor plans

circa 1996

Blueprints with notes

1999-001-05.0546

A

N

1997

research file

Helicopter NC

1996

Memos; correspondence Completed work permits; information sheets

1999-001-05.0547

A

N

1997

research file

Immigration Incorporation papers

1996

1999-001-05.0548

A

N

1997

research file

1996

Faxed registration forms Correspondence; certificates of insurance Correspondence; certificates of insurance Correspondence; certificates of insurance Correspondence; contact lists; location contracts Location contracts; correspondence; schedules; formal agreement Grange side road, Caledon, Contact Goldie Vanzack Kamloops, Burnaby, Okanagan, Cache Creek, Merritt

1999-001-05.0549

A

N

1997

research file

Insurance 1

1996

1999-001-05.0550

A

N

1997

research file

Insurance 2 Location insurance

1996

1999-001-05.0551

A

N

1997

research file

1996

1999-001-05.0552

A

N

1997

research file

Locations -1

1996

1999-001-05.0553

A

N

1997

research file

Locations -2

1996

1999-001-05.0554

A

N

1997

research file

Location maps

1996

1999-001-05.0555

A

N

1997

research file

Maps

1996

1999-001-05.0556

A

N

1997

research file

textual records Master in (from and research files Toronto) textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

1996

Memos; form and schedule templates

1999-001-05.0557

A

N

1997

research file

Memos

1996

Various forms of correspondence

1999-001-05.0558

A

N

1997

research file

Memos

1996

Various forms of correspondence Magazines and pamphlets; directories; maps

1999-001-05.0559

A

N

1997

research file

Merritt One line schedules

circa 1996

1999-001-05.0560

A

N

1997

research file

1996

Completed faxed schedules

109

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

1999-001-05.0561

A

N

1997

research file

file title date made Original / copies textual records Day out of days and research files BC 1996
textual records Picture Vehicle and research files contracts script / screenplay

object name

Description
Vehicles, additional labour, special equipment, special F/X

1999-001-05.0562

A

N

1997

research file

1996

Completed agreement forms A script with asterisks indicating parts to revise

1999-001-05.0563

A

N

1997

research file

Pink Script

1996

1999-001-05.0564

A

N

1997

research file

textual records and research files Preproduction -1 textual records and research files Preproduction -2

1996

Correspondence; notes

1999-001-05.0565

A

N

1997

research file

1996

1999-001-05.0566

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0567

A

N

1999-001-05.0568

A

N

1999-001-05.0569

A

N

1999-001-05.0570

A

N

1999-001-05.0571

A

N

1999-001-05.0572

A

N

1999-001-05.0573

A

N

1999-001-05.0574

A

N

1999-001-05.0575

A

N

1999-001-05.0576

A

N

1999-001-05.0577

A

N

1999-001-05.0578

A

N

1999-001-05.0579

A

N

1999-001-05.0580

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

1997

research file

textual records Production and research files reports / dailies textual records Production office and research files equipment textual records and research files

1996

Various work reports Starts Day 2 Tuesday Oct 29 - missing Day 24; ends Day 35 16 December 1996; on label: Camera reports, continuity, production reports, call sheets, ACTRA reports, extra reports

1997

research file

1996

Correspondence; report

1997

research file

Publicity

1996

Head shots; filmographies

1997

research file

textual records Purchase orders and research files 1 textual records Purchase orders and research files 2 textual records Purchase orders and research files 3 textual records Purchase orders and research files 4 textual records Purchase orders and research files 5 textual records and research files textual records and research files script / screenplay textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

1996

Invoices; logs

1997

research file

1996

Cash reports; invoices; logs

1997

research file

1996

Completed order forms

1997

research file

1996

Completed order forms

1997

research file

1996

Completed order forms

1997

research file

Resumés

1996

Correspondence

1997

research file

Resumés crew

1996

Various curriculum vitae By Atom Egoyan, dated August 1996; marked: Original Contains original envelope marked: Pink Script

1997

research file

Script final

1996

1997

research file

Script original

1996

1997

research file

Script research Shooting schedule Shooting schedule BC

1996

Various search results; notes

1997

research file

1996

Completed schedules

1997

research file

1996

Completed schedules

110

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter The Sweet Hereafter

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files

file title

date made

Description
Memos depicting travel arrangements for cast and crew

1999-001-05.0581

A

N

1997

research file

Travel

1996

1999-001-05.0582

A

N

1997

research file

Travel

1996

Memos; correspondence Work reports; contracts; production agreement

1999-001-05.0583

A

N

1997

research file

UBCP

1996

1999-001-05.0584

A

N

1997

research file

Vehicles

1996

Insurance certificates Empty Workers Compensation Board injury report

1999-001-05.0585

A

N

1997

research file

WCB

circa 1996

1999-001-05.0586

A

N

1997

research file

Wrap

1996

Invoices

1999-001-05.0587

A

N

research file

textual records [Correspondence and research files ] 1985-1997 Thoughts, contracts; CBC, Culture Lab textual records [Miscellaneous] and research files 1 1982-1997

1999-001-05.0588

A

N

research file

1999-001-05.0589

A

N

research file Bach Cello Suite #4: Sarabande Bach Cello Suite #4: Sarabande Bach Cello Suite #4: Sarabande Bach Cello Suite #4: Sarabande

1999-001-05.0590

A

N

1997

research file

DGC correspondence Media Arts Jury, Toronto Arts textual records [Miscellaneous] - circa 1983- Foundation, CV Simone Urdl, Culture and research files 2 1992 Lab Typed script mounted in album; textual records annotated; with archival material and research files Bach / Yo-Yo Ma circa 1996 inserted loose in album textual records Bach / Yo-Yo Ma and research files 1

1999-001-05.0591

A

N

1997

research file

1996

Transcription Script; floor plan; notes; correspondence Script; cast and crew list; schedule; correspondence OAL screen writing application; handwritten script Correspondence; a copy of "Such a Good Boy" by Lisa Hobbs Birnie Stratford; correspondence; script draft; scanned pages Alfred Hitchcock; correspondence; agreement; cast and crew list; floor plans; schedules Revised yellow script; shot sketches; timing charts; floor plans

1999-001-05.0592

A

N

1997

research file

textual records Bach / Yo-Yo Ma and research files 2 1996-1997 textual records Bach / Yo-Yo Ma and research files 3 1995-1997 textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files script / screenplay textual records and research files

1999-001-05.0593

A

N

1997

research file

1999-001-05.0594

A

N

research file

Crash course Darren Hueneman [Famous Last Words]

1985

1999-001-05.0595

A

N

research file

1993

1999-001-05.0596

A

N

research file The Final Twist The Final Twist The Final Twist

1997

1999-001-05.0597

A

N

1987

research file

Final Twist -1

1986

1999-001-05.0598

A

N

1987

research file

Final Twist -2

1986

1999-001-05.0599

A

N

1987

research file

Final Twist -3 Free to a Good Home

1986

Teleplay NFB film by AE; treatment; correspondence

1999-001-05.0600

A

N

research file

1986

111

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name
textual records and research files textual records and research files

file title

date made

Description

1999-001-05.0601

A

N

In this Corner

1986

research file

In this Corner

1985

Script for CBC

1999-001-05.0602

A

N

In this Corner

1986

research file

In this Corner

1985

Clippings; contract Production documents removed from binder pocket

1999-001-05.0603

A

N

In this Corner

1986

research file

textual records and research files In this Corner 1/3

1985

1999-001-05.0604

A

N

In this Corner

1986

research file

textual records Loose documents in binder; synopsis, and research files In this Corner 2/3 circa 1985 schedule, production documents textual records and research files In this Corner 3/3 circa 1985 script / screenplay textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files script / screenplay script / screenplay

1999-001-05.0605

A

N

In this Corner

1986

research file

Shooting schedule with annotations

1999-001-05.0606

A

N

research file Looking for Nothing

Le film d'une vie Looking for Nothing

1990

Script; in French Script; correspondence; previously known as "Nothing Happens" Script; correspondence; previously known as "There's No Tomorrow" Memos; script outline; previously known as "Giant Mine"

1999-001-05.0607

A

N

1988

research file

1986-1987

1999-001-05.0608

A

N

research file

Miss Piggy -1

1995

1999-001-05.0609

A

N

research file

Miss Piggy -2

1993

1999-001-05.0610

A

N

research file

Spat

1984

1999-001-05.0611

A

N

research file

Swallow -1

1985

1999-001-05.0612

textual materials

A

N

research file

textual records and research files

Swallow -2

1985

1999-001-05.0613

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

research file

textual records and research files textual records and research files

Swallow -3

1985

Screenplay by Atom Egoyan Screenplay by Atom Egoyan; formerly known as "Folk Dances of the Fully Assimilated" A hand written script; titles at the top of first page: Moments apart peculiar, gestures of friendship, peculiar gestures of friendship A series of hand written screenplays on notepads; one titled Swallow, the second titled Native Souls, the third titled Two Looks of Terror Alfred Hitchcock; shot sketches; script; floor plans; production notes Episode Number 20: annotated typed script and production notes removed from binder Equity primer; by-laws; insurance plan; Canadian Opera agreement Correspondence; A Salome Compendium, bound

1999-001-05.0614

A

N

research file The Twilight Zone

Temptation

1988

1999-001-05.0615

A

N

1989

research file

1999-001-05.0616

A

N

Salomé

1996

research file

textual records and research files The Twilight Zone 1988 Salomé / textual records Canadian Actors and research files Equity 1996-1997 textual records Salomé / and research files [Clarkson, Austin] 1996-1997 textual records and research files

1999-001-05.0617

A

N

Salomé

1996

research file

1999-001-05.0618

A

N

Salomé

1996

research file

1999-001-05.0619

A

N

Salomé

1996

research file

1999-001-05.0620

A

N

Salomé

1996

research file

Salomé / COC Press releases; biographical press kits 1996-1997 information; estimated costs Salomé / textual records Correspondence Possibly received while travelling with and research files 1 1996-1997 Salomé Salomé / textual records Correspondence Various faxes and emails; grosses and research files 2 1996-1997 reports

112

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

1999-001-05.0621

A

N

Salomé

1996

research file

1999-001-05.0622

A

N

Salomé

1996

research file

1999-001-05.0623

A

N

Salomé

1996

research file

file title Salomé / textual records Correspondence and research files 3 Salomé / textual records Correspondence and research files 4 Salomé / textual records Correspondence and research files 5
textual records and research files textual records and research files textual records and research files Salomé / Dancemakers Salomé / Houston -1 Salomé / Houston -2

object name

date made

Description

1996-1997

Newspapers; articles; reviews

1996-1997

1996-1997

Various greeting cards Various greeting cards and letters; schedules; cast lists; scene breakdowns Correspondence; prop list; programme; scans

1999-001-05.0624

A

N

Salomé

1996

research file

1996-1997

1999-001-05.0625

A

N

Salomé

1996

research file

Opera Cues magazines; 1996-1997 correspondence; booklets; pamphlets Information sheets; Opera Cues magazine; maps; handbook A copy of "The Dance of the Seven Veils"; correspondence; essay on Salomé

1999-001-05.0626

A

N

Salomé

1996

research file

1996-1997

1999-001-05.0627

A

N

Salomé

1996

research file

1999-001-05.0628

A

N

Salomé

1996

research file

1999-001-05.0629

A

N

Salomé

1996

research file

1999-001-05.0630

A

N

Salomé

1996

research file

textual records Salomé / and research files Langton, Jennifer Salomé / textual records [Printed matter] and research files 1 Salomé / textual records [Printed matter] and research files 2 Salomé / textual records Production and research files administration textual records and research files Salomé / Reactions

1996-1997

1996-1997

Various Salomé related books Programs for Atom Egoyan performances

1996-1997

1996-1997

Rehearsal schedules

1999-001-05.0631

A

N

Salomé

1996

research file

1996-1997

Article clippings

1999-001-05.0632

A

N

Salomé

1996

research file

textual records Salomé / and research files reference photos 1996-1997

1999-001-05.0633

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0634

A

N

1999-001-05.0635

A

N

1999-001-05.0636

A

N

1999-001-05.0637

A

N

1999-001-05.0638

A

N

1999-001-05.0639

A

N

1999-001-05.0640

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

Salomé

1996

research file

textual records Salomé / [album] and research files -1

1995

Photocopies Album with loose archival material; contains creative material related to Salomé production, including notes and sketches for costumes, correspondence, thoughts, references; cards and congratulations Colour photocopies of costume sketches found loose in album Script with set design schematic, annotated by Atom Egoyan

Salomé

1996

research file

textual records Salomé / [album] and research files -2 circa 1996 textual records and research files textual records and research files Salomé / [Staging]

Salomé

1996

research file

1996-1997

Salomé

1996

research file

research file Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing

Salomé / Subtitles Next of Kin, textual records Family Viewing, and research files Speaking Parts

1996

Draft copy

1987

research file

Festival related memos; newspapers; handouts Buyers log; screening schedule; textual records Family Viewing / booklet; personal schedule; and research files ["A"] 1985-1988 correspondence 1990-1992 textual records Family Viewing / and research files Berlin textual records Family Viewing / and research files ["C"] Programmes and booklets; memos; correspondence Memos; itinerary; receipts; programmes and booklets; correspondence

1987

research file

1988

1987

research file

1988

113

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Family Viewing Family Viewing Family Viewing

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name

file title

date made

1999-001-05.0641

A

N

1987

research file

textual records Family Viewing / and research files Florence textual records Family Viewing / and research files Genies textual records Family Viewing / and research files Jerusalem

1987

Description Florence Film Festival related correspondence, booklet, and ephemera
Programme, memos and application related to the Genie Awards

1999-001-05.0642

A

N

1987

research file

1988

1999-001-05.0643

A

N

1987

research file

1988

Booklets, correspondence and memos related to the Jerusalem Film Festival Newspapers, memos, maps, and correspondence related to the Festival Internazionale Del Film Locarno Programme, booklets, memos, schedules, identification, and correspondence related to the Miami Film Festival Hong Kong International Film Festival; Sydney Film Festival; Melbourne Film Festival; Birmingham Film and Television Festival; Festival Internazionale Cinema Giovani Correspondence related to the Festival Internacional De Cinema in Portugal Various correspondence, memos, itineraries, schedules, and booklets

1999-001-05.0644

textual materials

A

N

Family Viewing

1987

research file

textual records Family Viewing / and research files Locarno

1988

1999-001-05.0645

textual materials

A

N

Family Viewing

1987

research file

textual records Family Viewing / and research files Miami

1988

1999-001-05.0646

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0647

A

N

1999-001-05.0648

A

N

1999-001-05.0649

A

N

1999-001-05.0650

A

N

1999-001-05.0651

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

Family Viewing Family Viewing Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts

1987

research file

textual records Family Viewing / and research files miscellaneous textual records Family Viewing / and research files Portugal textual records Speaking Parts / and research files ["A"] textual records Speaking Parts / and research files Amsterdam textual records Speaking Parts / and research files ["C"] textual records Speaking Parts / and research files Cannes

1988

1987

research file

1987

1989

research file

1989

1989

research file

1990

Programs and booklets

1989

research file

1989-1990

1989

research file

1989

1999-001-05.0652

textual materials

A

N

Speaking Parts

1989

research file

textual records Speaking Parts / and research files Copenhagen

1990

1999-001-05.0653

textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts

1989

research file

textual records Speaking Parts / and research files Japan textual records Speaking Parts / and research files London textual records Speaking Parts / and research files Lyon

1989

Programme; memo; information Various information, booklets, and ephemera related to the Cannes Film Festival Programme, flyers, correspondence, memos and schedules related to the Copenhagen Film + Video Workshop Festival Memos, booklets, and ephemera related to the Quinzaine Realisateurs from the Cannes Film Festival reprogrammed in Japan Correspondence and pamphlet related to the BP Expo held in London Correspondence, maps, schedules related to Lyon film screenings in France Programme, memos and ephemera related to the Festival International du Nouveau Cinema et de la Video Montreal Correspondence, programme, information and memos related to the Palms Spring International Film Festival Programmes, memos and information related to the Semana Internacional de Cine de Valladolid Programme, memos and correspondence related to the Vancouver International Film Festival Correspondence with a variety of film festivals

1999-001-05.0654

A

N

1989

research file

1990

1999-001-05.0655

A

N

1989

research file

1989

1999-001-05.0656

textual materials

A

N

Speaking Parts

1989

research file

textual records Speaking Parts / and research files Montréal

1989

1999-001-05.0657

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

Speaking Parts Speaking Parts Speaking Parts

1989

research file

textual records Speaking Parts / and research files Palm Springs textual records Speaking Parts / and research files Spain textual records Speaking Parts / and research files Vancouver textual records and research files The Adjuster / general

1990

1999-001-05.0658

A

N

1989

research file

1989

1999-001-05.0659

A

N

1989

research file

1989

1999-001-05.0660

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

1991

114

CATALOGU CATALOGUE. CATALOGU CATALOG CATALOGUE.ID_NUMBE E.CATEGOR CATALOG CATALOG ACCESS_RES CATALOGUE. CATALOGUE. E.DATE_CO CATALOGUE.ARRAN CATALOGUE.ITEM UE.DATE_ R Y1 UE.FLAG3 UE.FLAG1 TRICTIONS CREDIT_LINE OPTION10 LLECTED GEMENT _NAME CATALOGUE.TITLE MADE related film/media title
Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

CATALOGUE.DESCRIPTION

Accession

series
textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

Departm restricte ent d?

access restriction

Object type (MWEB)

object name

file title

date made

1999-001-05.0661

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

textual records The Adjuster / and research files Flanders, Ghent textual records and research files The Adjuster / New York 1991

1991

Description Correspondence and schedules related to the International Flanders Film Festival-Ghent
Correspondence related to the New York Film Festival Correspondence related to the Film Festival Rotterdam Correspondence and schedule in relation to press junctions and screenings in Seattle for The Adjuster Correspondence and schedule in relation to press junctions and screenings in Vancouver for The Adjuster Posters, correspondence related to Calendar Memos, correspondence and schedules related to the New York Film Festival

1999-001-05.0662

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

1991

1999-001-05.0663

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

textual records The Adjuster / and research files Rotterdam 1992 textual records and research files The Adjuster / Seattle 1992

1991

1999-001-05.0664

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

1992

1999-001-05.0665

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

The Adjuster

1991

research file

textual records The Adjuster / and research files Vancouver 1991 textual records and research files Calendar / general

1991

1999-001-05.0666

A

N

Calendar

1993

research file

1994

1999-001-05.0667

A

N

Calendar

1993

research file

textual records Calendar / New and research files York 1993 textual records Exotica / Alliance and research files folder

1993-1994

1999-001-05.0668

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

1994

Clippings; articles; memos; ephemera

1999-001-05.0669

textual materials

A

N

Exotica

1994

research file

1999-001-05.0670

textual materials

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive

Exotica

1994

research file

Newspapers, jury information, textual records memos, information, correspondence and research files Exotica / Cannes 1993-1994 in relation to the Cannes Film Festival Academy of Canadian Cinema and Television; Genie Awards; London Exotica / Film Festival; Artificial Eye; Atlantic textual records Correspondence Film Festival; International Hofer and research files 1 1994 Filmatage; Alliance Alliance; Genie Awards; Regina Ziegler Film Production; Banff Centre for the Arts; Art Gallery of Ontario; various others; received while at festivals Correspondence, memos, and schedules related to the New York Film Festival Correspondence, memos and ephemera related to the Taipei Golden Horse Film Festival Correspondence, information, clippings and ephemera related to Taormina Arte Cinema Newspaper articles and correspondence

1999-001-05.0671

textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials textual materials

A

N

1999-001-05.0672

A

N

1999-001-05.0673

A

N

1999-001-05.0674

A

N

1999-001-05.0675

A

N

1999-001-05.0676

A

N

1999-001-05.0677

A

N

1999-001-05.0678

A

N

Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive Atom Egoyan Archive

Exotica

1994

research file

Exotica / textual records Correspondence and research files 2 textual records and research files Exotica / New York

1994

Exotica

1994

research file

1994

Exotica

1994

research file

textual records and research files Exotica / Taipei textual records and research files textual records and research files Exotica / Taormina arte Exotica / Valladolid

1994

Exotica

1994

research file

1994

Exotica

1994

research file

1994

Exotica

1994

research file

textual records and research files Exotica / Venice textual records and research files textual records and research files Exotica / Vancouver The Sweet Hereafter

1994

Exotica The Sweet Hereafter

1994

research file

1994

Correspondence and local information Correspondence, information, ephemera and pass for the Vancouver International Film Festival Cannes reporting; clippings; programme; booklets; scan

1887

research file

1997

115

Work Cited "Archive." Cambridge Dictionary. Accessed March 14th, 2018. https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/archive. Arroyo, José. "The Alienated Affections of Atom Egoyan." Cinema Canada, October 1987. Balfour, Ian and Atom Egoyan. Subtitles: On the Foreignness of Film. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2004. Bailey, Andrew and Paul Duncan. Cinema Now. Cologne: Taschen, 2007. Barber, Sian. Using film as a source. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2015. Brick: Twenty Fifth Anniversary Issue, edited by Michael Ondaatje, Michael Redhill, Esta Spalding, and Linda Spalding. 2003. Burwell, Jennifer and Monique Tschofen. Image and Territory: Essays on Atom Egoyan. Waterloo: Wilfred Laurier Press, 2007. Cleve, Bastian. Film Production Management: How to Budget, Organize and Successfully Shoot your Film. London: Taylor & Francis, 2017. Coombes, Annie E. "Atom Egoyan's Steenbeck-An Installation." American Anthropologist, no. 105 (2003): 161-163. Cultural Producers in Perilous States: Editing Events, Documenting Change, edited by George E. Marcus. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997. Davis, Kristy. "Slipping thru the Cracks: Issues with Performing Arts Ephemera." Oslo: International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions, 2005. PDF. Druick, Zoë and Gerda Cammaer. Cinephemera: Archives, Ephemeral Cinema, and New Screen Histories in Canada. Kingston: McGill-Queen's University Press,
116

2014. Duchovnay, Gerald. Film Voices: interviews from Post Script. Albany: State of New York Press, 2004. Egoyan, Atom. Steenbeckett: Atom Egoyan. London: Black Dog Publishing Limited, 2017. Enticknap, Leo. Film Restoration: The Culture and Science of Audiovisual Heritage. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013. Falsetto, Mario. Personal Visions: Conversations with Contemporary Film Directors. Los Angeles: Silman- James Press, 2000. Frick, Caroline. Saving Cinema: The Politics of Preservation. New York: Oxford University Press, 2011. Gillett, Cary and Jay Sheehan. The Production Manager's Toolkit: Successful Management in Theatre and Performing Arts. New York: Routledge, 2017, Grainge, Paul. Ephemeral Media: Transitory Screen Culture from Television to YouTube. London: Palgrave MacMillan, 2011. Hall, Alix. "A Brief History of the Toronto International Film Festival." The Culture Trip. Accessed March 28, 2018. https://theculturetrip.com/northamerica/canada/articles/a-brief-history-of-the-toronto-international-film-festival/. Harrison, Harriet W . The FIAF Cataloguing Rules for Film Archives. München: K. G. Saur, 1991. Katz, Susan Bullington. Conversations with Screenwriters. Portsmouth: Heinemann, 2000. Kredell, Brendan, Skadi Loist and Marjike de Valck. Film Festivals: History, Theory,

117

Method, Practice. New York: Routledge, 2016. Kroeger, Angela. Library of Congress Call Numbers: A Guide for Non-Catalogers Who Suddenly Find Themselves with a Cataloging Job. Accessed March 16, 2018. https://www.slideshare.net/akroeger/kroeger-lcclassification. Latsis, Dimitrios. Atom Egoyan: Memory and the Machine. Accessed January 31, 2018. PDF file. MacKenzie, Scott. Film Manifestos and Global Cinema Cultures: A Critical Anthology . Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2014. McSorley, Tom. Atom Egoyan's `The Adjuster'. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2009. Melynk, George. Great Canadian Film Directors. Edmonton: The University of Alberta Press, 2007. Melnyk, George. One Hundred Years of Canadian Cinema. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2004. Mimsy XG. 2003. Axiell. Morris, T.J.. Atom Egoyan: Interviews (Conversations with Filmmakers Series). Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2010. Pike, David L. Canadian Cinema Since the 1980s: At the Heart of the World . Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2012. Porton, Richard. Dekalog 3: On Film Festivals. New York: Wallflower Press, 2009. Public: Touch in Contemporary Art, edited by David Thomas. Ontario: Self published, 1996. Romney, Jonathan. Atom Egoyan (World Directors). London: British Film Institute,

118

2003. Rickards, Maurice. The Encyclopedia of Ephemera: A Guide to the Fragmentary Documents of Everyday Life for the Collector, Curator, and Historian. New York: Library of Congress, 2000. Rowlands, Avril. Continuity Supervisor. Burlington: Focal Press, 2013. Slide, Anthony. Nitrate Won't Wait: A History of Film Preservation in the United States . Jefferson: McFarland & Company, Inc., 1992. Stewart, Kelly. Rad Refresher. Accessed March 16, 2018. https://aabc.ca/media/5572/RADrefresher_Jan-10.pdf. TIFF: A Reel History 1976-2012.Toronto: The Globe and Mail, 2012. https://beta.images.theglobeandmail.com/static/ebooks/Tiff_A_Reel_History__The_Globe.pdf. Totaro, Donato. "A `Taxing' Incentive: The Capital Cost Allowance Films". Offscreen. Accessed June 13th, 2018. http://offscreen.com/view/a_taxing_incentive. Waltz, Eugene P. Canada's Best Features: Critical Essays on 15 Canadian Films. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2002. Wilson, Emma. Cinema's Missing Children. New York: Wallflower Press, 2003. Wood, Jason. Talking Movies: Contemporary World Filmmakers in Interview . London: Wallflower Press, 2006.

119


