TAKING THE REINS: A PROPOSAL FOR MANAGING THE PREVIOUSLY UNMANAGED ROYAL AGRICULTURAL WINTER FAIR ARCHIVE

by Victoria Masters BFA, OCAD University, Toronto, ON, 2012

A thesis presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in the Program of Film and Photography Preservation and Collections Management

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2018 © Victoria Masters 2018

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION FOR ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF A THESIS
I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. This is a true copy of the thesis, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I understand that my thesis may be made electronically available to the public.

Victoria Masters

ii

Abstract

TAKING THE REINS: A PROPOSAL FOR MANAGING THE PREVIOUSLY UNMANAGED ROYAL AGRICULTURAL WINTER FAIR ARCHIVE Master of Arts, 2018 Victoria Masters Film and Photography Preservation and Collections Management, Ryerson University

The Royal Agricultural Winter Fair (The Royal) has been a renowned national event in Toronto's history since its debut in 1922. The annual fair is held for 10 days each November, and is the largest combined indoor horse show and agricultural fair in the world. As The Royal approaches its centenary year, the timing was perfect to deeply examine the previously-unmanaged collection of over 180,000 photographic objects and ephemera, and nearly seven metres of textual material, that has accumulated over the span of its rich history. Through a thorough review of the collections content and advice for both physical storage of the collection and collections management software options including digital storage, this thesis presents a list of recommendations for creating an accessible archive of this material, a resource that will enable this wonderful collection of important local, provincial, and national history to be preserved and made available to the public.

iii

Acknowledgements
I am blessed to have a long list of individuals to thank for being instrumental in the completion of this thesis. First and foremost, I must thank Dee Psaila. Beyond being an astounding resource for all questions regarding the ins and outs of managing an archive, Dee was a constant source of inspiration (including the initial suggestion of working with the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair), a wonderful second reader, and a great support system. In a similar vein, I could not have created a finished, polished product without the invaluable support and guidance of my first reader, Don Snyder. His expertise and constant excitement about this project made a daunting task manageable. I feel incredibly lucky to have been the first Ryerson student to work with the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair. The team at The Royal was beyond welcoming and interested in this thesis, and it would most certainly not have been possible without their knowledge and time. Thank you to Bobby Arthur for sharing with me everything he knows about The Royal history and the collection of boxes that currently forms the archive, to Peter Hohenadel for his kind introduction to the staff and assistance offered whenever possible, and to Gabe Simms for sharing his technical building knowledge and documents with me. Although not directly related to my thesis, it would be remiss not to thank Sophie Hackett, Julie Crooks, Jill Offenbeck, and the rest of the staff at the Art Gallery of Ontario. Completing a project in a previously unmanaged collection was made possible by my wonderful internship at the AGO. I would like to thank the faculty in the Film and Photography Preservation and Collections Management Program, and Ryerson University, for allowing me this opportunity and supporting me through this journey. Last, but far from least, I need to thank the friends and family who have helped me make it to the end of my graduate career. To my older sister Kaitlin Baxter for proofreading my thesis along with my parents, Brenda and Philip Masters, who also generously allowed me to live in their house and feed me while I once again became a poor student, and my younger sister Bethany Masters for cohabiting with me
iv

while I was less than pleasant due to thesis stress. To my partner, Christian Devlin - it is difficult to express how deeply grateful I am for your constant and unwavering support, for listening to me ramble about photographic degradation, software options, and what I stumbled upon in the archive on any given day, and for being my rock. I cannot thank you all enough for your love, support, and words of wisdom.

v

Table of Contents

TAKING THE REINS: A PROPOSAL FOR MANAGING THE PREVIOUSLY UNMANAGED ROYAL AGRICULTURAL WINTER FAIR ARCHIVE AUTHOR'S DECLARATION FOR ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF A THESIS Abstract Acknowledgements Table of Contents List of Figures 1. Introduction 1.1 History and Importance of the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair 2. Literature Survey 2.1 Approaching an Unmanaged Collection 2.2 Selecting Appropriate Software 2.3 Maintaining a User-focused Approach 3. Process 3.1 Box-level Inventory 3.2 Collections Policy 3.3 Collections Management Systems 3.4 Physical Storage and Environmental Controls 3.5 Arranging and Describing 3.6 Policies and Procedures 4. Box-Level Inventory 5. Collections Management Software Recommendations 5.1 Vernon CMS 5.2 Proficio Elements (Recommended) 5.3 Argus 5.4 AtoM 5.5 Archivematica versus Preservica
vi

ii iii iv vi viii 1 2 5 6 7 9 13 14 16 17 18 20 22 23 27 28 29 30 32 32

5.6 Other Considerations 6. Physical Storage and Environmental Controls Recommendations 6.1 Decommissioned Coolers and Residential De/Humidifier 6.2 Converting Decommissioned Coolers to Vaults (Recommended) 6.3 New Vault 6.4 Other Considerations 7. Conclusion Appendix A The Royal Agricultural Winter Fair Archive Collections Policy Mandate Acquisitions Accessioning Deaccessioning Loans Responsibilities Access Appendix B Storage and Handling Procedures Appendix C Cataloguing Procedures Appendix D Digitization Procedures Appendix E Prioritized List Appendix F: Box-Level Inventory Appendix G: Collections Management Software Survey Questions Appendix H : Collections Management Software Chart Bibliography

33 34 37 38 39 40 42 45 45 45 45 45 46 47 48 48 50 50 51 51 53 53 55 55 56 129 130 135

vii

List of Figures

Figure 1. Royal Winter Fair sign on Prince's Boulevard. Photograph provided courtesy of the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair. 1 Figure 2. Princess Anne visiting The Royal in 1974. Photograph provided courtesy of the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair. Figure 3. Jersey cows during the first year of the Royal Winter Fair, 1922. Photograph provided courtesy of the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair. Figure 4. Map of the Upper East Annex area with the current storage location and the proposed new location marked in red. Figure 5. Map of The Royal offices with the current collection locations marked in red. Figure 6. Photograph showing damage from a paperclip, taken by the author, February 8, 2018. 5 13 15 15 16

Figure 7. Photograph showing photographs with paperclip, taken by the author, January 26, 2018. 16 Figure 8. Graphic showing the levels of arrangement in a fonds. From the Archives @ PAMA blog. CC-VY 4.0. https://peelarchivesblog.com/2016/02/29/how-do-archivists-describecollections-or-how-to-read-a-finding-aid/ 21 Figure 9. Horse jumping outside at The Royal, 1949. Photograph provided courtesy of the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair. 23 Figure 10. Photograph of the Upper East Annex storage area, taken by the author, January 18, 2018. 24 Figure 11. Photograph showing collection in Mylar sleeves, taken by the author, January 18, 2018. 24 Figure 12. Photograph of banker's box in the Upper East Storage area, taken by the author, January 18, 2018. 24 Figure 13. Photograph of an album housing photographs in the Upper East storage area, taken by the author, January 18, 2018. 24 Figure 14. Prince Philip and the Mexican team, 1968. Photograph provided courtesy of the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair. 27 Figure 15. Model with corn display, c. 1950s. Photograph provided courtesy of the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair. 34

viii

Figure 16. Photograph showing a decommissioned walk-in cooler, taken by the author, January 18, 2018. Figure 17. Photograph showing a decommissioned walk-in cooler, taken by the author, January 19, 2018. Figure 18. Cowgirl at The Royal, 1949. Photograph provided courtesy of the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair.

36 36 42

ix

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Royal Winter Fair sign on Prince's Boulevard. Photograph provided courtesy of the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair.

Since the first Royal Agricultural Winter Fair (The Royal) enchanted guests in 1922, photographs documenting the annual event have been collected. The approximately 181,000 photographs, slides, negatives, and ephemera forming The Royal archive are currently organized into bankers boxes by year, and sit collecting dust in various locations without any environmental controls throughout The Royal offices. Without the benefit of accession numbers, a finding aid, or a database these photographs became under-utilized and rarely accessed. The lack of any sort of preventative preservation actions have led to deterioration, such as colour shifting, curling, objects adhering together, and rust stains. My applied project will be to answer the following question: what is the most beneficial course of action to take when beginning to organize an archive such as the one at the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair? To answer this

1

question, my research has been divided into these sections: the history of the Fair, including its presentday importance; how to approach a previously unmanaged collection; selecting appropriate collection management and digital asset management software; and setting The Royal up for success by maintaining a user-focused and feasible methodology. This research will allow me to prepare an effective and efficient proposal for The Royal on the steps required to create an organized and accessible collection that can be preserved for the future.

1.1 History and Importance of the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair
The Royal Agricultural Winter Fair is a key annual Toronto event that was founded in 1922 under the leadership of cattle breeder W.A. Dryden. 1 The Royal, which began as a small competition among locals, has grown over the years to become the largest integrated indoor equestrian competition and agricultural fair in the world. 2 The Royal was originally slated to open in 1921, but construction issues with what would later become the Ricoh Coliseum necessitated a year-long delay. 3 Canada has a long history of local fairs, dating from 1765 in Windsor, Nova Scotia. 4 Provincial fairs were standard by 1910, and in 1913 a National Livestock and Dairy Show was held in Toronto in an attempt to compete with Chicago's International Livestock Exposition, although the First World War prevented further iterations from being discussed until 1918. 5 W.A. Dryden was elected chairman and plans were discussed to create a national fair that would occur between the National Horse Show, held in New York in November, and

"A Royal History." The Royal Agricultural Winter Fair. Accessed October 31, 2017. http://www.royalfair.org/ Beverley Smith. "60th ANNIVERSARY The Royal Agricultural Winter Fair Humble Beginnings among the Memories of Fair Horse Show." The Globe and Mail. Nov. 9, 1988. http://ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/login?url=https://search-proquestcom.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/docview/385844966?accountid=13631. 3 Dan Needles, The Royal Agricultural Winter Fair: An Illustrated History. (Toronto, ON: Random House of Canada Limited, 1997), 16. 4 W.P. Watson, The Royal: A History of the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair. (Toronto, ON: McClelland and Stewart, 1968), 10. 5 Dan Needles, The Royal Agricultural Winter Fair: An Illustrated History. (Toronto, ON: Random House of Canada Limited, 1997), 19.
2

1

2

the Chicago International Livestock Exposition, taking place in December, and which would feature a horse show designed to increase attendance. 6 The Royal has enjoyed success since its very first year, when the Toronto Globe heralded it as a triumph on a municipal, provincial, and national level. 7 This remains true today, providing a one-of-akind event that is of great cultural importance on all three of these levels. The City of Toronto was involved in a neck-and-neck race for the future site of The Royal, beating out Hamilton by only one vote. 8 This annual event has become enmeshed in the history of the city, and led to the construction of the original Coliseum, a building with a rich history of its own. Furthermore, the horse show at The Royal has assisted Canadian show jumpers in reaching the podium on an international stage, leading to a much more robust show circuit in North America. 9 Over the years, many celebrities and people of importance have attended the fair, documentation of which is included in The Royal collection. As such, the many invaluable cultural heritage objects contained in this archive are at significant risk due to inattention. Moreover, this material is currently inaccessible. In order to make this collection accessible, the contents of the archive must be examined. Prior to the commencement of this project, The Royal was entirely unaware of the size, condition, or subject matter of their holdings. Without this critical information, it is impossible to make accurate recommendations or create a realistic plan. Due to the time constraints of this six-month long thesis, it was decided to complete a box-level inventory to get a general sense of the size, scope, and condition of the collection. This is discussed in detail in section 4. Based on the information gathered during this inventory, research was completed in order to create recommendations for arranging and describing the collection, database software to allow for
Ibid, 20. Ibid, 23. 8 W.P. Watson, The Royal: A History of the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair. (Toronto, ON: McClelland and Stewart, 1968), 12. 9 Beverley Smith. "60th ANNIVERSARY The Royal Agricultural Winter Fair Humble Beginnings among the Memories of Fair Horse Show." The Globe and Mail. Nov. 9, 1988. http://ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/login?url=https://search-proquestcom.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/docview/385844966?accountid=13631.
7 6

3

cataloguing, a web portal for increased public access, retrofitting an existing collections space to allow for proper environmental controls, and storage of digital assets. Furthermore, procedures for care and handling, cataloguing, and digitizing of the collection were drafted, along with an overarching collections policy. This resulted in a proposal that balances the specific needs of The Royal, the existing resources such as finances, staff, and space, and current best-practices in the industry. These address the main concern of this thesis - to improve accessibility and ensure preservation of this collection.

4

2. Literature Survey

Figure 2. Princess Anne visiting The Royal in 1974. Photograph provided courtesy of the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair.

This thesis encompasses many areas of collections management as they directly relate to the archive at the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair. Accordingly, it was necessary to research best practices in a wide variety of areas. My research fell into three general areas: discussions on how to approach a previously unmanaged collection, methods to select appropriate collection management and digital asset management software, and how to create a proposal that was user-focused and feasible. Although some of the sources utilized for this thesis take a more theoretical approach, many of the most crucial resources took the form of practical, instructional manuals and case studies. Some of the most important of these sources are discussed in detail below.

5

2.1 Approaching an Unmanaged Collection
It is imperative to begin planning prior to actually undertaking work at The Royal archive. Angela Kipp, the collections manager at the Technoseum in Germany, discusses this in great detail in her book, Managing Previously Unmanaged Collections: A Practical Guide for Museums. Kipp highlights the importance of developing a mindset that differs from what is generally taught in collections management education, where the focus is on established rather than unmanaged collections. 10 This advice is easily implemented into my thesis project as I am beginning with a box-level inventory to take stock of the condition of the collection as well as the overall breadth and size of The Royal holdings. Another helpful resource for the planning stage has been case studies, such as "The Glasgow Miracle Project: Working with an Arts Organization's Archives" by Susannah Waters. This article was written by the archivist involved in a project that was similarly working with uncatalogued, and therefore inaccessible, material 11 which creates an obvious similarity with The Royal archive. The entire article is a record of the steps taken to catalogue this archive, although the institution involved in this project is an arts organization, and hence has different goals and aims than The Royal. However, this detailed account is beneficial to my thesis in terms of methodology from my writing. Furthermore, it provides an example of the workflow that a team followed to complete a similar project. An important factor to keep in mind to ensure my goals are realistic is that the project was undertaken by a large team, and accordingly had vastly different resources than I will have access to. As I will be the only person working on The Royal archive, and certainly the only collections management staff, it will be critical to have adequate resources to ensure that I am following best practices and not being overwhelmed by the work load that needs to be completed. The article written by Susan Pevar, "Success as a Lone Arranger: Setting Priorities and Getting the Job Done" is a wonderful resource for this purpose. Pevar also highlights an important distinction between different models of
Angela Kipp, Managing Previously Unmanaged Collections: A Practical Guide for Museums (Lanham: Rowman Littlefield, 2016), 1. 11 Susannah Waters, "The Glasgow Miracle Project: Working with an Arts Organization's Archives," Archives and Records 36, no. 1 (2015): 7, doi: 10.1080/23257962.2015.1010150.
10

6

archival access. She focuses on taking a partnership approach through her anecdotal discussion of her experience as a single collections staff member, which will be discussed in more detail in the section on user-focused models. 12

2.2 Selecting Appropriate Software
Once a concise plan has been created, following an in-depth inventory of the collection in its current state, it is important to research various options to find the best course of action for digitization and collections management software. As this collection is essentially unprocessed, this is the optimal time to create a workflow for digitization, including an online catalogue. An important part of this process will be selecting an appropriate digital asset management system (DAMS). Deborah Kaplan tackles this issue in an article that appeared in the Journal of Archival Organization, "Choosing a Digital Asset Management System That's Right for You." Kaplan provides instructions on how to plan for and select the appropriate DAMS for your specific institution. Although flexibility in a system is important, finding a program that will fit all your needs 50 years down the road is not necessary, according to Kaplan. 13 This is important to consider. The Royal staff have expressed concern that whatever system they invest in has the capacity to be relevant in the future, an idea that Kaplan disagrees with as she feels all technology will become obsolete. Rather, Kaplan believes it is important to focus on a system that will provide the user with data that can be exported and incorporated into a new system. 14 When planning to digitize a collection, there are a number of factors which must be considered. Another case study, written by Elizabeth Shepard for the Journal of Archival Organization and titled "Digitizing a Photographic Collection in a Midsize Repository: A Case Study" offered an applicable example of a collection with similarities to The Royal archive, providing a workflow that is directly pertinent to my thesis. Shepard discusses the importance of detailed planning before beginning the project
12

Susan Pevar, "Success as a Lone Arranger: Setting Priorities and Getting the Job Done," Journal of Archival Organization 3, no. 1 (2005): 54-55, doi:10.1300/j201v03n01_05. 13 Deborah Kaplan, "Choosing a Digital Asset Management System That's Right for You," Journal of Archival Organization 7, no. 1-2 (2009): 40, doi: 10.1080/15332740902897360. 14 Ibid.

7

by articulating the main goals and desired end result to ensure that it fits within the mandate of the archive as a whole. 15 Although I expect to propose a web-based database within my thesis, depending on budgetary limits, an in-house searchable database as was employed in this case study may be the preferred option. Shepard discusses actions to consider such as image selection, eligibility of the workspace for a digitization project, copyright restrictions, the intended audience and their needs, staff resources required to fulfill the project, and a budget. Furthermore, it is important to determine whether you will be describing at a collection-level, folder-level, or item-level for your catalogue records. Due to the fact that I will be under the supervision of a non-collections professional who has no experience in archives and will be viewed as an expert, it is crucial to be knowledgeable about and have adequate resources supporting the process from planning to implementation. Additionally, a critical part of the project to consider is the possibility of an online catalogue. The Royal staff have expressed interest in having an online catalogue that is accessible to the public. As the article "To Make Archives Available Online: Transcending Boundaries or Building Walls?" highlights, many institutions have started creating digital access to their collections via the web. The authors suggest that the two main motivations to digitize are preservation of objects that are either deteriorating or frequently used, and providing increased access for a broader group of individuals. 16 This move has led to an influx of digital objects that have their own preservation requirements, as seen in the case of digital libraries. 17 Collecting institutions have historically remained distinct from one another, even when their purposes overlap. 18 The digital age has brought about a more cooperative effort between libraries, archives, and museums, as they all struggle to find solutions to preservation and management issues of

Elizabeth Shepard, "Digitizing a Photographic Collection in a Midsize Repository: A Case Study," Journal of Archival Organization 2, no. 4 (2005): 68, DOI: 10.1300/ J201v02n04_05. 16 Lars-Erik Hansen and Anneli Sundqvist, "To Make Archives Available Online: Transcending Boundaries or Building Walls?," Journal of Archival Organization 10, no. 3-4 (2012): 207-208, DOI: 10.1080/15332748.2013.795784. 17 Ibid., 208. 18 Ibid.

15

8

digital artifacts. 19 Born-digital materials have seen an increase in academic discussion, but items that were originally analog and have been replicated in the digital realm have not received the same interest. 20 The authors comment that the act of digitization creates a loss in the removal of the original analog item from its context and materiality, but also adds qualities, making it more than just a surrogate. 21 This viewpoint was one I had not previously considered, and think it is extremely important when considering digitizing a photographic collection. The case study presented in this article highlights the importance of accurate and well-documented procedures when undertaking a digitization project, and that this should be communicated on the website housing the collection. 22 In a larger sense, the article aims to tackle issues of access and usability while considering how archival context can be communicated, an important factor to consider in my thesis.

2.3 Maintaining a User-focused Approach
Keeping this in mind, it is important to review options for creating a web-based resource that is user-focused. "Re-Imagining Archival Display: Creating User-Friendly Finding Aids" discusses the growing divide as archival institutions move from the traditional, paper-based finding aid to a digital alternative. 23 The authors argue that archives must adopt a more user-focused model for a finding aid, and that a single-level display is the way to achieve this. 24 Due to the fact that users are comfortable with searching an online library catalogue, they expect a similar level of description to be readily accessible and searchable at the item level when viewing archival objects online. Historically, archives have favoured the hierarchical approach, which becomes confusing to users when migrated to the web and displayed on screen. Co-authors Daines and Nimer recommend that the key to making online finding aids

Lars-Erik Hansen and Anneli Sundqvist, "To Make Archives Available Online: Transcending Boundaries or Building Walls?," Journal of Archival Organization 10, no. 3-4 (2012): 207-208, DOI: 10.1080/15332748.2013.795784. 20 Ibid., 209. 21 Ibid. 22 Ibid., 223. 23 J. Gordon Daines and Cory L. Nimer, "Re-Imagining Archival Display: Creating User-Friendly Finding Aids," Journal of Archival Organization 9, no. 1 (2011): 4, doi:10.1080/15332748.2011.574019. 24 Ibid, 12.

19

9

more user-friendly is to separate the previously shared purposes of the finding aid as management tool and access portal. 25 A single-level display, which shows only the specific area that the user is interested in and provides links to the rest of the hierarchy, is the best answer to this problem. 26 Their article also describes a case study of the methods they implement at their institution, Brigham Young University. Their case study references AtoM, a software I am familiar with as the Ryerson University Library and Archives also utilizes this program. 27 This resource will be key in my recommendations for the type of software The Royal archive will invest in, and what their digital presence will be. I encountered multiple other resources dealing with the issue of single-level displays, and now feel this is an appropriate solution to the issue of usability with online finding aids. This has also led me to consider software that is designed for museums rather than archives, due to the intended use of the online portal to provide information on the item level rather than describe a fonds in a hierarchical display. Continuing in the discussion of meeting users' needs and using single-level displays, "Contexts, Original Orders, and Item-Level Orientation: Responding Creatively to Users' Needs and Technological Change" written by Geoffrey Yeo discusses the historic idea of original order, which has been retained as the cornerstone of archival practices. These rigid boundaries have been applied to collections primarily through the idea of provenance, although groupings based on function rather than fonds have also been adopted. 28 Although provenance of the images in The Royal archive is likely known, it is unlikely to be the most beneficial way for researchers to locate items, with subject matter seeming more applicable. Yeo discusses that due to the move from paper to digital finding aids, archives are now presented with the

J. Gordon Daines and Cory L. Nimer, "Re-Imagining Archival Display: Creating User-Friendly Finding Aids," Journal of Archival Organization 9, no. 1 (2011): 13, doi:10.1080/15332748.2011.574019. 26 Ibid., 12-13. 27 Ibid., 12-20. 28 Geoffrey Yeo, "Contexts, Original Orders, and Item-Level Orientation: Responding Creatively to Users' Needs and Technological Change," Journal of Archival Organization 12, no. 3-4 (2014): 172-173, DOI: 10.1080/15332748.2015.1048626.

25

10

opportunity to have multiple arrangements and search field options 29. He presents a detailed example of the ways in which researchers utilize information and archival records in the digital age, which leads Yeo to a similar conclusion as Daines and Nimer - that searchable single-level displays are a way to achieve this user-centred goal. 30 Although item-level cataloguing has been considered too resource-intensive for years, the development of new technologies that automatically, or at least partially-automatically, document metadata will help relieve this burden. 31 For reasons similar to the Daines and Nimer article, this article proves advantageous for my project by presenting important theoretical ideas to consider when creating an online catalogue, and supporting this framework with practical and implementable concepts. Lastly, it will be of utmost importance to find adequate funding to create the necessary improvements to make The Royal archive accessible. Consequently, an article written by Ben Primer which focuses on the financial aspects of archives in an easily comprehended manner is very beneficial. The author recommends learning all that you can about the organization you are employed within, including its history, the formal structure of who you report to as well as the informal power structure, how much freedom you are given, who can help you realize your goals, and so on. 32 It is key to present a professional impression to potential donors, Primer argues. 33 This will be especially beneficial for my suggestions to The Royal on improving the location of the collection, specifically in terms of temperature and relative humidity control. This will not only benefit the stability and longevity of the collection, but also can also encourage donor support. Rather than simply focusing on grants, the author encourages sourcing private donors who have a relationship with your institution, which could be corporate

Geoffrey Yeo, "Contexts, Original Orders, and Item-Level Orientation: Responding Creatively to Users' Needs and Technological Change," Journal of Archival Organization 12, no. 3-4 (2014): 171, DOI: 10.1080/15332748.2015.1048626. 30 Ibid., 176-178. 31 Ibid., 179. 32 Ben Primer, "Resources for Archives: Developing Collections, Constituents, Colleagues, and Capital," Journal of Archival Organization 7, no. 1­2 (2009): 59, DOI: 10.1080/15332740902892833. 33 Ibid., 61-62.

29

11

sponsorship in the case of The Royal. 34 Some key tips on grant writing are provided, something which has not been discussed in the Ryerson curriculum but will be necessary when working with a non-profit organization. 35 Overall, this source details many practical suggestions for fundraising under the overarching theme that if the use of an archive is encouraged, funding will follow. This guiding thought relates this resource to the many others discussing user-focused approaches, as a more user-friendly archive will be a more utilized archive. Although my research has covered a large range of topics broadly, this has allowed a few main themes to become visible. These are the importance of planning, making thoughtful decisions that will benefit both the short- and long-term goals of the institution, and maintaining a user-focused approach in all aspects. These will guide me as I move through all stages of recommendations to making The Royal archive, a key part of Toronto history, accessible to the public. Equally as important as the sources I have found beneficial are the sources that are lacking. Although there are a multitude of sources that discuss theoretical approaches to keeping digital resources user-focused, and ideas on increasing accessibility to archives in the digital age, few of these offer any concrete practical advice. The resources that examine the day-to-day reality of how to implement best practices, or even what to do when best practices are not a realistic option are sparse. This thesis fills this gap by providing a resource that uses a specific archive as an example for a general process on how to approach an archive that has not seen professional intervention, and particularly how to do so within the limits of an existing space, finite budget, and non-existent collections staff.

Ben Primer, "Resources for Archives: Developing Collections, Constituents, Colleagues, and Capital," Journal of Archival Organization 7, no. 1­2 (2009): 62-63, DOI: 10.1080/15332740902892833. 35 Ibid., 64.

34

12

3. Process

Figure 3. Jersey cows during the first year of the Royal Winter Fair, 1922. Photograph provided courtesy of the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair.

The research described in Section 2 was put to practical use as I began the necessary steps to craft a complete proposal for The Royal. Although the methodology used is detailed below, each of these key sections resulted in the creation of a document recommending the necessary process to The Royal. The documents which have been crafted for The Royal's immediate use are included as appendices (Appendices A to E), and follow The Royal's formatting conventions. I initially drafted a rough plan on what order I would tackle the issues at hand. The first priority was to get a sense of what The Royal had in their collection in terms of quantity, size, subject matter, material, and condition of the objects. Once an inventory was completed to answer these questions, this information could be used to create reasonable recommendations. An overarching collections policy was determined to be the next step, as this would affect other documents relating to the archive. Simultaneously, information needed to be gathered on collections management software and physical storage options. It was determined that these processes

13

should be started at approximately the same time, as many different suppliers would need to be contacted regarding both software and storage. The Royal corporate offices are housed in the Enercare Centre, and reside in part of the Ricoh Coliseum. Hence, The Royal has no control over the current building environment, and faces additional complications due to the age of the building such as windows that do not close. The archive needs to be housed within The Royal office space, so a suitable solution that offers environmental controls must be arrived at. A section of the second floor East Annex storage area houses decommissioned walk-in coolers, and the possibility of repurposing these to act as a vault was mentioned early on. It is important to investigate all options, however, and this includes creating brand new vault space. This required research into companies offering new vaults, engineering companies to create technical drawings to reimagine the coolers into vaults, furniture such as shelving, and HVAC options for temperature and humidity control. Once an overarching collections policy exists, and recommendations on software and physical storage have been drafted, it will be important to create the framework of procedures for The Royal to build upon, such as cataloguing, handling, and digitization.

3.1 Box-level Inventory
The collection as a whole had not been inventoried in recent memory, and no records exist to give a suggestion of its scope and size. Currently, the archive is stored in various locations including the Upper East Annex storage area, the President's Room, the office for the head of the Marketing Department, and on the walls throughout the offices (see Figures 4 and 5). Accordingly, it was crucial to complete an inventory of all items that The Royal views as belonging to the archive. Due to the brevity of this project (six months), and the amount of bankers boxes I was presented with, it became obvious that a box-level inventory would be the most beneficial option. This involves examining each box (or filing cabinet, etc.) and approximating the number of objects contained within it. With regards to the bankers boxes, the majority of the photos were stored in albums, therefore I estimated the number of photographs based on how many photographs were in each Mylar sheet and multiplied this by the number of sheets in the

14

album. While approximating the number of objects in each container, I quickly took stock of the overall conditions, size, contents and subject matter.

Figure 4. Map of the Upper East Annex area with the current storage location and proposed new location marked in red.

Figure 5. Map of The Royal offices with the current collection locations marked in red.

15

As I progressed through this inventory, I made sure to remove any elastic bands and paper clips, and to make note of objects that should be prioritized for rehousing (see Figures 6 and 7). As seen in these figures, paperclips and elastic bands can cause damage over time.

Figure 6. Photograph showing damage from a paperclip, taken by the author, February 8, 2018.

Figure 7. Photograph showing photographs with paperclip, taken by the author, January 26, 2018.

Paperclips can rust and leave residue, as well as creating dents in the photograph's surface. Elastic bands decay over time, and accordingly are not a reliable method of keeping objects contained together, Furthermore, in heat and higher humidity, they can become adhered to the surface of materials.

3.2 Collections Policy
I began looking at examples of collections policies at other institutions with similarly sized collections and facing comparable challenges. Although a collections policy is important for any institution, it was especially crucial for The Royal. The goal of my thesis work from The Royal's perspective is to have a more accessible collection that is promoted online, which will lead to more awareness of the archive's existence. This, in combination with a complete lack of any documentation relating to management of the archive, is a recipe for the archive becoming a store-all without a valid
16

reason to not accept donations. Furthermore, this collections policy will provide an overarching document to guide the archive in shaping a cohesive collection and, along with the inventory, highlight areas that are weak. It was important to investigate collections policies for similar institutions to ensure that I was following best practices. Although I looked at a great many policies, a number of them stood out for various reasons. The policy for the Trinity Hall Archives at the University of Cambridge was greatly beneficial in terms of a starting layout and some clearly defined sections. 36 However, this policy was significantly briefer than what I was looking to draft. Accordingly, the 14-page document that serves as a collections policy for the Wyoming American Heritage Center offered a look at a much more detailed and robust policy. 37 The Royal staff expressed to me that it will be necessary to deaccession some material. Given this, it was especially important to look for references regarding deaccessioning policies. One of these was a guide created by the Archives Association of British Columbia specifically designed with small archives in mind that offered practical insight into crafting a deaccessioning policy that will truly benefit a small archive. 38 Lastly, a local resource, the University of Toronto Archives and Special Collections, was beneficial for their requirements for deaccessioning and for their policy as a whole. 39

3.3 Collections Management Systems
Armed with knowledge about the approximate size of the collection, as well as a better understanding of the condition and mediums of the material, it was possible to begin researching options for collection management and digital asset management systems. I began this process by creating a survey (Appendix G) which I sent to other collections management professionals to ask what software

"Archive Collection Policy," Trinity Hall, accessed February 8, 2018, https://www.trinhall.cam.ac.uk/about/library/archives/archive-collection-policy/. 37 "Collections Management Policy," UW - Laramie, Wyoming American Heritage Center, accessed February 8, 2018, http://www.uwyo.edu/ahc/_files/policies/collection-mgmt-policy.pdf. 38 Donald Alexander Baird, A Manual for Small Archives. (Vancouver: Archives Association of British Columbia, 1999), 28-29, accessed February 8, 2018, https://aabc.ca/media/6069/manualforsmallarchives.pdf. 39 "Collection Policy, University of Toronto Scarborough Library, Archives & Special Collections," Collection Policy, University of Toronto Scarborough Library, Archives & Special Collections | University of Toronto Scarborough Campus, accessed February 8, 2018, https://utsc.library.utoronto.ca/asc-collection-policy.

36

17

they use, whether or not they would recommend it, and what they like and dislike about it. This survey was not overly beneficial as only seven individuals responded. Of these seven, four listed The Museum System (TMS) as the software that they use, which I ruled out due to cost. Other systems listed include: Collector Systems, Filemaker Pro, and Aleph. Systems that were listed but not recommended included Eloquent, Past Perfect, and Mimsy XG. Due to the fact that I did not receive as many responses as predicted, I did some basic research for additional options. Once again, a spreadsheet (Appendix H) was created to track information such as the benefits and downfalls of the software as it related to The Royal needs, and the approximate cost. Two of the potential options were quickly taken out of consideration due to their unsuitability for The Royal. I reached out to each of the companies on my list and received highlights of what their software offers as well as approximate cost. Since these quotes are confidential, a redacted copy has been included with "$" values assigned between one to four representing the relative expense. Four software solutions were selected that fit The Royal requirements for cataloguing, a basic digital asset management system for access copies of their digital surrogates, and a web portal for increased access to the collection. All fall into different price ranges, offering a range of options for The Royal depending on budgetary restrictions.

3.4 Physical Storage and Environmental Controls
The next major need to be addressed is the physical location of the collection. As previously mentioned, it is currently stored in multiple spaces, and there is no finding aid or database to assist in locating a specific object or group of objects. The areas currently housing the archive do not have collections-standard temperature and humidity control, as they are on the building's central heating, ventilation, and air conditioning system. This system is controlled by the Enercare Centre, not The Royal. Furthermore, the boxes stored in the Upper East Annex area are above a space that houses hundreds of animals annually during the November fair. There is ammonia off-gassing from urine and drastic increases in temperature and humidity during this time. Historically, there have been issues of pests such as raccoons, mice, and birds getting into the storage area as well, although surprisingly little evidence of pest intervention was found in the collection. However, it is likely only a matter of time until this changes
18

for the worse. Although most of the photographic objects are stored in archival Mylar sleeves within banker's boxes, a small percentage of the collection is stored loose within these boxes, and some of these photographs have begun adhering to each other. This is likely due to fluctuations in temperature and humidity. Shifting has also been noticed in colour materials, which again could be slowed by proper storage. Accordingly, a site has been proposed that contains decommissioned walk-in coolers. All but one of these units have had the doors removed, and all have had the heating, ventilation and air conditioning units removed, as well as the Freon drained from them. In recent years, they have been used for storage. The largest of these units is 2.4 by 3.7 by 2.4 metres, with the second largest unit being 2.4 by 3.1 by 2.1 metres. As determined by many experts in the field including Henry Wilhelm, black and white materials should be stored around 30% relative humidity 40 (although the Library of Congress proposes between 3040% relative humidity) 41. Recommendations are for photographs to be stored below room temperature, ideally 21 degrees Celsius or cooler. 42 Wilhelm recommends that colour materials are stored at a lower relative humidity of 20-30%, and at minimum below 10 degrees Celsius, although below 2 degrees Celsius is preferable. 43 My proposal for rehousing the physical collection includes recommendations for incorporating a consumer-grade dehumidifier, building a new vault, and refurbishing the walk-in coolers. Although these attempt to follow best practices, some minor sacrifices have been made to account for budgetary limitations, such as staying within the Library of Congress' recommended relative humidity while being slightly above Henry Wilhem's suggestions. Within the latter recommendation of refurbishment, there are three options which can be pursued:

Henry Gilmer Wilhelm and Carol Brower, The Permanence and Care of Color Photographs: Traditional and Digital Color Prints, Color Negatives, Slides, and Motion Pictures (Grinnell, IA: Preservation Publishing, 1993), Electronic, 544. 41 "Care, Handling, and Storage of Photographs," The Library of Congress, accessed May 8, 2018, http://www.loc.gov/preservation/care/photo.html. 42 Henry Gilmer Wilhelm and Carol Brower, The Permanence and Care of Color Photographs: Traditional and Digital Color Prints, Color Negatives, Slides, and Motion Pictures (Grinnell, IA: Preservation Publishing, 1993), Electronic, 545. 43 Ibid, 545.

40

19

- one unit as a cool vault (5-10 degrees Celsius and 35% relative humidity) - one at collection standard (18 degrees Celsius and 35% relative humidity) - two vaults, one at each of these standards.
I also detail what material should be prioritized. I have received quotes for a brand-new vault space as well as to retrofit these coolers, which need temperature and humidity controls reinstalled, flooring replaced, and new powder-coated shelving. One of the units also needs a door. Included in the recommendations for rehousing the collection as a whole are guidelines to follow for how individual objects should be stored.

3.5 Arranging and Describing
Beyond moving the physical collection to a new location, some sort of intellectual order needs to be applied to the archive. This must be done on a case by case basis, as generalizations will only lead to further complications in the future. The Rules for Archival Description (RAD) are appropriate to be followed during this process. RAD is a guidebook on how archives arrange and describe their collection materials, following a hierarchical concept. 44 The Royal collection could most easily be arranged into fonds, series, file, and item levels (see Figure 8). RAD recommends describing from the most broad term to the most specific, and so my recommendations proceed from the fonds-level to the series-level (and sub-series where applicable) to the file-level and eventually item-level. 45

Rules for Archival Description (Ottawa: Bureau of Canadian Archivists, 2008), 0-1, accessed May 8, 2018, http://www.cdncouncilarchives.ca/rad/radcomplete_july2008.pdf. 45 Rules for Archival Description (Ottawa: Bureau of Canadian Archivists, 2008), xviii, accessed May 8, 2018, http://www.cdncouncilarchives.ca/rad/radcomplete_july2008.pdf.

44

20

Figure 8. Graphic showing the levels of arrangement in a fonds. From the Archives @ PAMA blog. CC-VY 4.0. https://peelarchivesblog.com/2016/02/29/how-do-archivistsdescribe-collections-or-how-to-read-a-finding-aid/

Another important focus of archival work which RAD follows is respect des fonds, meaning that the original order that archival objects are arranged in should be followed so as not to disturb connections between items. 46 The manner in which the records at The Royal have been organized is indicative that respects des fonds has not been followed. Many of the photographs from the 1920s through to the 1970s have been placed in manila file folders according to subject. Select photographs have been pulled for marketing purposes and not returned to their previous location. In these cases, as original provenance is unknown, and the maker is most often unknown, it will be most beneficial to continue to impose an artificial order. One example of this would be the miscellaneous horse show jumpers fonds, and the miscellaneous dairy cow fonds, etc. These would be further divided by series and, when appropriate, sub46

Ibid.

21

series and file, with each individual photograph eventually being described at the item level. However, whenever provenance is known, original order should be respected. When the maker (photographer) is known, or a natural arrangement by event exists, this should be maintained, and further divided by series, sub-series when appropriate, file and item. This could lead to a natural arrangement by photographer, such as the Jim McNeil fonds, the Clix fonds, the Norm Scudvalli fonds, or by event as with the Guests of Canada fonds. A separate proposal has not been prepared on this matter as any sort of definitive rules will most certainly need to be broken, and each fonds should be evaluated individually.

3.6 Policies and Procedures
In speaking with The Royal staff, it became evident that there may be interns, volunteers, and various staff members working on and with the collection in the future. In order to ensure that best practices are followed, and that work is completed consistently, I created procedures for handling, cataloguing, and digitization (Appendices B to D). These documents are not as specific as I had originally planned, as I found that this was impossible to accurately accomplish without a collections management software, arrangement and description, or a numbering system being in place. However, these policies can serve as a strong backbone for future documents, with additional specifications once these aspects of the archive are completed. Working with a previously unmanaged collection has presented a unique set of challenges and has provided an opportunity to make recommendations in a vast variety of areas to increase accessibility and provide preservation for important heritage materials. The creation of this thesis as a bound collection of proposed solutions, policies, and procedures will be a valuable resource to the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair as they move from a conglomeration of stored materials to an archive available for internal and external research alike.

22

4. Box-Level Inventory

Figure 9. Horse jumping outside at The Royal, 1949. Photograph provided courtesy of the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair.

As previously mentioned, the collection at The Royal currently has no catalogue or database, no finding aid or identification numbers, and no documentation detailing the scope and content of the objects contained within it. For this reason, a priority early on was to get a sense of what The Royal actually had stored in the many banker's boxes filling storage shelves. It was determined that a box-level inventory was the most effective way to complete this task. I concluded that the best way to organize my spreadsheet (Appendix F) was to create separate sheets for each main storage location (the Upper East Annex storage area, the President's Room, material located throughout the office space, and material from the Marketing Manager's office). I then created a sheet for total numbers, so I could combine the data from the preceding sheets. This allowed me to create columns that applied specifically to the manner in which the material was stored in each area. For

23

example, in the Annex storage area, the majority of the photographs are stored in archival Mylar sleeves within albums, which are gathered together in banker's boxes on storage shelves (see Figures 10 to 13).

Figure 10. Photograph of the Upper East Annex storage area, taken by the author, January 18, 2018.

Figure 11. Photograph showing collection in Mylar sleeves, taken by the author, January 18, 2018.

Figure 12. Photograph of banker's box in the Upper East Storage area, taken by the author, January 18, 2018.

Figure 13. Photograph of an album housing photographs in the Upper East storage area, taken by the author, January 18, 2018.

24

I created a column for the box name, and then the binder number within that box. For the President's Room, the photographs are again primarily in Mylar sleeves but are stored in numbered file folders within a set of filing cabinets. Each filing cabinet has a number, and each cabinet has three drawers which are labelled with a number as well, so I created a column for the filing cabinet and drawer numbers and for the folder number. In each of the individual sheets, I created a column to store data about the overall condition of the material, the average size of the photographs within that album or folder, whether they were colour or black and white, and general subject matter. I then had columns for the number of photographs, number of slides or negatives, number of non-photographic ephemera, and centimetres of textual material. For photographs contained in Mylar sheets, especially in albums where there were many such sheets, I counted the number of photographs per page and multiplied it by the number of pages in the album. For large groups of loose photographs or slides I would count either 50 or 100 of the object, then measure the size of this selection and estimate how many times this would fit into the entire group. This inventory provides an approximate number, as there is sure to be some error in counting this many objects. I tried to account for Mylar sheets that were missing photographs as much as possible, as this is a common occurrence within this collection. I counted a total of approximately 181,000 objects which includes photographic prints, contact sheets, negatives, slides, paintings, posters, ephemera such as ribbons and pins, and born-digital photographs. The collection also contains around 6.75 metres of textual material including newspaper clippings, published books about The Royal, and ledgers of the yearly winners. This collection contains approximately 99.5% photographic materials, both analogue and born-digital, and 0.5% ephemera and other artworks. Of the analogue photographic material, approximately 60% is black and white material while 40% is colour. Approximately 60% of the entire collection is born-digital photographic material while the remaining 40% of the photographic objects are analogue. The born-digital content consists primarily of JPEGs. In fact, these make up 99.9% of this content, with the remaining file formats consisting of PCT, BUP, IKO, VOB, AVI, MOV, PPT, PNG, and
25

MP4. In total, the born-digital materials amount to approximately 77 GB. Currently, this material is stored primarily on one external hard drive, a number of USB thumb-drives, CDs, and DVDs. A consistent naming system has not been used, and the files differ in sizes as they seem to have been saved onto the external drive however the photographer sent them. The incorporation of a CMS with a basic DAMS will help to remedy this precarious digital storage system. The files will need to be reorganized and renamed in accordance with the new numbering system. The Royal is in the process of moving to a cloud-based server storage system, and will be doing so with assistance from a third-party IT company, Jolera. There have been no known preservation attempts at this time. This inventory, although an approximation rather than an exact total, not only provides The Royal with an idea of the scale of the collection as a whole, but confirms that it is primarily photographic. The other statistics mentioned above can help direct The Royal on decision making in the future. For example, although more than half of the analogue material is black and white, the analogue colour material is at highest risk in terms of preservation, and has suffered the most from inconsistent temperature and relative humidity. However, the born-digital material, which makes up more than half of the collection, has different preservation requirements, making this number a much more manageable one in terms of cool or cold preservation prioritization. Moreover, the attached spreadsheet (Appendix F) provides information on the content of the collection rather than just size. It provides a general sense of the scope of the subject matter, as well as an idea of the overall condition of the objects. Lastly, it can be a beneficial tool for prioritizing which objects need immediate preservation attention. Although this was a time-consuming practical task, the information it provided was required for every other step of this thesis. It informed quotes for collection management software, directed the writing of the Collections Policy, and highlighted the specific preservation needs of this collection.

26

5. Collections Management Software Recommendations

Figure 14. Prince Philip and the Mexican team, 1968. Photograph provided courtesy of the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair.

Selecting a collections management software (CMS) that is appropriate for an individual institution is crucial to ensuring success for the archive. This software can function for a number of different purposes, including as a central database, catalogue record, online portal for the public, and a basic digital asset management systems (DAMS). Accordingly, it is important to consider the importance of each of these functions. The Royal has indicated a desire first and foremost to have their collection accessible online. To create a functional online portal, catalogue records must also be accessible, allowing researchers to locate material both online and in person. Other factors must be considered such as whether the program will be stored on a server or on an external cloud-based platform, how many users need to access the back-end of the program, digital storage limitations, and budgetary concerns. I have selected four options that present a varied cost scale and have included my reasons for selecting each one. I have also briefly discussed two options for a more robust DAMS and digital preservation software. This is something that should be strongly considered by The Royal for the longevity of their collection and

27

digital objects. Due to the time constraints of this thesis, this extremely large and in-depth issue is only touched upon here as a starting point. A separate document has been prepared for The Royal including these recommendations with cost comparisons. Due to confidentiality reasons, these cannot be included in this thesis and are for internal use at The Royal only.

5.1 Vernon CMS
Although initially looking at Vernon Systems for their eHive online software, Vernon CMS 47 was determined to be a stronger solution due to the large size of The Royal holdings. Vernon CMS is a licensed, modular software that would be installed on The Royal server. This is another feature that makes it more favourable than eHive, which is a browser-based software, as staff at The Royal mentioned that an installed software was preferred. There are a number of features that make this software appealing for The Royal. Firstly, it is modular, which allows for only the applicable modules to be purchased. In this instance, this would include the Cataloguing module, the Browser module, and the Web Messenger module. There is also an Activities module that assists in tracking and managing acquisitions, exhibitions and the like, but I do not think that The Royal requires this currently. Additionally, although the first year is expensive, the only ongoing expense is a service agreement that offers support and updates at a fee of 20% of the total licences. This is optional but recommended. Lastly, Vernon has been following the International Image Interoperability Framework for eHive, and will be incorporating this into their Vernon CMS software, an important factor in providing greater access. The Cataloguing module provides one user licence, but additional users can be added on. This module refers to the relational database component of the software, and allows for all standard cataloguing to be completed including object details, location and movement information, multimedia files, related persons details, and vocabulary lists, which can be individualized. Multiple windows can be opened and viewed simultaneously, and customizable record views exist. The search bar is very user47

https://vernonsystems.com/products/vernon-cms/

28

friendly, and is capable of smart dates searches (for example, late 1960s to early 1980s). Object lists can be created and exported into Excel. Permissions can be set individually or for groups, and a log of modifications is created with each change that is made. The Browser and Web Messenger modules work in conjunction with each other. The Browser module allows for the collection to be published to a website, and also offers intranet and kiosk access. The Web Messenger module allows for updates to the catalogue to be automatically sent to the Browser module and published online, and provides a basic DAMS. It can be integrated with a third-party software as well, such as a digital preservation tool like Preservica. The Browser module can also automatically generate tags for each object using artificial intelligence. External pages such as Wikipedia can be linked to the collection webpages.

5.2 Proficio Elements (Recommended)
This software by Re:discovery offers a variety of options at different price points, making it a flexible and viable option. Proficio Elements 48 can be purchased as a cloud-based or server-based program, and it also has a web portal. There is the option for a basic DAMS as well as multiple modules (both museum and archive), and exhibitions can be presented on the web portal. Although The Royal collection is technically an archive, the museum module may be a better fit for The Royal collection, if public interaction with the objects through an online portal is the main focus. A hierarchical archival organization can be confusing for researchers and the public alike, whereas a gallery of item-level records with images may be the most beneficial. Proficio Elements allows more flexibility through the multiple modules to retain a hierarchical organization, if desired, while still providing users with accessible item-level information. The ability to switch between modules offers an adaptability that few other software programs offer. The web portal not only allows for the collection to be seen by the public but also provides an option to create curated online exhibitions.

48

https://rediscoverysoftware.com/proficio-elements/

29

Billing can be set up as a one-time licensing fee or via subscription, and is based on the number of users who need to access the back-end of the program. Access to the public web portal for researchers and the public is unlimited. The first 90 days of support are offered for free, but they do recommend having support for the first year, which does come at an additional price. The web module is sold as a separate add-on with a set-up fee and a monthly charge, with the option to customize the master page to match The Royal website for a one-time fee. Assuming that the one-time license fee option is selected, and support for the first year is purchased for one user with the web module for one year, it is approximately a third of the cost of Argus, and almost a ninth the cost of the initial year of Vernon CMS. However, annual costs for Proficio Elements are close to the same as annual costs for Vernon CMS support following the first year. This does not include the optional web customization. Proficio Elements can most closely be compared to Past Perfect. However, Past Perfect functions on a module-based billing system, meaning that for each necessary module you must add on to achieve the results you desire (such as a multi-media add-on, web module, additional work station add-ons, etc). This can lead to an end product that is much more expensive than initially believed. Proficio Elements is derived from Proficio, a software designed with larger institutions in mind that has been on the market for the last 10 years. Both Proficio and Proficio Elements utilize a more modern interface than that of Past Perfect. The Proficio search engines do not require the user to know which field name a keyword is located within as it searches across all fields simultaneously. The web module allows for the creation of online-only exhibitions, and they boast longevity with their client service team, as team members have been with Re:discovery for an average of 18 years.

5.3 Argus
The Argus 49 software by Lucidea offers a robust option that seems to cover all of The Royal needs. It combines a basic DAMS and CMS together with an integrated web portal. The web portal is searchable on Google and does not require an understanding of how these metrics work. Although it is
49

https://lucidea.com/argus/

30

ready to use right out of the box, it can be customized to the individual institution. Argus allows the user to rename or hide fields and activities such as accessioning, deaccessioning, loans, exhibitions, etc. The web portal can be incorporated into an existing website, and this software allows for data stored in the collections management portion of the software to be exported into various file formats. Argus could be hosted by The Royal servers as a customized off the shelf (COTS) software or by Lucidea, at a decreased rate. It is offered at a five-year subscription rate plus implementation costs such as configuration and staff training. Although it is more affordable to have Lucidea host, the costs are based on how much storage is required. Although some deaccessioning is being recommended, The Royal does have a significantly-sized collection, so this could become costly. The obvious benefit to a cloud-based service is that it can be accessed on any computer with a web browser, on- or off-site. If The Royal chooses to host Argus on their own servers, at a five-year subscription, billing starts at slightly over three times the yearly cost of Proficio Elements with additional implementation costs. Should The Royal choose to have Lucidea host through a cloud-based service, the cost would be about two and a half times the yearly fee of Proficio Elements, with a five-year contract. Additional services to set-up Argus would be required including training, system configuration, reporting licenses, web portal set-up, etc. However, the set-up quote provided includes data conversion, which will not be required for The Royal as there is currently no data to convert. Argus presents a software that, although customizable, is ready to use immediately and requires little training. The desire to have The Royal collection accessible online is supported by Argus through combining collections management tools with an online portal for increased visibility and accessibility. They also offer a search capability that connects with Google. Record views can be personalized for each individual staff member or by collection, allowing for an efficient workflow that can be adjusted case by case.

31

5.4 AtoM
Access to Memory 50, also known as AtoM, is an open-source cataloguing software. It is webbased, which unfortunately does not align with the preference of The Royal to have an installed software, but as it is open-source it is offered at no cost. Should it be determined that a budget does not currently exist for purchasing software, AtoM would be recommended. This software, like many others, is a relational database that is based on standards. Artefactual, the developer of AtoM, uses multiple metadata exchange standards to allow for data to be imported and exported. If a budget is not currently available for software, but will be a later date, this would allow for AtoM to be utilized currently and data to be exported to a readable format for another software in the future. There is a basic web portal available as well. Artefactual has also developed Archivematica, an open-source digital preservation software, which works in conjunction with AtoM well. It may not be possible to use Archivematica with other software. As AtoM is open-source software, it does require more knowledge and effort on the part of The Royal staff. It will also require a certain amount of collaboration with The Royal third-party IT company, Jolera. However, extensive documentation is available online to assist with establishing AtoM. It does not present an interface that is as user-friendly as the other options discussed here, but is more than functional.

5.5 Archivematica versus Preservica
It is important to note that it was not possible to explore digital asset management systems (DAMS) and digital preservation software to the extent that they deserve within the time constraints of this thesis. However, two software options for digital preservation that are available to The Royal are Archivematica 51 and Preservica 52. Digital preservation is an increasingly important issue, and should be researched more fully by The Royal archive staff, when such staff exist.

50 51

https://www.accesstomemory.org/en/ https://www.archivematica.org/en/

32

Archivematica is an open-source software produced by Artefactual that also offers certain paid services. It would pair best with AtoM as they are created by the same developer. It has been integrated with other third-party systems, but not with Vernon CMS, Proficio Elements, or Argus, as far as I can find. Further discussions with The Royal IT consultant would be required to ensure this is an option, once a collections management system has been implemented. Preservica can be integrated with Vernon CMS, Proficio Elements, or Argus. Additionally, it would require considerably less effort from The Royal staff and IT consultants alike. However, this software is available at a rather significant cost, depending on how much storage is required. A clear recommendation of one of these options over the other cannot be determined until a CMS has been selected, and more research into digital preservation softwares has been completed.

5.6 Other Considerations
These recommendations have been made keeping in mind the goals of The Royal while trying to maintain a budget-friendly solution. Other options exist that are not being suggested due to prohibitive costs, or the lack of a web portal allowing for increased public access to the collection. Other options such as Microsoft Excel or Filemaker Pro can provide a low-cost database but can limit how data is exported and do not allow for any sort of DAMS or web gallery. Databases such as this can also be complicated in a hierarchical archival arrangement such as one The Royal will be following. However, an Excel or Filemaker Pro database would be more beneficial than having no catalogue whatsoever, as is the case currently. If a web catalogue is created, it makes sense to catalogue each item as it is digitized, although this is not required and can be determined by the priorities of The Royal. It is my opinion that Proficio Elements aligns with The Royal goals and preferences while still remaining affordable with flexible options and is therefore my recommended software. If the budget for this does not exist, I would recommend AtoM as an alternative.

52

https://preservica.com/

33

6. Physical Storage and Environmental Controls Recommendations

Figure 15. Model with corn display, c. 1950s. Photograph provided courtesy of the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair.

The Royal Agricultural Winter Fair archive is currently stored in a number of locations spread throughout their offices in the Enercare Centre. The collection is primarily stored in two locations, with additional materials spread throughout the Marketing Manager's office, bookshelves in the general office space, and on the walls throughout the space. The more historical material, from approximately the 1920s to the 1970s, is housed in archival Mylar sleeves within manila file folders, separated by year or decade and subject, in filing cabinets in the President's Room. The other main storage area holds the more contemporary analogue material, once again primarily in archival Mylar sleeves stored in albums within banker's boxes, on metal shelving in the Upper East Annex. The born-digital material is primarily stored on one external hard-drive. As The Royal is a tenant in the Enercare Centre, they do not have control over the heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning (HVAC) system. This means that temperature and relative

34

humidity fluctuations are a regular occurrence, further complicated by the fact that the offices are in an old part of the building and face issues such as windows not closing properly. Furthermore, the Upper East Annex is directly above an area where thousands of animals are housed each November, leading to great fluctuations in temperature and relative humidity, as well as off-gassing of substances such as ammonia. Lastly, this area has had pest control issues, with known instances of birds, raccoons, and mice getting into the storage area and posing a large risk to the collection. While completing a box-level inventory, I made note of specific preservation concerns. Although there has been surprisingly little signs of pest intervention, the colour materials in particular have suffered due to the lack of temperature and humidity control. As is well-documented, black and white photographic materials should be stored at temperatures of 18 degrees Celsius and relative humidity between 30-40%, and colour materials should be stored at temperatures below 10 degrees and a similar or slightly lower relative humidity. 53 Most importantly, the temperature and relative humidity must not fluctuate drastically, as this has been found to be the most detrimental to photographic collections.54 Moreover, although access to the collection is currently hampered due to a lack of a finding aid or numbering system, this is further complicated by the many storage locations for materials spread throughout a great amount of square footage. Accordingly, it is my recommendation to rehouse the collection in one central storage area. There are a number of ways that this can be done, dependent on budgetary limitations. The figures provided in this proposal are subject to change and are approximate. A separate document has been prepared for The Royal containing some confidential information which cannot be included in this thesis.

Henry Gilmer Wilhelm and Carol Brower, The Permanence and Care of Color Photographs: Traditional and Digital Color Prints, Color Negatives, Slides, and Motion Pictures (Grinnell, IA: Preservation Publishing, 1993), Electronic, 545. 54 Henry Gilmer Wilhelm and Carol Brower, The Permanence and Care of Color Photographs: Traditional and Digital Color Prints, Color Negatives, Slides, and Motion Pictures (Grinnell, IA: Preservation Publishing, 1993), Electronic, 545.

53

35

One part of the Upper East Annex storage area currently contains three decommissioned walk-in coolers, as well as two additional coolers that are not available to The Royal for these purposes. These small spaces had all HVAC systems removed, and the Freon drained. All but one have had their doors removed, and they are presently being used as additional storage spaces (see Figures 16 and 17). These coolers were decommissioned as they no longer had tight seals and were experiencing issues with air leaking. These spaces have been flagged as suitable areas for the collection to be stored in the future as they do offer small, contained spaces that could be kept locked, allow for a microclimate to be created, and already have pre-existing insulated walls. A number of upgrades must be completed prior to becoming a useable vault space. This includes installing appropriate flooring that will not off-gas and is not as inviting a space for mould, fungus, and insects to reside as the current wood floors, installing powder-coated shelving (available through Uline), and repairing any leaks where possible.

Figure 16. Photograph showing a decommissioned walk-in cooler, taken by the author, January 18, 2018.

Figure 17. Photograph showing a decommissioned walk-in cooler, taken by the author, January 19, 2018.

36

6.1 Decommissioned Coolers and Residential De/Humidifier
It is at this stage where three options arise. The most economical, but also most short-term solution would be to utilize a store-bought residential-grade humidifier/dehumidifier. There are issues with this solution, as it takes up more space within the vault's square footage and could present a risk to the collection, as these small consumer units do not have the same backups and safety shut-off features as an HVAC system. This solution would also require either manually emptying the water reservoir or installing a connection to the building's existing drainage system. Manually emptying this reservoir can be messy and puts the collection materials at risk of water damage, while using the existing drainage system could be costly. Additionally, no temperature control is provided, although the insulated walls would help decrease the extent of any temperature fluctuations. Storage shelves need to be installed, and the flooring should be replaced or covered by rubber mats or vinyl flooring. Powder-coated shelving is available from Uline. 55 If both vaults will be utilized, one needs a door, and repairing the leaky seals should be considered. Moving the collection to a centralized, humidity-controlled and insulated area would still be more beneficial than its current locations, but only somewhat decreases the risk that this material faces. Here is a list of possible costs with approximate figures. Figures referencing one vault are for the larger unit. All figures are in Canadian dollars, before tax: - Vinyl flooring $200 for one vault, $400 for two, Home Depot. This may not be necessary as The Royal had rubber mats they could use. - Replacement door, $1000-1500, various sources new or used. - Powder-coated shelving $3,600 for one vault, $6,500 for two, Uline. Approximately 156 banker's boxes will fit in the larger unit and 126 additional boxes in the smaller unit. - Dehumidifier, $375, Uline (will need one per vault).

55

https://www.uline.ca/BL_4025/Heavy-Duty-Steel-Shelving?keywords=shelves

37

- Total expenditure for two vaults: $9,150

6.2 Converting Decommissioned Coolers to Vaults (Recommended)
The second option would be to have an engineering company come in to The Royal and prepare technical drawings and a plan to refurbish the coolers. This would include repairing the leaks, reinstalling a door on the cooler that no longer has one, adding in a HVAC system for temperature and humidity control, and ensuring that lighting is adequate. If this route is selected, ideal recommendations would be to have two vaults, one as collection standard storage (18 degrees Celsius) and one as cool storage (10 degrees Celsius). However, if it is determined that only one vault can be refurbished, it is recommended that it be a cool storage vault in order to protect the colour photographic materials which are at highest risk of deterioration. A quote has been obtained from Smith + Andersen 56, a local engineering consultant firm, for mechanical and electrical engineering services. Furthermore, a HVAC technician will be required, as well as the HVAC system itself, and additional contracting or construction services may be necessary. A number of HVAC companies were contacted, and Imperial Energy 57 was found to have sufficient knowledge for this task. They also offer engineering services, at a lower price than Smith + Anderson. Similar to the first option, powder-coated shelving should be purchased and installed. Uline has many options for shelving, and should be consulted prior to purchase. This option should be looked at in phases. Phase one would be to retrofit the larger cooler as the collections standard vault. Once there are resources available to do so, the second cooler could be retrofitted to be a cool vault for the colour materials. If it is determined that two vaults will be too costly, an alternative would be to digitize the objects that are deteriorating and purchase one or more chest freezers. There are certainly costs incurred with this as well, including the purchase of the freezer(s),

56 57

http://smithandandersen.com/ http://imperialenergy.ca/

38

packaging materials to protect the objects, digitization costs, electricity usage to run the freezer, etc, but this could be a less costly option than converting a second cooler to a cool vault. Although this option has a considerably larger financial commitment attached to it, with the fastapproaching centennial year of The Royal, additional funding may be available and this is an ideal time to create a long-term solution while utilizing existing construction as much as possible. Here is a list of possible costs with approximate figures. Figures referencing one vault are for the larger unit. All figures are in Canadian dollars, before tax: - Vinyl flooring $200 for one vault, $400 for two, Home Depot. This may not be necessary as The Royal had rubber mats they could use. - Replacement door, $1,000-1,500, various sources new or used. - Powder-coated shelving $3,600 for one vault, $6,500 for two, Uline. Approximately 156 banker's boxes will fit in the larger unit and 126 additional boxes in the smaller unit. - Engineering services, $2,500-8,750, Imperial Energy or Smith + Andersen. - Ductless HVAC units and install, $3,500, Imperial Energy. - Dehumidification system, $2,500, Imperial Energy. - Plumbing services, $500-1,000, subcontracted. - Electrical work, $1,000, subcontracted. - Total expenditure for two vaults: $25,150 (calculated on the highest end of all approximate figures).

6.3 New Vault
The final option would be to create a brand-new vault or vaults from scratch. I approached Scientific Climate Systems 58, an American-based company who has worked in Canada in the past, for an approximate quote on what it would cost to install a new archival photographic vault. Unfortunately, a comparable Canadian company could not be sourced for this project. The ballpark figure provided was

58

https://www.scs-usa.com/

39

$100,000, so this option is not being strongly recommended. The cost is prohibitive, and significant savings can be found by reusing the existing coolers.

6.4 Other Considerations
There are other factors to consider when creating a plan for long-term storage. The loose photographs should be rehoused in archival Mylar sleeves. Perhaps most importantly, an intellectual order and concurrent numbering system need to be devised. It would be ideal for the numbering system to be applied to the images prior to them being moved to a new storage area, although this may not be possible depending on time constraints and available staff. Intellectual order will need to be determined based on the material. Specifically, if natural fonds exist, such as a collection of photographs produced by one photographer or a photographic company, this organization should be retained. However, artificial fonds may have to be created when the maker is unknown and these would likely be described by subject. More detailed information regarding intellectual order can be found in the essay included with this publication, section 3.5. A decision should also be made if the material is going to be physically reordered to follow the new intellectual order. If it is, it would be most logical to impose this new order while the material is being moved to a new storage location. However, if a collection standard and a cool vault are being created, the material may need to be divided by preservation concerns depending on space limitations. If this is the case, the material that is at highest risk or already facing degradation should be placed in the cool vault, while more stable materials could remain in the collection standard vault, thereby requiring a different physical reorganization. Should The Royal pursue recommendations to create vault space, storage space limitations may become a factor in deaccessioning. Deaccessioning is discussed in greater detail within the Collections Policy (Appendix A). It could be beneficial to The Royal to deaccession objects with little to no informational value, or duplicates in excess of three copies, for example, as this will allow the stronger components of the collection to be made accessible faster. Most importantly, imminent action must be taken to stabilize the environment in which this collection resides. Continued fluctuations in temperature and relative humidity, as well as the addition of
40

airborne pollutants such as ammonia and pest intervention will inevitably lead to the loss of valuable historic material. Changes can already be observed in the colour photographic material, and some objects are likely past preserving at this stage and may endanger other parts of the collection. As such, they should be deaccessioned in order to maintain the integrity of the collection as a whole. Although a shortterm solution can be appealing as there are considerably less commitments required in terms of resources, it is beneficial to look at the overall cost of these options. A small, residential humidifier would have a short lifespan, requires significant upkeep, and does not provide temperature control. The creation of a vault or modification of the current coolers will provide a solution that covers all the issues and will be easier to maintain in both the shorter and longer terms. With this in mind, however, any action is better than inaction, and a step in the right direction.

41

7. Conclusion

Figure 18. Cowgirl at The Royal, 1949. Photograph provided courtesy of the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair.

This thesis seeks to accomplish a number of objectives. These apply specifically to the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair as an institution, to the field of archival studies relating to previously unmanaged collections, and to similar organizations such as agricultural groups, breed club associations, and the like. First and foremost, this is a proposal to move an underused and essentially invisible collection of boxes, now in a storage area, into an accessible archive which will preserve a part of Toronto's rich history: the history of The Royal Agricultural Winter Fair. This thesis aims to be a helpful resource for The Royal by providing key guiding documents, such as a Collections Policy, recommendations on physical storage, intellectual arrangement, collections management software, and the backbone of procedures that can serve as a reference for future staff and volunteers. Ergo, it is designed as a collection

42

of separate documents to allow for quick reference relating to a specific matter which is especially important due to the broad nature of this project. Furthermore, the general ideas and structure of this project can easily be applied to other collections that remain in an unmanaged state. Although sources about unmanaged collections exist, they are much harder to find than those regarding best practices. Similarly, the teachings in many programs regarding collections management focus on a well-established collection, so this publication can help to fill a gap in the field. Although best practices are essential and should be followed whenever possible, this project provides an exploration of suitable options, including some that may not be classified as optimal by archival standards. However, due to the limitations of resources (staff, fiscal, space, etc.) in real-world examples, the generally-accepted best practices are not always feasible. This is another under-documented area of the archival field. Lastly, although this project deals with a specific collection in a specific organization, many of the recommendations can be tailored to other similar organizations which are likely to have collections in a comparable state of neglect. Examples of these institutions include dog breed club associations, groups such as the Dairy Farmers of Ontario, other fairs that have retained historical material, and not-for-profit groups that are looking to create an accessible collection with an online catalogue. The documents preceding this conclusion were written to fulfil the requirements of this thesis, and to explain the research and methodology used to complete this project. The research involved was crucial to ensuring that sound recommendations were made. Detailing the methodologies and process undertaken was important to provide context for the documents following this conclusion. These documents, included as appendices, are papers designed for The Royal, and are written in a language that reflects their intended use. Their purpose is to provide recommendations that The Royal can refer to, and as the basis for core documents for the archive which can be modified as the archive is realized. Due to the nature of this project, this writing is designed to act as a source of recommendations and preliminary documents that will need to be edited as the proposed steps are completed. Although this publication is

43

specific to The Royal archive, the basic processes and recommendations can be applied to other such institutions who find themselves faced with a collection of previously unmanaged photographic materials.

44

Appendix A The Royal Agricultural Winter Fair Archive Collections Policy Mandate The mandate of The Royal is to promote excellence in food, agriculture and equestrian activities through world-class competition, commerce, education and entertainment. The mandate of the archive is to document, collect, and preserve materials created during and pertaining to the annual Fair for the purposes of research, both internal and external, and promotion of The Royal.

Acquisitions Acquisitions can be made to The Royal archive, in accordance with policies developed by the archivist. Acquisitions will be primarily through donations to the archive and supported by a formal donor agreement. Any donations will be evaluated internally as to their value to the collection, overall condition, and replication of materials already in the collection. In cases where a monetary valuation is required, an external expert will be utilized. In cases where external valuation has been performed, a tax receipt may be issued, but this possibility must be determined individually for each donation and is expected to be a rare instance. Documentation and photographic material created during the annual fair by individuals employed by The Royal will also be collected into the archive, including photographs produced by contracted photographers. Material that is deemed in need of preservation exceeding the abilities of the archive, duplicates, or material that does not fall under the aims of the collection will be directed to another institution or returned to the donor. Purchases are not considered by The Royal archive, unless under extraordinary circumstances.

Accessioning Assuming that the object(s) being considered fall within this collection policy, the first step is to properly accession these items. This is crucial to allow the new material to be accessible as it continues to be described and digitized. As The Royal does not currently have any collections management software, what follows is a general guideline of steps that should be followed, but the specific details will need to be refined as The Royal continues to shape its archive. 1. The first step is to assess the potential acquisition. This requires the archivist to critically examine the objects and ascertain if they fit within the Collections Policy. Are they appropriate for The Royal to collect? Do they fill a gap somehow? Can they be adequately preserved, and not put the rest of the collection at risk? Do they offer information that could be beneficial to researchers? If the accession is large, or has significant costs involved under $5,000, a written proposal should also be submitted to the CEO. If expenditure will be over $5,000, a written proposal should be submitted to the President.

45

2. If the accession is approved, a deed of gift or transfer of title must be completed. This should be kept as supporting documentation, with the physical location of these documents noted in the database record for this acquisition. 3. Ideally, until they have been accepted, acquisitions should not be stored at The Royal. Once accepted, they should be stored away from the remainder of the collection until they can be assessed. 4. The accession should be described to the file level, ideally, but at the very least to the series (and where applicable sub-series) level. It is not necessary to describe to the item level at this stage, unless it is an accession that contains individual objects that are expected to be in high demand. 5. While the accession is being described, an identification numbering system should be applied. At the time of writing, a numbering system has not been devised as the collection has not yet been arranged and described. The identification number and series- or file-level arrangement should be recorded in the database. 6. A condition report must be completed, whether the accession is a loan or will be part of the permanent collection. The items should be closely examined for any evidence of mould or pest intervention and be treated accordingly. They should also be rehoused at this time, if at all possible, into archival storage containers, Mylar sleeves, etc. 7. Basic information such as the identification number, maker (if known), dates (if known), medium, credit line (if applicable), and a brief description of the fonds, series, and file should be recorded in the database. Further cataloguing information can be added at a later date if time restraints do not allow for a more in-depth description of the accession. 8. The accession should now be moved to permanent storage, with the location noted in the database record. During any object handling, proper handling procedures should be followed (see Appendix B). Deaccessioning Deaccessioning is an important procedure for any archive to have in place to ensure that preservation needs are being properly met, and that the collection is as strong as possible. Deaccessioning refers to the removal of records from The Royal archive. Recommendations about deaccessioning will be made by the archivist and approved by the CEO. Material may be deaccessioned due to:

- Objects duplicating what is already in the collection in excess of three copies - Objects that may be hazardous to the rest of the collection - Objects that are damaged beyond repair and/or without significant research value
46

- Objects that cannot be cared for in a way that ensures long-term preservation - Objects that are not duplicates but which replicate other material almost identically (a
representative sample should be kept)

- Objects with little to no informational value (for example, photographs that are not in focus or
are under or overexposed

- Objects that fall outside the Collections Policy.
Deaccessioning is an important tool for any institution to refine and strengthen their collection. As the Canadian Museums Association stresses, it is critical to ensure that deaccessioning decisions are being made ethically, or risk losing trust from the public, donors, and other institutions. Therefore it is important to follow these procedures and ensure that no individual person is ever solely making the decision to deaccession. 1. Assess the object(s) selected for possible deaccessioning. What are the reasons for deaccessioning? Do these align with the Collections Policy? Consider what the reasons for accessioning originally may have been. Do these reasons still exist? 2. Ensure that the object can legally be deaccessioned. This will involve researching the original donor agreement and any other acquisition paperwork. However, due to the previously unmanaged status of The Royal archive, there are likely to be instances where no such paperwork exists. In these cases, risks such as a loss of public trust, unhappy donors, and hesitation from other institutions to collaborate should be considered and balanced with the need to deaccession. 3. Create a deaccessioning plan. Will the item be returned to the donor? Sent to another institution? In rare cases, it may be best to divest through disposal, but this should be avoided whenever possible. If destruction is determined to be the most acceptable solution, a confidential shredding company such as Iron Mountain should be contacted. 4. A written recommendation will be prepared by the archivist and submitted to the CEO. The CEO may consult the Marketing Manager, when necessary. This report should include the object(s) to be deaccessioned, any information on original acquisition and provenance, donor information if applicable, reasons for deaccessioning, and the proposed plan for divestment. 5. All decisions by the archivist, CEO, and Marketing Manager must be recorded and retained in the appropriate collection file. Information regarding deaccessioning and divestment, especially if transferred to another institution, should be documented in the database in case future researchers are attempting to locate this object. Loans Outgoing loans will be considered on an individual basis, dependent on:
47

- the condition of the material being requested - the duration of the loan - if the materials will be traveling to more than one venue - if they are required for research or display at The Royal archive during the proposed loan
period and therefore cannot leave The Royal

- the value of the requested material and number of objects requested.
The archivist will provide written acceptance or denial of the loan request based on their recommendations, subject to approval by the CEO. The borrowing institution must provide evidence of adequate environmental, care, and handling controls, as well as an insurance certificate. All fees relating to the transportation and display of the loaned materials are the responsibility of the borrower. A written loan agreement must be completed by both The Royal archive (the lending institution) and the borrowing institution. The archive will not accept material on an incoming loan, except when borrowing material under a short-term loan for reproduction purposes or to be included in displays or exhibitions. Responsibilities The Royal archive is managed by the archivist and the CEO.

- The archivist manages the archive on a day to day basis, overseeing general operation,
scheduling visits by the public, internal and external requests for copies, cataloguing, digitizing, preserving, and otherwise managing the collection. The archivist will oversee interns, staff, and volunteers working with the collection. The archivist will present recommendations regarding preservation, deaccessioning, loans, and proposed changed to procedures and policies to the CEO.

- The CEO will accept or deny recommendations made by the archivist. The CEO may look to
the Marketing Manager for additional guidance on a case-by-case basis. The CEO will oversee hiring of the archivist.

- In cases where expenditures will be in excess of $5,000, it may be requested that the President
review the proposal. Access The Royal archive will make its materials available to the public upon request. In order to make these objects more accessible, finding aids and an online catalogue will be developed. There may be cases where material is unavailable due to confidential content or unprocessed accessions, although every effort will be made to extract non-confidential material and to process the
48

existing backlog as quickly as possible. Appointments must be booked in advance to view material, and visitors will be required to sign-in with photo identification. Basic care and handling training will be performed by the archivist or a suitable employee prior to access being granted.

49

Appendix B Storage and Handling Procedures Archival materials are often inherently delicate due to age and it is thereby crucial to practice safe handling anytime there will be interaction with these objects. The archivist should train any staff and volunteers as well as visiting researchers on these procedures prior to handling. Although this list is not exhaustive, it covers the basics of safe handling.

- A suitable viewing area must be set up prior to removing any objects. A clean, clear
workspace is required. Archival mat board can be placed on top of a table or similar surface if there are concerns about the cleanliness of the area. Clutter is to be removed, and a separate space should be used for writing notes, when possible.

- Pencil is the only writing instrument allowed in the collection space. No pens or markers are
allowed.

- Nitrile gloves should be worn when handling objects. If gloves cannot be used (for example, if
the dexterity lost while wearing gloves is more hazardous to the item), hands should be well cleaned prior to handling.

- Ensure long hair is tied back, and that jewellery and other dangling objects such as badges or
keys on lanyards are removed.

- For researchers, a staff member or volunteer should transport materials to the viewing area. - Boxes should be kept flat and transported using a handcart. Ensure that boxes are not stacked
in an unstable way. You should be able to see over the top of the boxes while on the cart.

- Boxes should be moved from the handcart to the viewing area, and objects should not be
viewed on the handcart.

- Ensure that you have a clear path from the storage area to the new destination for the material
prior to beginning transport.

- Materials should not be left out of their archival housing overnight but should be replaced
prior to end of day.

- If an item must be removed, a removal slip must be placed where the item is housed indicating
the object number (if applicable), when it was removed, why, and by whom. It should be replaced as soon as possible. An object removal slip should also remain with the removed item listing the original container and location of the item, when it was removed, why, and by whom.

- If you are unsure of how to handle a material, please ask the archivist prior to handling.
50

Appendix C Cataloguing Procedures Cataloguing is an important process to allow for greater access to the collection, as well as higher searchability functions online. As The Royal archive does not currently have any collections management software, it is impossible to create specific procedures for how items should be catalogued. However, some general guidelines can be applied, and specific step-bystep procedures should be crafted once a software program is selected. It is important to determine to what level the collection will be catalogued. From discussions with The Royal staff, it is apparent that they would like to see individual photographs accessible in the future via an online catalogue or web portal. I would recommend that the collection is described and numbered to the file-level prior to beginning any in-depth cataloguing efforts. In order to fulfill the vision of an online catalogue, item-level description will be necessary. This will require that each individual photograph, slide, ribbon, etc. is numbered, catalogued, and digitized. This is an extremely time-consuming and resource-heavy endeavour, but if realistic expectations about the timeline for this project are kept in mind, and strong volunteers or interns are available, it can certainly be completed. A decision should be made with The Royal CEO, Marketing Manager, and archivist regarding the extent of cataloguing that will be completed. This conversation is best had once a software option has been selected. At a minimum, container fields in the chosen database that should be completed are:

- Title - Creator/Maker - Format - Medium and Materials - Description - Measurements - Rights - Credit Line - Identification Number - Subject

51

As the plan is to digitize individual objects, there should also be an area for a digital access file to be stored, along with the corresponding digital image identification number. More information on this can be found in the Digitization Procedures (Appendix D). It is important to use a controlled vocabulary and established thesauri. For example, for locations, the Getty Thesaurus of Geographic Names (TGN) should be applied. However, resources that are typically used such as the Getty Union List of Artists Names (ULAN) will likely be of limited use as many of the makers are either unknown, or commercial photographers who do not appear in ULAN. For subject matter, it will be most beneficial to create a custom thesaurus of acceptable terms with the archivist and the Marketing Manager. For example, terms should be selected from a defined list to avoid confusion over whether the subject of a photograph should be: cow, bovine, cattle, dairy cow, dairy cattle, or Ayrshire cattle. Unfortunately, the thesauri currently available such as the Getty Art and Architecture Thesaurus (AAT) do not have the level of specificity required by an agricultural fair's archive. The AAT can be useful as a thesaurus for format. Measurements should be made in centimetres, with the height listed first followed by the width, and lastly depth if appropriate. It is important to follow a metadata schema. This is another decision that should be made with the archivist, CEO, and Marketing Manager, dependent on the desired use of the collections management software and online catalogue. The Dublin Core Schema is a widely used option that could be appropriate for The Royal archive. Decisions about what metadata will be visible to the public should also be made. Lastly, an approach for tagging digital surrogates and records should be defined. Will tagging be completed by The Royal staff and volunteers, or will The Royal take an open-source approach that allows for crowd-sourced tagging? All of these decisions should be discussed within a more precise set of Cataloguing Procedures.

52

Appendix D Digitization Procedures Once again, detailed procedures should be drafted once equipment has been purchased. Equipment that should be investigated includes:

- A high-quality, high-resolution scanner, ideally one that has the capacity to scan negatives and
positive transparencies

- Image editing software such as Adobe Photoshop - A grayscale and colour checker tool - A digital camera capable of capturing RAW files for objects that are too large for a scanner
bed, or are 3-dimensional

- If investing in a digital camera, a copy stand should also be purchased
Furthermore, there must be proper storage in place for digital surrogates. A high-resolution master image, saved as a TIFF file, along with a low-resolution access image for web use, saved as a JPEG file, should be created for each image digitized. This takes significant storage space, so a plan should be in place prior to digitization. These images should be backed up in at least two separate locations, although three with redundancies is preferable. Considerations should be made regarding offsite physical storage, cloud storage, and external hard drives. In order to determine the size at which an object should be digitally captured (either by camera or on a scanner), the intended use of the digital surrogate must be considered. If large copies will be available for purchase, a higher resolution will obviously be required. The original size of the object must also be considered. For example, if scanning an 8"x10" photograph at 300 DPI for an output print size of 8"x10", the quality will be high at 300 DPI. If, however, a 35mm negative is scanned at 300 DPI for an output print size of 8"x10", the quality will be low as the DPI is now 35. This is, of course, an extreme example, but serves to illustrate that DPI must be considered based on the size of the original image and the anticipated use of the digital surrogate. As The Royal archive has photographs that fall into a few typical sizes (35mm negatives, a few varieties of slides formats that do not differ greatly in size, and 4"x6", 5"x8" and 8"x10" prints), it could be beneficial to create a chart listing what resolution each should be scanned at for a set output. The output size should be determined based on expected need, likely no bigger than 16"x20". Below is a rough outline of the steps that should be completed while digitizing. 1. Once an appropriate resolution is calculated, place the object in the scanner and set the desired resolution in terms of DPI. Note - nitrile gloves should be worn while handling the object. If using a camera and copy stand, the camera should be set up on the copy stand,
53

ideally allowing for remote capture from a computer, set to RAW image quality, with the image placed on the copy stand. 2. A colour checker should be placed on the scanner bed or copy stand as well. 3. Once the object has been scanned or photographed, save the image as a TIFF using the digital surrogate identification number. This should be generated using the prefix DSI, followed by the fonds and series alphanumeric identification and the order number of that specific item. The last number should be a one or a two, with one signifying that it is the recto of the image, and two signifying that it is the verso. For example, if the file for the Large Pony Hunters Class within the 1998 Series of the Clix Photography Fonds was being digitized, the number may look something like this: DSI.A 22-1998-10.8.1. I have used arbitrary alphanumeric identification for the fonds, series, and file numbers as no such system currently exists, but would recommend using dashes to differentiate between the fonds (A 22 in this example), the series (1998), and the file (10). This digital surrogate identification number therefore refers to the recto of the eighth image in the 10th file of the 1998 series in the A 22 fonds. This DSI number should be recorded in pencil on the verso of the object, and in a spreadsheet listing all of the DSI numbers in each file, within each series, within each fonds that is digitized. 4. The TIFF image should now be opened up in the photo editing software. If using RAW images captured on a camera, they can be opened as RAW images and saved as a TIFF after corrections (steps 5 and 6) are completed. 5. White balance should be corrected using the colour checker captured within the image. 6. The colour checker may now be cropped out of the image, and the image should be straightened if required. 7. After ensuring the master copy of your file is saved, resize your image to web-resolution (72 DPI) and save as an access copy. A system needs to be put in place to differentiate your access and master files. This can be done by saving them in separate locations with folders labelled `Master' and `Access', or by adding `access' or `web' to the end of your DCI filename. 8. The access files could be uploaded to the web portal at this time, or at a later date.

54

Appendix E Prioritized List Below is a list of steps that need to be taken to allow The Royal collection to become an accessible archive. They have been ordered in priority sequence. This list is not exhaustive, and focuses on the large goals rather than the individual tasks which each goal will require. A more detailed timeline should be created by the archivist hired to oversee this endeavour. 1. 2. 3. Hire an archivist to oversee the collection. Arrange the collection following RAD. Implement a collections management software and begin a database (this should be completed up to the file-level to begin with, and can be described to the item-level as needed and when resources allow). At this time, records can be sparsely populated. Create a new storage area with environmental controls. Research digital preservation and DAMS options. Implement a more secure storage system for digital content based on the research from the previous step. Ideally this will include a DAMS and digital preservation software option. Begin digitizing the collection (ongoing). Describe the collection to greater detail (ongoing). Launch a web portal to allow the collection to be viewed by a wider audience.

4. 5. 6.

7. 8. 9.

10. Curate exhibitions to increase knowledge of the archive's existence.

55

Appendix F: Box-Level Inventory

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

100

101

102

103

104

105

106

107

108

109

110

111

112

113

114

115

116

117

118

119

120

121

122

123

124

125

126

127

128

Appendix G: Collections Management Software Survey Questions
1. Please provide your name, position, and institution (including a brief description such as size, scope of the collection, Library/Museum/Archive). 2. What collection management software do you currently use? 3. What do you like about this software? 4. What do you dislike about this software? 5. On a scale of 1 to 5, with 1 being the most difficult and 5 being the easiest, how would you rate the ease of information input? 6. On a scale of 1 to 5, with 1 being the most difficult and 5 being the easiest, how would you rate the ease of search function / information output? 7. If you are aware of the approximate cost, how would you rate the expense of this software on a scale of 1 to 5, with 1 being no charge and 5 being expensive? 8. On a scale of 1 to 5, with 1 being low value and 5 being extraordinary value, how would you rate the value of this software? 9. Would you recommend this software for another institution? 10. Do you have previous experience with other software that you would recommend using or avoiding? What software?

129

Appendix H: Collections Management Software Chart CMS options
Program Excel spreadsheet Pros Inexpensive, easily accessible, easy to use, many already have knowledge of how to use it. Cons Cost

Minimal applications, not Free - $ accessible online, can be difficult to import data into a new software in the future.

eHive

Online options, accessible, cloud-based, pleasant userface, easy to use, prompt customer service, inexpensive. Has procedures for keeping data accessible as technology changes. Flexible options depending on requirements.

Limits on space (but can upgrade to higher subscription), no DAM incorporated but stores low-res images.

50 mb/200 images - free. 500 mb/2000 images - $. 1GB/4000 images $. 5GB/20,000 $ - $$. 25GB/ 100,000 images $$. Options to pay yearly or for a five-year contact.

Vernon CMS

Modular, based on standards, automatic updates from database to website through browser module, offers a basic DAMS through web messenger module with integrates with third party software. Offers many of the same capabilities as TMS but more userfriendly. Smart date searches. Browser module allows for autogenerated tags using AI. Can relate external links like Wikipedia on website.

Vernon is based in New Zealand (server location, time difference for phone calls, etc). The first year is costly, but yearly support is optional and affordable, compared to the yearly pricing of some other options.

$$$$ for first year, ongoing support agreement is charged 20% of the licenses held (this is optional but very recommended). $$ yearly for support agreement. Payment plans may sometimes be offered.

130

CMS options
Program FileMaker Pro Pros Customizable, inexpensive, no storage limits except for your computer system. Cons May be hard for noncreator to use, not accessible online. Cost Pro - $. Advanced - $$.

Museum Collector Systems

Cloud based, very detailed fields, no storage limit (can use as basic DAMS)

Seems to have too much of a museum-focus in terms of application, fields, etc. Charged per user so could get costly. Focus on acquisitions and tracking for exhibition that is not useful for the RAWF.

$$ per user per month, so depending on the number of users could get to be $$$ - $$$$ easily.

TMS Cataloguer

TMS with web-based interface. E-Museum is the online web publishing tool, will match to existing website, accessible anywhere. Remote training.

Costly and contains many $$$ features that the RAWF will not utilize. Number of users determines number of log ins and cost, but far outside of the budget.

Aleph

This software is very specifically tailored to libraries, and I never heard back from the manufacturer so will not be pursuing.

Axiell (Ad Lib)

Will be web based, has minimal DAMS capabilities which may be sufficient, customizable. Collections is the web client. Tagging and comments, can approve/deny both.

In the process of changing to a web version, if not done by the time of purchase may be an annoyance. Costly. In person training.

$$$$

131

CMS options
Program Past Perfect Pros Add-ons so more customizable Cons Add-ons so can get expensive. Would need either only one work station, or network upgrade which also requires appropriate network system, need separate upgrade for multimedia files. Cost $$$ - $$$$

Museum Space - Sirma

Bulgarian, can't find info in English so will not be pursuing. DAMS and CMS together, Modules that need to be $$$$ web-based purchased separately - like Past Perfect. Complicated pricing scheme.

Eloquent

Re:discovery

DAMs option, web portal, May be too costly multiple modules although seems fairly (museum and archive), can reasonable to me create exhibits on web portal, cloud or on server, flexible and all costs included in one

$$$

132

CMS options
Program Lucidea (Argus or Argus Essentia) Pros Combines DAMS and CMS, integrated web portal, searchable on google without having to know how to make these metrics work for you. It is ready to use but configured to each institution. Can rename or hide fields and activities (such as accessioning, deaccessioning, loans, exhibitions). Can be incorporated into the existing website. Can export into various files formats. Cons Costly. Cost $$$$

MINISIS

Offers a cloud-hosted or licensed version - the licensed version does not incur yearly fees but is much more expensive. Combines multiple modules, Canadian, many longterm clients such as the Archives of Ontario, Trusted Digital Repository.

Very costly for licensed version.

$$$$

133

CMS options
Program AtoM (Access to Memory) Pros Open source, therefore free. Standards-based, and ability to import/export data as they use a variety of metadata exchange standards. A large amount of documentation exists to support users. Pairs well with Archivematica (both software by Artefactual) a digital preservation software (also opensource). Cons Cost

Requires technical / IT Free knowledge, and will require collaboration between Jolera (The Royal IT company) and The Royal archive staff. In my personal experience, not the most user-friendly platform. Web-based and The Royal preferred a software they could download to their own servers.

134

Bibliography
"A Royal History." The Royal Agricultural Winter Fair. Accessed October 31, 2017. http://www.royalfair.org/. "Accession." Statement of Principles | Society of American Archivists. Accessed February 24, 2018. https://www2.archivists.org/glossary/terms/a/accession. "Acquisition and Accessioning ­ Suggested Procedure." The Collections Trust. Accessed May 9, 2018. https://collectionstrust.org.uk/resource/acquisition-and-accessioning-suggested-procedure/. "Archive Collection Policy." Trinity Hall. Accessed February 8, 2018. https://www.trinhall.cam.ac.uk/about/library/archives/archive-collection-policy/. Arthur, Bobby. "Questions regarding the History of the Organization." E-mail message to author. April 19, 2018. Benson, Allen C. "The Archival Photograph and Its Meaning: Formalisms for Modelling Images." Journal of Archival Organization 7, no. 4 (2009): 148­87. https://doi.org/10.1080/15332740903554770. "Best Practice Online." Managing Business Archives, 2017. Accessed November 9, 2017. http://www.managingbusinessarchives.co.uk/. Baird, Donald Alexander. A Manual for Small Archives. Vancouver: Archives Association of British Columbia, 1999. Accessed February 8, 2018. https://aabc.ca/media/6069/manualforsmallarchives.pdf. Buck, Rebecca A., and Jean Allman Gilmore. Collection Conundrums: Solving Collections Management Mysteries. Washington, DC: American Association of Museums, 2007. Buck, Rebecca A., and Jean Allman Gilmore, eds. MRM5: Museum Registration Methods. 5th ed. Washington, DC: American Association of Museums, 2010. "Business Archives Section." Society of American Archivists. Accessed November 11, 2017. https://www2.archivists.org/groups/business-archives-section/business-archives-in-north-americainvest-in-your-future-understand-your-past. "Care, Handling, and Storage of Photographs." The Library of Congress. Accessed May 8, 2018. http://www.loc.gov/preservation/care/photo.html. Caring for Collections: Strategies for Conservation, Maintenance and Documentation. Washington, DC: American Association of Museums, 1984. "CMA Deaccessioning Guidelines." Canadian Museums Association. Accessed May 8, 2018. https://museums.in1touch.org/uploaded/web/docs/Documents/CMA%20Deaccessioning%20Guideline s.pdf "Collections Management Policy." UW - Laramie, Wyoming American Heritage Center. Accessed February 8, 2018. http://www.uwyo.edu/ahc/_files/policies/collection-mgmt-policy.pdf.

135

"Collection Policy, University of Toronto Scarborough Library, Archives & Special Collections." Collection Policy, University of Toronto Scarborough Library, Archives & Special Collections | University of Toronto Scarborough Campus. Accessed February 8, 2018. https://utsc.library.utoronto.ca/asc-collection-policy. Crowe, Stephanie H., and Karen Spilman. "MPLP @ 5: More Access, Less Backlog?" Journal of Archival Organization 8, no. 2 (2010): 110­33. https://doi.org/10.1080/15332748.2010.518079. Daines III, J Gordon, and Cory L Nimer. "Re-Imagining Archival Display: Creating User-Friendly Finding Aids." Journal of Archival Organization 9, no. 1 (2011): 4­31. https://doi.org/10.1080/15332748.2011.574019. Denham, Elizabeth. A Failure To Archive: Recommendations To Modernize Government Records Management. Beaconsfield, Quebec: Canadian Electronic Library, 2014. http://books.scholarsportal.info/viewdoc.html?id=671768. Dolan-Mescal, Alexandra, Marcie Farwell, Sara Howard, Jessica Rozler, and Matthew Smith. "A Digital File Inventory of the Queens College Special Collections and Archives." OCLC Systems & Services: International Digital Library Perspectives 30, no. 2 (2014): 78­90. https://doi.org/10.1108/OCLC-072013-0023. Ernisse, Sarah Ann. "Conservation Survey, Condition Report and Collections Care Proposal for the World War I Portrait Collection at State Records of South Australia." Master's thesis, Ryerson University, 2008. Evans, Max. "Archives of the People, by the People, for the People." American Archivist 70, no. 2 (2007): 387­400. http://archivists.metapress.com/content/D157T6667G54536G. Fahy, Anne, ed. Collections Management. New York, NY: Routledge, 1995. Falk, Patricia, and Stefanie Dennis Hunker. Cataloguing Outside the Box: A Practical Guide to Cataloguing Special Collections Material. Oxford, UK: Chandos Publishing, 2010. Ferguson, Sara, "Access and the documentary photographic archive: a case study." Master's thesis, Ryerson University, 2006. Paper 448. Frusciano, Thomas J. "Online Finding Aids, Catalog Records, and Access -- Revisited." Journal of Archival Organization 9, no. 1 (2011): 1­3. https://doi.org/10.1080/15332748.2011.585916. Gardner, James B., and Elizabeth E. Merritt. The AAM Guide to Collections Planning. Washington, DC: American Association of Museums, 2004. Gunnlaugsdottir, Johanna. "Functional Classification Scheme for Records FCS: A Way to Chart Documented Knowledge in Organizations." Records Management Journal 22, no. 2 (2012): 116­29. https://doi.org/10.1108/09565691211268171. Hansen, Lars-Erik, and Anneli Sundqvist. "To Make Archives Available Online: Transcending Boundaries or Building Walls?" Journal of Archival Organization 10, no. 3­4 (2012): 207­30. https://doi.org/10.1080/15332748.2013.795784.

136

"Historical Archives Collection Policy and Procedure." University of Southern Queensland. December 17, 2015. Accessed February 8, 2018. https://policy.usq.edu.au/documents/13283PL. Hurley, Grant. "Gordon Dodds Prize: Community Archives, Community Clouds: Enabling Digital Preservation for Small Archives." Archivaria 2016, no. 81 (2016). Jantz, Ronald, and Michael Giarlo. "Digital Archiving and Preservation: Technologies and Processes for a Trusted Repository." Journal of Archival Organization 4, no. 1­2 (2007): 193­213. https://doi.org/10.1300/J201v04n01. Kallberg, Maria. "Archivists 2.0: Redefining the Archivist's Profession in the Digital Age." Records Management Journal 22, no. 2 (2012): 98­115. https://doi.org/10.1108/09565691211268162. Kaplan, Deborah. "Choosing a Digital Asset Management System That's Right for You." Journal of Archival Organization 7, no. 1­2 (2009): 33­40. https://doi.org/10.1080/15332740902897360. Kipp, Angela. Managing Previously Unmanaged Collections: A Practical Guide for Museums. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2016. Maier, Shannon Bowen. "MPLP and the Catalog Record as a Finding Aid." Journal of Archival Organization 9, no. 1 (2011): 32­44. https://doi.org/10.1080/15332748.2011.577652. Malaro, Marie C. A Legal Primer on Managin Museum Collections. 2nd ed. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1998. Mcleod, Julie. "On Being Part of the Solution, Not the Problem: Taking a Proportionate Approach to Managing Records." Records Management Journal 22, no. 3 (2012): 186­97. https://doi.org/10.1108/09565691211283147. National Park Service. "NPS Museum Handbook." Accessed October 3, 2017. https://www.nps.gov/museum/publications/handbook.html Needles, Dan. The Royal Agricultural Winter Fair: An Illustrated History. Toronto, ON: Random House of Canada Limited, 1997. Niu, Jinfang. "Event-Based Archival Information Organization." Archival Science 15, no. 3 (September 2015): 315­28. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10502-014-9222-4. Note, Margot. Managing Image Collections: A Practical Guide. Oxford, UK: Chandos Publishing, 2011. O'Keefe, Elizabeth. "The Invisible Backlog: Improving Access to Inaccessible Parts of Your Collections." Art Documentation: Journal of the Art Libraries Society of North America 14, no. 4 (1995): 3­5. Oleck, Joan. Trends in Photography Special Collections Management. 2011 Editi. New York, NY: Primary Research Group, 2011. Orlans, Harold. "Hidden Treasures." Change: The Magazine of Higher Learning 36, no. 1 (2004).

137

Patty, William Jordan. "Metadata, Technology, and Processing a Backlog in a University Special Collections." Journal of Archival Organization 6, no. 1­2 (2008): 102­20. https://doi.org/10.1080/15332740802237337. Peel Art Gallery Museum and Archives. Levels of Arrangement in a fonds. Digital image. Archives @ PAMA. February 29, 2016. Accessed May 25, 2018. https://peelarchivesblog.com/2016/02/29/howdo-archivists-describe-collections-or-how-to-read-a-finding-aid/. Pevar, Susan. "Success as a Lone Arranger: Setting Priorities and Getting the Job Done." Journal of Archival Organization 3, no. 1 (2005): 51­60. https://doi.org/10.1300/J201v03n01. Pitel, Deborah. Managing on a Shoestring Budget: A Guide for Small Museums and Historic Sites. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2016. Primer, Ben. "Resources for Archives: Developing Collections, Constituents, Colleagues, and Capital." Journal of Archival Organization 7, no. 1­2 (2009): 58­65. https://doi.org/10.1080/15332740902892833. Purcell, Aaron D. "Providing Better Access to Manuscript Collections: A Case Study from the Historical Society." Journal of Archival Organization 1, no. 4 (2002): 29­52. https://doi.org/10.1300/J201v01n04. Reibel, Daniel B. Registration Methods for the Small Museum. 4th ed. Lanham, MD: AltaMira Press, 2008. Rinehart, Amanda Kay, Patrice-andre Prud, and Andrew Reid Huot. "Overwhelmed to Action: Digital Preservation Challenges at the under-Resourced Institution." OCLC Systems & Services 30, no. 1 (2013): 28­42. https://doi.org/10.1108/OCLC-06-2013-0019 Rinio, Tyson. "Collection Condition Assessment in a Midsized Academic Library." Collection Management 41, no. 4 (2016): 193­208. https://doi.org/10.1080/01462679.2016.1227289. Rolan, Gregory. "Agency in the Archive: A Model for Participatory Recordkeeping." Archival Science 17, no. 3 (September 2017): 195­225. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10502-016-9267-7. Rougeux, Debora A. "Processing the CONSOL Energy, Inc. Mine Maps and Records Collection at the University of Pittsburgh." Journal of Archival Organization 9, no. 2 (2011): 118­26. https://doi.org/10.1080/15332748.2011.602600. Rules for Archival Description. Ottawa: Bureau of Canadian Archivists, 2008. Accessed May 8, 2018. http://www.cdncouncilarchives.ca/rad/radcomplete_july2008.pdf. Schlak, Tim. "Framing Photographs, Denying Archives: The Difficulty of Focusing on Archival Photographs." Archival Science 8, no. 2 (2008): 85­101. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10502-009-9081-6. Shoemaker, Katherine, "A Subject Index: The Canadian Architect Image Archive At Ryerson University Library's Special Collections." Master's thesis, Ryerson University, 2010. Paper 1489. Simmons, John E. Things Great and Small: Collections Management Policies. Washington, DC: American Association of Museums, 2006.

138

Shepard, Elizabeth. "Digitizing a Photographic Collection in a Midsize Repository: A Case Study." Journal of Archival Organization 2, no. 4 (2005): 67­82. https://doi.org/10.1300/J201v02n04. Smith, Beverley. "60th ANNIVERSARY The Royal Agricultural Winter Fair Humble Beginnings among the Memories of Fair Horse Show." The Globe and Mail. November 9, 1988. http://ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/login?url=https://search-proquestcom.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/docview/385844966?accountid=13631. Southeastern Registrars Association. Basic Condition Reporting: A Handbook. Edited by Deborah Rose Van Horn, Heather Culligan, and Corinne Midgett. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2015. The Royal Agricultural Winter Fair, Organizational Profile. Toronto, ON: The Royal Agricultural Winter Fair, 2018. Tough, Alistair, and Michael Moss, eds. Record Keeping in a Hybrid Environment: Managing the Creation, Use, Preservation and Disposal of Unique Information Objects in Context. Oxford, UK: Chandos Publishing, 2006. Waters, Susannah. "The Glasgow Miracle Project: Working with an Arts Organization's Archives." Archives and Records 36, no. 1 (2015): 6­17. https://doi.org/10.1080/23257962.2015.1010150. Watson, W. P. The Royal: A History of the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair. Toronto, ON: McClelland and Stewart, 1968. Westbrook, Bradley D., Lee Mandell, Kelcy Shepherd, Brian Stevens, and Jason Varghese. "The Archivists' Toolkit: Another Step Toward Streamlined Archival Processing." Journal of Archival Organization 4, no. 1­2 (2007): 229­53. https://doi.org/10.1300/J201v04n01. Whitney, Taylor. "The Brown Family Archive: Assigning Intellectual Order & Physical Arrangement to a Private Photographic Collection." Master's thesis, Ryerson University, 2006. Wiener, Judith A. "The Element of Surprise: Preparing for the Possibility of Hazardous Materials Within Archival Collections." Journal of Archival Organization 5, no. 4 (2008): 33­49. https://doi.org/10.1080/15332740802153344. Wilhelm, Henry Gilmer, and Carol Brower. The Permanence and Care of Color Photographs: Traditional and Digital Color Prints, Color Negatives, Slides, and Motion Pictures. Grinnell, IA: Preservation Publishing, 1993. Electronic. Xie, Iris, and Krystyna K. Matusiak. Discover Digital Libraries: Theory and Practice. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier Inc., 2016. Yeo, Geoffrey. "Contexts, Original Orders, and Item-Level Orientation: Responding Creatively to Users' Needs and Technological Change." Journal of Archival Organization 12, no. 3­4 (2014): 170­85. https://doi.org/10.1080/15332748.2015.1048626. Yerkey, A. Neil. "FileMaker Pro 7." Library & Archival Security 19, no. 1 (2004): 15­27. https://doi.org/10.1300/J114v19n01.

139

Zigkolis, Christos, Symeon Papadopoulos, George Filippou, Yiannis Kompatsiaris, and Athena Vakali. "Collaborative Event Annotation in Tagged Photo Collections." Multimedia Tools and Applications 70, no. 1 (2014): 89­118. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-012-1154-5.

140

