Augmented Virtual Reality:
Playing Architect

by

Stefan Miller
Bachelor of Architectural Science A thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Architecture in the Program of The Department of Architectural Science. Toronto, Ontario, Canada 2018 © Stefan Miller 2018

i

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. This is a true copy of the thesis, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my thesis may be made electronically available to the public.

ii

iii

Abstract
Augmented Virtual Reality: Playing Architect
Master of Architecture, 2018 Stefan Miller Ryerson University

This thesis sits at the intersection of identity and technology by considering what it means to assume the role of architect as the young black male. The public image of the architect is represented instead, by the white male figure and distributed in a narrative of individualist and ego. However, a critique of the ego through introspection and auto-biographical context gives alternative understanding to the social, cultural, racial and political discourse for the minority seeking autonomy. Framed in modern blackness, design in research becomes a process of appropriation where the architect can be challenged by notions of new softwares where platforms are built instead of foundations. Research that began largely about architecture and virtual reality - instead concludes with urgent questions involving the architect and the tools he interfaces opening avenues for critical discourse on identity, autonomy, anonymity, and devices.

iv

v

To my parents, siblings, supervisor and Sible.

vi

vii

Table of Contents


48 56 66 

CHAPTER 2: Another Domestic Revolution
2.1 On Sale 2.2 Room Scale 2.3 Room Scale & The Family Room

i Authors Declaration iiiAbstract iv Table of Contents x List of Figures
1Introduction 8Glossary



PART TWO

db

db





PART ONE

CHAPTER 3: Migrant Flows Across Augmented Borders
70 71 72 3.1 Ethnographic Studies and Research 3.2 Jamaica to Canada 3.3 Waning Troubled Waters



CHAPTER 1: Identity Breeding Grounds

12 1.1 Domesticity in the Making 14 1.2 Survival of the Fittest 19 1.3 Ring Ring ... Hello? 21 1.4 Don't Sit So Close to the T.V, It'll Burn Your   Eyes Out! 26 1.5 Role-Play for Adults 28 1.6 Steve's  1.6.1 Software
1.6.2 Parental Control



CHAPTER 4: Markham's Songbird

38 40 42  43 

1.7 iChappy 1.8 Hello, H.A.L 1.9 Normal Technology
1.9.1 Parental Control

1.10 Predicting the Potential Applicability of a Popularized Technology

78 4.1 On a Neck, On a Spit 82 4.2 "When You Were Young" 87 4.3 Is That Swearing I Hear? 91 4.4 Finders Keepers 92 4.5 Fake Narratives for Real Characters (GTA 3: San Andreas - "End of the Line") 96 4.6 Dismantle Everything 98 4.7 Lucky Number Slevin 100 4.8 Kick Off Your Shoes and Relax Your Feet 102 4.9 Killing Them Softly 106 4.10 The World is Yours 108 4.11 www.worldstarhiphop.com //  www.yourtube.com



viii

ix

 118

CHAPTER 5: A Home for Markham's Songbird
5.1 The Augmented Ego 174 

CHAPTER 8: Repurposed Toronto VR Games
8.1 Available Pricing and Membership Options
8.1.1 Membership 8.1.2 Hourly 8.1.3 Monthly 8.1.3 V.I.P

PART THREE
176   177


8.3 Groups (Couples & Parties) 8.4 Headsets 8.5 Avatars (Assume - and be Yourself
 8.5.1 Securing Your digital Avatar 8.5.2 Backups and Storage 8.6.1 Private Booths

8.2.1 New Users 8.2.2 Experienced Users

8.2 Individual

CHAPTER 6: Ego's in Space
138 139 142  143 146 150 6.1 Recognizing Ego's (Existing or Otherwise) 6.2 Toronto's VR Arcade 6.3 A Business Model 6.4 On the Outside Looking In 6.5 The Internet Cafe 6.6 Sex in Virtual Reality 6.7 On Identity

179   190

8.6 Services



8.5 Save, Load, Delete



PART FOUR

CHAPTER 7: Repurposed House of VR
155. 156 157  160
 

7.4 Families + Extended Members(Relatives) 7.5 Families + Extended Members(Relatives) + Friends:
7.5.1 Hosting remote avatars 7.5.2 Live Stream 7.4.1 Shared Ceremonies 7.4.2 Collective Sensory Deprivation

7.3.1 Local Storage & Scanning Options

7.1 On Your Visit 7.2 Individual 7.3 Single Family


188 189 205 206 208   218

CHAPTER 9: Appropriate Objects

163 


166

7.6 Ceremonial Services

9.1 How to Steal Familiar Objects 9.2 Appropriate Objects 9.3 Building Software Fictions 9.4 Interface 9.5 Edit Mode 9.6 Controls 9.7 Appropriate Elements 9.8 Appropriate Architecture (From the Authors Friends and Family) 230  9.9 Device, Identity, Appropriation, Autonomy,Anonymity 234  9.10 Conculsions & Beginnings Appendix  Bibliography & Notes

x

xi

List of Figures
Introduction

ix. Patent for x-y position indicator for a display system filed in 1967 by  D.C Englebart Retrieved fromhttps://patentimages.storage.googleapis.  com/7d/13/7e/3fd1de4c37ed12/US3541541.pdf 30 List of Advertisements (Popularized Domestic Products  20th Century - Onwards) In Order from Left to Right: i. 1925 Advertisement for the "Western Electric", Telephone. Retrieved from  https://www.pinterest.de/pin/331999803755182397/ ii. 2002 Press Release Package of The Electrolux Group, "TriloBite",  Autonomous Vacuum Cleaner Retrieved from http://banksvac.com/media/  product_manuals/electrolux/Electrolux%20Trilobite.pdf iii. 1960s Advertisement for the "Flashmatic", Wireless Remote Control.  Retrieved from https://mudwerks.tumblr.com/page iv. 1954 Advertisement for the "RCA Victor", Colour TV Retrieved from   http://www.earlytelevision.org/rca_color_ad.html v. 1960s Advertisement for "The Smokegard 700", the first smoke alarm  Retrieved from https://flipquiz.me/u/barengl/inventions-of-the-1960s-1970s vi. 2018 Advertisement for "Amazon Echo, smart speaker" just ask  Retrieved from http://www.nimbuzz.com/mu/articles/technology/what-is-  amazon-echo-817 vii. 1977 Advertisement for "Apple II" the first personal computer  Retrieved from https://wikivisually.com/wiki/Computer_monitor viii. 2017 Advertisement for "Oculus Rift" the first consumer version virtual reality headset Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/  watch?v=5q6BcQq_yhw ix. 1984 Apple brochure for "Macinosh", outlining how to use  a mouse Retrieved from http://bryanhaggerty.com/blog/2007/08/  by_the_way_you_just_learned_how_to_click/ x. 1972 Advertisement for the "Odyssey", gaming console Retrieved   from https://gamehistory.org/first-video-game-commercial/

Fig. 1.4  Fig. 1.1 Fig. 1.2 
4 The First Day of Thesis Research, Drawn by the author

10 The Architect, According to a Small Article in a 2018 Architectural Digest Retrieved from CFM&D Canadian Facility Management & Design:   June/July 2018

CHAPTER 1: Identity Breeding Grounds

Fig. 1.3 

15 List of Patents (Popularized Domestic Products 20th Century - Onwards)  In Order from 1-9: i. Patent for calling device for telephone exchanges in 1898 by A. E. Keith &  C. J. Erickson Retrieved from https://patentimages.storage.googleapis.  com/06/52/20/bb0eadd6d0ca9e/US597062.pdf ii. Patent for the first gaming console filed in 1973 by Ralph H. Baer. Retrieved from, https://worldwide.espacenet.com/publicationDetails/bib  lio?CC=US&NR=3728480&KC=&FT=E&locale=en_EP iii. Patent for the first Fire Detector filed in 1971 by Duane D. Pearsall,  Morrison. Retrieved from, ftp://ftp.apple.asimov.net/pub/apple_II/documenta  tion/misc/Apple%202%20Patent%204%20136%20359.pdf iv. Patent for the first personal computer filed in 1979, "Apple 2" by Steve  Wozniak. Retrieved from, ftp://ftp.apple.asimov.net/pub/apple_II/documenta  tion/misc/Apple%202%20Patent%204%20136%20359.pdf v. Patent for Loud Speaker filed in 1929 by C. W. Rice. Retrieved from https:/   patentimages.storage.googleapis.com/66/b5/99/fd85e659f50e78/US1707570.pdf vi. Patent for control system filed in 1959 by E. J. Polley Retrieved from https://  patentimages.storage.googleapis.com/f7/02/b1/5716b40ac9c0fc/US2903575.pdf vii. Patent for system and device for a self orienting device filed by Kliener et al.  in 1997 Retrieved from https://patentimages.storage.googleapis.com/1c/c2/  e7/68e620f77daaec/US5935179.pdf viii. Patent for virtual reality headset filed by Luckey et al. in 2014 Retrieved  from https://patentimages.storage.googleapis.com/68/d7/1a/baf2a7335f64fc/  USD701206.pdf 

Fig. 1.5  Fig. 1.6 Fig. 1.7 

34

Chart of Domestic Appliances, Drawn by the author Archie gets a new computer, Excerpt retrieved from the 1939 American  comic book, "Archie Comics" Interface Lexicon: Digital Boundary, Drawn by the author

36  44

xii

xiii

Fig. 1.8

45  

Novels on Future Fictions and Domestic Appliances: Syllabus informed  by https://www.goodreads.com/list/show/106036.Best_VR_and_AR_in_ Science_Fiction

PART TWO
CHAPTER 3: Migrant Flows Across Augmented Borders

CHAPTER 2: Another Domestic Revolution

Fig. 3.1 

76 Christmas Day, 1990's Photograph of family in-front of the television Photographed by Leroy Miller.

Fig. 2.1  50  Fig. 2.2
53

Diagram of the modern cyber subject and physiological locations of digital  boundaries, Drawn by the author Equipment and Specs. Drawn by the author A Timeline of Future Domestic Technology in Pop Culture, Drawn by the  author with Information from sources - see bibliography informed by https://www.goodreads.com/list/show/106036.Best_VR_and_ AR_in_Science_Fiction How To: Setup Room Scale, Featuring a Man, Drawn by the author Virtual Reality Interface: Oculus Rift CV1, Drawn by the author

CHAPTER 4: Markham's Songbird

Fig. 2.3 54    Fig. 2.4 Fig. 2.5 Fig. 2.6
58 61

Fig. 4.1  Fig. 4.2  Fig. 4.3 Fig. 4.4  Fig. 4.5  Fig. 4.6 Fig. 4.7 Fig. 4.8 Fig. 4.9 

79 80 82 89 91 99 101 107

Locating Home, Drawn by the author Living Arrangements, Drawn by the author Digital Boundaries: frequentations, Drawn by the author Below Grade: The Entertainment Room, Drawn by the author Digital Boundaries: Gestures, Drawn by the author Ground Floor: Family Room, Drawn by the author Digital Boundaries: Graphical User Interface, Drawn by the author Above Grade, Level Two: Bedrooms, Drawn by the author

62 Dedicated Guest Bedroom (3m x 3.5m)(2IR Sensors)  Drawn by the author

Fig. 2.7 Fig. 2.8
64

Garage(3m x 5m)(3IR Sensors) Drawn by the author Front Lawn(2.7m x 2.8m)(2IR Sensors), Drawn by the author

Fig. 2.9 A Mothers Living Room (2.7m x 2.8m)(2IR sensors), Drawn by the author

114 Appliance Chart: An Index of Domestic Technologies at Songbird, Drawn by the author

CHAPTER 5: A Home for Markham's Songbird

Fig. 5.1  Fig. 5.2 

121

Collapsing Digital Boundaries, Drawn by the author

123 Family Room (2018) Photographed by Shantel Miller 

xiv

xv

https://www.torontovrgames.ca/ by author

PART THREE
CHAPTER 7: After Life

Fig. 5.3 

137 Series of Informal Literature Reviews Regarding VR A virtual reality baptism will strengthen Oregon man's faith. Retrieved from  https://www.oregonlive.com/pacific-northwest-news/index.sf/2018/05/virtu al_reality_church_co-foun.html I tried a sex-themed virtual reality experience and here's what happened.  Retrieved from https://torontosun.com/life/sex-files/i-tried-a-sex-themed-vir tual-reality-experience-and-heres-what-happened The vr experience `lube river' is undoing the stigma around sex toys.  Retrieved from https://i-d.vice.com/en_us/article/mbk3vp/the-vr-experience- lube-river-is-undoing-the-stigma-around-sex-toys Porn's Uncanny Valley. Retrieved from https://www.theatlantic.com/technolo gy/archive/2018/06/porns-uncanny-valley/561521/ This Porn Company Wants to Use Virtual Reality to Keep You Alive Forever.  Retrieved from https://www.esquire.com/lifestyle/sex/a19745403/virtual-reali ty-porn-camasutra-technology/ Why the future of VR will be shaped by porn. Retrieved from https://bigthink. com/paul-ratner/the-future-of-vr-will-be-shaped-by-the-pornography-of-today  Behind the Scenes of Tori Black's Virtual Reality. Retrieved from https://www. vice.com/en_ca/article/3bjwpy/behind-the-scenes-of-tori-blacks-virtual-reali ty-porn-debut Virtual Reality Porn. Retrieved from https://www.pornhub.com/insights/virtu al-reality Making a Killing in Virtual Real Estate. Retrieved from https://www. bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-06-12/making-a-killing-in-virtual-real-es tate 

 154 - 167 Repurposed House of VR: Policy, Drawn by the author. Information from   sources - see bibliography
CHAPTER 8: Avatar Clubs

 172 - 185 

Repurposed Toronto VR Games: Policy, Drawn by the author. Information  from sources - see bibliography

PART FOUR
CHAPTER 9: Appropriate Objects

 Fig. 9.1 

190 +191 194

1000+ Archived Photographs, by author Backyard Sketch, Drawn by the author

CHAPTER 6: Ego's in Space

Fig. 9.2 196 3D Mesh Model Panorama, by author  Bed A/C Unit  BackYard  Bed  Facade Fig. 9.3  Fig. 9.4  Fig. 9.5  Fig. 9.6 
198 200 201 202 Stolen Artifact: Fractal Facade Drawn by the author Stolen Artifact II: Normal A/C Unit Drawn by the author Stolen Artifact III: Brick A/C Unit Drawn by the author  Stolen Artifact IV: Metallic Facade Drawn by the author

Fig. 6.1 Fig. 6.2  Fig. 6.3  Fig. 6.4 

141

Locating Arcades, Drawn by the author

145 An interior of VR Playin, Located at 294 College Street. www.vrplayin.ca Taken by author 151  153 An interior of Levelup Reality Located at Aura - Unit 28 (Lower Level) 384 Yonge & Gerrard) levelupreality.com, Taken by author An Exterior of Toronto VR Games Located at 55 Kensington Ave, (Toronto) 

xvi

xvii

Fig. 9.7  Fig. 9.8  Fig. 9.9  Fig. 9.10  Fig. 9.11  Fig. 9.12  Fig. 9.13  Fig. 9.14  Fig. 9.15 - 9.21 

203 204 207 209 210 212 214 216 219

Stolen Artifact V: Wooden A/C Unit Drawn by the author Stolen Artifact VI: Soufflé Drawn by the author Appropriate Objects U.I. Design and Layout Drawn by the author Still from Appropriate Objects I: Edit Mode Taken by the author Functions: In-Game Demonstration Taken by the author Still from Appropriate Objects II: Gravity Off Taken by the author Appropriate Objects: Tutorial Series 1 Taken by the author Appropriate Objects: Exports & Models Taken by the author Appropriate Architecture I, Taken by the author

 









I Created by Nick  III Created by Anne  V Created by Catalina  VI Created by Ron 224 Still from Appropriate Objects III: Applying Texture  Taken by the author

Fig. 9.19  Fig. 9.22  Fig. 9.23  Fig. 9.24 Fig. 9.25 Fig. 9.26
 

228 229 232

Still from Appropriate Objects IV: Select Objects Taken by the author Still from Appropriate Objects V: Export Taken by the author A public Platform to Locate Appropriate Objects Drawn by the author

232 QR Code to Appropriate Objects: Software to Take Drawn by the  author 232 Trinity Bellwoods Park - Locating Appropriate Objects Drawn by the  author

Augmented Virtual Reality - 1

Introduction
In a Room of Twenty-Two

This thesis tries to understand what it means to assume the role of architect (for students this is given but hardly questioned before attaining your degree), while maintaining existing identities that are never recognized as a figure of the architect. Because the young black male does not exist as a publicized representation, and it requires a production on their part to see their presence as an existing force. One with lateral influence of agency and empowerment in a profession that is made up of the white male, to instead write their own narratives - here is mine.

apply to the Universities I thought might accept me. As a last-minute thought, architecture seemed to combine the two things I could tolerate in school math and art. By grade 12 I was on my way to Ryerson and eager to start and finish in as little a time as possible. While writing the admissions examination I needed to guarantee my spot - glancing at the ceiling as a response to a drawing exercise - replicating one of the light fixtures hanging from above in pencil. It seemed to work, I spent the next four years learning how to balance aesthetics and practicality - skills that are not innate - criticism by the faculty and guests of

I think it was sometime around grade 10 (2010) when I thought deeply about the choice of becoming an architect. Rearranging courses at the last minute to satisfy pre-requisites; ones that would allow me to

what made for an anxiety against my ability to present ideas solidified through practice. Because it required that I assume an oppositional attitude - someone at constant odds with others. It wasn't long before

2 - Introduction

Introduction - 3

I realized that finding a collective group of friends would also require a willingness and vulnerability on my part - wanting to share ideas through a comingling of cultures, aesthetics, and identities was not something I was fond of at first. Personality or our ego's was a built form - one that also determined the success and execution of a project - presenting your work was also an opportunity to present some representation of your own likeness. Being one out of the two black male students in a class of one hundred and twenty required - I think - a unique determination of wanting to be recognized by others - not as a minority - but as a needle in a haystack. Constantly recognizing the absence of yourself in relation to others, that the link was strictly on the basis of a shared interest in architecture - or becoming the architect. The architect - from what I can remember (see Ayn Rand's 1943 novel "The Fountainhead") as a first year undergraduate, is all ego - a white male - someone who cares only about himself in a world

that is constantly at odds with him (who exactly was he against?) Le Corbusier meets Howard Roark, with a "modern man"1 playing in the background. I'm meant to relate to who exactly? The individualist, conformist, egoist, socialist - their narratives are foreign, without any relation, but yet something to be read and known as a young architecture student. I would even argue - for the sake of honesty - that it's perhaps better to skip over the history lessons. Modernism, post modernism - ideals of an ego negotiating their place in a built environment through an artificial (augmented) progress, monuments was all I could find in ASC406. Those in the spotlight shaped the future course of this profession - and still do to this day, those of a particular representation and background reinforce the success and failure of those seeking a place in an environment that is not necessarily built for them. Where are the ideas, technologies and precedents of the ethnic minorities (specifically those of colour?) - their lessons to be

learned and noted - is there any point in sifting through the past - I can't recall anything. - not that the minority was easy to forget, but that they didn't exist.

a critique on the ego of the architect - rendering them public for a discussion that I have yet to hear in a profession that takes critical issues seriously. The issue of the minority, the architect, the multiplicity

To finally graduate and discover it's not over, that it keeps going - the scarcity increased. I made it into the Master's program - but find its more difficult than ever to relate to anything searching for a desk with familiar faces, I wonder what this opportunity affords? And how to find my place and meaning in a room of twenty two.

of identities, agency, empowerment, and recognition of the augmented self (existing or otherwise) these are cues that are lost on the architecture student - but worth finding for those in need of it.

Sitting behind my desk before I begin my research I try not to notice that I'm also the only black male student - I am however extremely comfortable, yet curious. Curious to know why, how will I get to the end goal - becoming an architect - without compromise (who's the black sheep?)2 If there is a need to write a thesis in architecture, then mine will come at the expense of my identities through

4 - Introduction

Introduction - 5

PART ONE
Fig. 1.1 The First Day of Thesis Research

Identity

PART TWO

Ethnographic Studies & Research: Minority Agency

PART THREE PART FOUR
  Playing Architect: Appropriate  Objects

Your Augmented Ego

see-through corridor

ASC ARC200B

6 - Introduction

Introduction - 7

In my search for representations of the 2018 architect - I couldn't help but notice a recurring pattern in the articles, journals, and news I came across. An identity - one that comes as a superficial caricature in disguise. The architect, is outfitted behind the promise of "empowering end users through visualization",3 his ego, represented by a white middle aged man approaching retirement. On him, is a virtual reality device to be worn by him and clients - maybe even his team. With the device, he communicates design intent, letting clients walk through his space with 6-degrees of freedom. Making it nearly impossible to interpret his ideas - spatial and formal logics are rendered using physically based materials - it makes him a spectacle for spectators trying to understand his work. His identity is clouded by the screen he interfaces - losing touch with the reality he creates. The 2018 architect might be - in this moment blinded by the devices that render his imagination true, compromising his identity in media to capture

his ideas and thoughts for brief moments at a time - until the goggles come off. Does it matter who sits behind the goggles? At least in the articles and journals I keep coming across, we still imagine the architect and the figure dressed in an all black turtle neck, clinging to the fringes of mainstream thought and social discourse. But the figure is still that of a white male with grey hair. If the goggles are on, it suggests that it still matters who wears them - that the ego, identity, and personality continue to be worn in compliance with social expectations, the ideas that follow are equally constrained. Virtual reality devices are presenting an anonymity for the architect seeking "empower[ment] through end users..."4 At who's expense - it is more likely that there exist the architect already in disguise - those who do not fit the public image we find in articles. Those already wearing identities that sit in opposition to the generic - identities that are individuals - the ethnic minority, racial and cultural

backgrounds, those marginalized as a consequence of their image. Unaugmented and yet their own they would perhaps not prefer a pair of goggles. They are already a spectacle - the only one in a room of twenty two.

of a new image - one that is neither anonymous nor foreign - but my own. That does require an extensive background check - and that is however something to be understood out of technology - and the devices I interfaced growing up, the ones we make domestic and normalized - because there exists parallels

No matter how you approach these tools - they present with them their own political, social, and cultural connotations. To find them on the architect is strange, I grew up playing with devices like these - and recognize them as a tool for play not design. In this image (see fig 1.2) it is likely the only familiar object - the figure wearing them is foreign and anonymous. This present, for me, an opportunity to begin from - not the person but the goggles he wears. To start at an intersection of technology and identity, where I, might be able to find my place - as it does not exist. The virtual reality device as a tool is therefore a point of departure, a point to begin this pursuit of role-playing - towards the understanding

between technology and architect - ones that I can claim and use at my own expense.

8 - Introduction

Introduction - 9

Glossary
Terms to be Familiar with.

Identity (id)
/id/

the id is the personality component made up of unconscious psychic energy that works to satisfy basic urges, needs, and desires.

noun

Live Simulation: Avatar:
noun
/avtär/

nature herself, who incessantly tries and fails aloud, never stopping to perfection3

1. Hinduism // a manifestation of a deity or released soul in bodily form on earth; an incarnate divine teacher 2. Computing // an icon or figure representing a particular person in video games, Internet forums, etc the metamedium of all forms of communication defined by thousands of algorithmic species running in parallel programming1

/smjlen/

noun

Real-Time:
/r()l tm/

Computation:
noun

/kämpytSH()n/

noun

the world as it is, appearances of both the human culture and scientific images of computational processing. i.e computational appearances. Perpetuating the hallucination of a one-dimensional reality - acknowledged; these parallel yet incompatible dimensions appear or is manifested in the world4 1. A sandbox of reality's dynamic processes, or like reality's gym. It is a a private game we devise when the aliveness of a situation is too complex to really know. It is drifting reality through an ocean of forking behaviours to find an optimal end5 2. Extrapolators of meaning6 3. There is no simulation of humans, because humans already have a modelling capacity - a manifest image or conceptual infrastructure that works - in constant elaboration of - the scientific image of the material substrate7 a huge space with a huge accumulation of mini-behaviours and laws that act and react to each other with no master design, just tendencies, all playing out in parallel with each other8

Simulation:
noun

/smjlen/

Diaspora:
/daspr/

noun

people settled far from their ancestral homelands members of the African diaspora  i : the place where these people live  ii : the movement, migration, or scattering of a people away from an   established or ancestral homeland the black diaspora to northern cities previously unrecognized noise made meaningful

Data:
noun

/dad,dd/

Virtualize:
verb

/vir·tu·al·ize/

Digital Boundary:
noun

/dijidl - bound()r//

a communication boundary that is always created when the mechanical function of a digital tool is triggered by the interaction of a human. This is really meant to be understood as a closed loop made by humans and software the act of becoming known or coming into view : the act of emerging. It happens continuously. An unending firework comes into sight repeatedly causing new worlds2

Emergence:
noun

/i-mr-jn(t)s/

10 - Introduction

A General History -11 2

Fig. 1.2 The Architect according to a small article in a 2018 architecture digest

PART ONE

Empowering End Users Through Visualization
M&D Canadian Facility Management & Design: June/July 2018

12 - Augmented Virtual Reality

Augmented Virtual Reality - 13

Chapter 1
Identity Breeding Grounds: Popularized Domestic Technology

notion of "family" and what it meant to be a partaker in a complex public economy. It is argued here, that the 20th century brought with it a revolution in information communications technology (ICTs), placing society

The midcentury suburban household introduced a new sense of spatially temporal boundaries rooted in the ephemerality of domesticated technology. In a way, building security, identity, autonomy and agency that occurs through the enclosed boundaries of appliances makes it difficult to regulate and control the in and out flows of media content.4 Parents, need to decide what content is and is not allowed for their children, who watches what and where, and who listens to who, while using what, where, and when, etc. The capacity for the family to create and sustain themselves as an economic, social and cultural unit depended mainly on the competence and status of each individual family member, making their success or failure a matter of economic resources, desires, national pride, ambition, and other capabilities.. To "fit in" to a community or be accepted by others, while maintaining a sense of identity and independence unique to their culture was determined by the appliances one owned, and how often used. Making devices a production of tool

1.1 Domesticity in the making

sphere), a place for the appropriation of technology, such that it could be used like an electronic commodity

in a period of information-based economies and resources. Anthropologists (such as Cheal, Parry and Bloch), identify this behaviour as a "moral economy" operating within domestic households.2 The notion of a moral economy,3 draws on formal commodities and - individual-based economies that get marketed to enhance households based on value (cultural, social and economic) and suburban interests. Recognizing each suburban household as a sustained economy derived out of the successful production and distribution of cultural reproduction. In determining

The past century has created the suburban context as I know it today; a test bed for technological advancements aimed to breed identity through the consumption of content. In the context of western society, households of the nuclear family type are perceived as subjects for activating new cultures of social and economic reproduction, specifically within and around domestic spheres. Technology and media forge symbolic and objective meaning through the exchange of information based content; diffusing and shifting the boundary between public and private zones within and outside the home. Where outside (the public sphere), becomes a territory for the production and distribution of technologies; inside (the private

with ascribed personal values. Technology facilitates the activities of consuming social and cultural pleasures, by turning households into a domain for transactional systems of value between individual family members and media content. What resulted, was the ability for the family to create and sustain its autonomy and identity as an independent economic, social and cultural unit.
1

The day to day routines of family life operated on a process of value creation within the household, such that an identity could be formed in relation to an individual's class, ethnicity, and geographical location. Status was both (to itself and to others) a process of objectifying the

what constitutes a popularized commodity, it is purely based on exchange and transaction rates; depending on the return value of appropriated media such that it can be easily shared and redistributed within domestic spheres. This will be explained in section 2.

14 - Identity Breeding Grounds

15

that is necessarily popular as it becomes a means for sustaining public and private relationships; either between neighbours, friends or family.

ideologies, fuelling communist, fascist, and liberal democratic propaganda made possible by domestic technology that could be used to serve the interest of those in power. By altering the perception of

1 4

2 5
CLICKON ONDOCUMENT DOCUMENT CLICK TOSEE SEEFULL FULLCOPY COPY TO

3 6

1.2 Survival of the Fittest

opinion and beliefs, households became a territory for inducing families into hypnotic subservience through the efficiency and speed provided by a decentralized network of controlled media content. Atomizing and devaluing all sense of community and self, citizens were either eager to submit to authoritarian leadership or were simply unaware that they were being manipulated. Not having access to domestic technology was perhaps worse than submission, as it automatically placed citizens in the precarious blind spot of the dominant ideology of the time, further alienating and accelerating the pace of divisiveness, made possible by media as a replacement for face to face community life.

Before domestic technology could be properly democratized for all; the majority of Western and Eastern civilization needed to be liberated from the contested miss-appropriation of the tool.5 Regarded as a failure first; many perceived domestic technology as a populist threat. Media programs (i.e radio or television) were often considered "ephemeral garbage" used to exercise political power and social control.6 Mid century thinking created a new form of "mass" class society, where consumers would be tricked (marketed) into believing there was a need for mass everything - to mass media, mass culture and mass audience.7 Often regarded as a failure of democracy, domestic technology established a space for totalitarianist

7

8
Fig. 1.3 List of Patents (Popularized Domestic Products Twentieth Century - Today)

9

16 - Identity Breeding Grounds

Identity Breeding Grounds - 17

As previously mentioned, self, security, autonomy and identity is created within the boundary of appliances this of course, also became a tool to be used against mass society thinking. As it fuelled estrangement between neighbours and one another, turning against each other because of what would be broadcasted - propaganda that altered perceptions by fostering paranoia and doubt - this produced intolerance for foreign identities and xenophobia.. Domestic spheres and technology instead took on assumed roles and identities, labelling private domestic spheres as either feminine or lower class, depending on the access and use (not strictly the fault of technology nor the designers themselves, this was during a period of political authoritarianism and was a consequence of knowledge about the tool that accelerated the process of social control).

needed to produce specialized intellectual property (I.P.) to fortify a position within the technology revolution. The bureaucratic process of patenting required distinct ideas with legal and financial validation seeking mass production of designs required this unique discrepancy. The potential value derived from patented ideas depended on the creators' ability to sustain governing rights to their own inventions, such that it could be used in order to generate capital through the monopolization of ideas. A designer might sell, rent, or lease their protected idea to any public or private entity with a specified amount of years to deploy (manufacture, distribute, retain out of circulation, etc) the I.P. as they determined. Out of this process, there began a global culture of highly competitive yet protected I.P. Each patent was made in order to exchange in a public forum - where

the public index of chronological records. Patenting began as "an Act to promote progress of useful Arts" and has since generated a need to overcompensate, depending on the significance held by larger agencies in need of creating and marketing products specific to problems of their time, either to create or diffuse social, cultural, and/or economic public and private spheres within and around family households.

There are two ways I would like to recognize domesticated technology here; either as a product of intent by the maker or user or as a factor with environmental, social, economic, or cultural impact. Therefore, each device that finds popularization in the household by the family is mainly a product of those using the device and this says more than leads on from the point of view of each individual family member participating in the contest of growing the exchange rate and distribution of media.

The preoccupations of consumer culture led the inevitable progression to desired technological newness; especially as an inventor; many suddenly

detailed disclosed agreements could be owned and later sold for profit. Today, we can pin-point the exact date, author and idea past while accessing

18 - Identity Breeding Grounds

Identity Breeding Grounds - 19

A General History of Technological Goods for Home An Index for Architects: Words & Phrases used to describe Domestic Technology
Words Automated Autonomous Accessible Appliance Cyber CRT Easy Peasy Ecosystem Energy Star Rating Electrician Fun Gestures Graphical User Interface (GUI) Hardware Human ICT (Information Communications Technology) I/O Boards Mechanical Micro Monitors Meters Off-Grid Open-Source Operating System Platform Proprietary Protocols Positional Tracking Radio-Frequency Smart Smart Home Smart House Self-Sufficient Sensors Security Software Technical The Grid The Cloud Touch User Interface (UI) Wireless Video Machine Voice Commands VTR " The Boob Tube" "The Idiot Box"
"The One-Eyed-Baby-Sitter"

1.3 Ring, Ring ... Hello?

quantities with high demand and corporate control; it was not long before designers began challenging

Phrases

The telephone was invented towards the end of the steam age and its process of domestication began just before the start of the twentieth century. From a mechanical and social point of view, the suburban context in the late 1890s afforded designers the opportunity to elicit a number of inventions for everyday consumers owning property with access to utilities like hydroelectricity and telecommunications technology. Before the start of WWI, technological advancements made by industries matched unforeseen cultural phenomenons which enabled the popularization of products that could have otherwise not been accessed by consumers, permeating into mainstream commercial audience only by chance. In some cases, designs originally conceived for military or government agencies eventually found greater value in the hands of the masses.8 Seemingly unobtainable technologies would be of greater value when produced in low

the public by re-thinking assumed

conventions

towards domesticity, introducing new ideas with no standards or orthodoxy. By prompting the production of newer and newer commodities that promised ease and comfort at a low learning curve; thereby revolutionizing activities that were as basic as talking.

"The Glass Teat" "Chewing Gum for the Eyes" "Man Caves" "Tech Dens" "Electronic Cottage" "Thingamajig" "Witch Craft" "Watch Whatever, Whenever" "Zapping"

The domestic telephone presented an opportunity to automate the process of contacting neighbours, family, friends, the police, etc.9 However, the ability to produce and innovate on an analog mechanism to be widely adopted and immediately understood by all, turned into a challenge for industrial designers to solve; such that they could patent their ideas and resell them for capital and royalties.

For many, the concept of communicating through a line of wire resulted in a new but novel method for

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2018

20 - Identity Breeding Grounds

Identity Breeding Grounds - 21

contacting others through assigned dial tones transcribed in numbers. By 1892, a patent (see "1" in Fig. 1.1 List of Patents) was submitted in an attempt to teach and popularize a domestic method that automated the process of connecting telephones through the function of tones. By conceiving of a dial, the function required the index finger to engage in a linear rotational motion, the initial starting point would always be an assigned number, rotating the ratchet wheel (see "1" in Fig. 1.1 List of Patents) clockwise with your index finger would trigger the tone assigned to the number. Although the cultural phenomena of visiting your neighbour had not disappeared - one could either write a letter, or send a telegraph. There was now, however, the ability to communicate or warn beforehand whether it was possible to visit a friend to borrow a cup of sugar. Even with countless innovations made to the design of automated domestic telephones, we have not seen since 1892 a mechanism that produced as significant a

cultural impact as the one developed by A.B Strowger. As the automatic rotational dial system developed into a ubiquitous industrialized format of manufacturing telephones for suburban homes for decades later.

The consequence of attaining a domestic lifestyle was the invariable need to learn, adopt, trust and secure new routines that protect the separation between public and private moral economies. The sudden expectation that collect calls always provide access to

similar process of competing inventions, rivalling the radio; television quickly became the poster child for mass media, news and entertainment. The TV was used for government propaganda and the marketing to audiences without their control over content by private corporate agencies. Whomever was responsible for the invention of the first popularized domestic television would take ownership of a tool with the power to engineer mass social control via the television screen. The major difference here, (between TV and the telephone, especially) is the dependence on both centralized producers of content, and networked, nested (licensed) systems of distribution - that needed each other in order to function. These were

The automation of the telephone generated a mechanical and social standard that catered to the desire for comfort at a low learning curve (easy access, low threshold) of what was a very foreign technology at the time. The concept here, is what makes intellectual property important. Manufactured for nearly 40 years after, the patent guaranteed royalties from anyone interested in mass producing and marketing this novel design. What might have initially appeared excessive and complex, in fact generated an alternative solution to a basic problem. As technology advanced, so would the need to anticipate greater complexities of social and cultural reproduction in domestic lifestyles for family households seeking easier consumption methods at a fraction of the cost.

anyone in your city or town. Or conversely, that domestic technology is able to solve challenging problems with a basic solution is not normal. However, this became the basis and lifestyle for mass society thought, where mass everything could be solved by domestic inventions, patents, and devices manufactured at scale for the reproduction of internal cultural content (like gossiping, in the instance of telephoning).

1.4 Don't Sit So Close, It'll Burn Your Eyes Out!

embedded in single entities ("Networks") such as CBS, ABC, and NBC in the US and CBC in Canada, that

Domestic technology after the telephone was treated like an emblem to exercise political power over thought at the start and end of the 20th century. Although the television became a domestic technology through a

owned or controlled the broadcast licenses of local "affiliate" stations. It's difficult to identify or pin point the original source responsible for inventing the television., as there wasn't one single force driving

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2018

22 - Identity Breeding Grounds

Identity Breeding Grounds - 23

the invention (and popularization) of televisions.10 With increased assemblages of patents attempting to solve and publicize a new domestic technology, coupled with the guaranteed success if marketed, manufactured, and sold correctly; this invariably required the scale of larger corporate companies instead of a single inventor working incognito.

The television worked by displaying images at frame rates unnoticeable to the viewer (30 or 60 frames per second) and allowed for information to be distributed coherently in an analog visual format, either in real time or from pre-recordings.11 This meant that information, like the news and entertainment, didn't need to be witnessed in person and could be exchanged visually and sonically within the moral economy of a

Television needed to transition from the cultural norm of needing to witness events in first person or in a public setting (news reals shown in movie theatres), towards what it would be "like" to spectate from an alternative perspective, this made media a replacement for direct community life. Suddenly, households were a place where the media or event happened utilizing their home for witnessing in a private context. Interfacing information through the lens of a screen was both good and bad, real or artificial events required eye-sight and ears to consume transmitted media - if you became tired you could watch laying down or sitting up right, so long as you were in proximity and view of the sound and display. As early as 1938, society associated the television with feminized and lower class identity.13 The television accelerated the process of cultural circulation in nuclear family households, where submission to bureaucratic and authoritarian leadership could be passively consumed (with preoccupation of participation), through a homogenized, yet alienating technology.

By the mid 1970s there would be a push towards the democratization of television and video technologies. With the advent of cable networks, greater numbers of content providers entered the market, programs could be chosen depending on personal interests as opposed to limited access under network control. Audience empowerment generated the creation of new networks catering to viewers who were previously unrecognized as the victims of totalitarianism. To right these wrongs, television attempted to redeem itself through the domestic set up of multi media consumption enabled by video tape decks (JVC released the VHS format 1976), cable and satellite television (TVO - 1970, CITY TV - 1972, global - 1974), video art and more devices that assist in the reproduction of morally economical media - letting family members watch and play back recordings of sentimental events captured on video (self authoring.) The opportunity given to suburban families eager to own their first tricolour Picture Tubes initiated pressure in other sectors surrounding multi media

News and entertainment was dominated by three large networks (in the U.S, leading up to and during the Cold War Era) for a significant period of time, advertisement and mass media turned into the epitome of social engineering through its control by these corporate bodies. As long as the television did not allow for feedback on the part of the perceiver, it would be almost impossible to escape the broadcasting of controlled media content. As a result, television completely transformed traditional methods of media consumption without any thorough understanding by either consumer or producer of the social, cultural or economic impacts.

household. With the over popularization and demand of the television came new sought out mechanical challenges and innovations, for instance, designers needed to overcome limitations in resolution and display size. Producing and manufacturing a design comfortable enough to recognize moving images while viewing from a reasonable distance, not to mention the scale and weight of the appliance. Manufacturers and designers needed to take into consideration sizes of living rooms (and bedrooms) in order to standardize dimensions and resolution densities.12

24 - Identity Breeding Grounds

Identity Breeding Grounds - 25

information. With nothing more than colour television and the polar attitudes of broadcasters and corporate agencies, the television earthed a period of remediation. The introduction of colour t.v. made little difference to the stigma generated by class and social pressures, still, the television was revered as a feminine product to be accessed by lower class families. Although the colour television cost more, it still carried the cultural implications generated over the years of public scrutiny, and therefore the television needed an antidote to reclaim its place in the domestic sphere. Rather than killing the television altogether, the industry compromised with political, economic and cultural motives from individual agencies seeking newer methods of remediation. Family members could spark a new link between their domestic technologies and video games by generating participatory interactions, the television could become a more democratic medium that was no longer limited to demanding passive viewership.

The home was transformed by opportunities to shift from totalitarian to egalitarian consumption, it simply needed to end specialized content and to instead embrace the countercultures generated out of protest to mass society thinking during the mid 1960s. Corporations were willing to take entrepreneurial control over demand and supply (if it ultimately meant moving the industry forward), where risks to network television could be instead, placed in the hands of audience members who preferred borrowing recorded programs to watch off air at their own convenience (i.e Blockbuster Video.) The fact that different consumers and family members could selectively record and redistribute specific broadcast content (as well as create their own original expressions with video cameras), meant the inventors and manufactures could more democratically cater to the personalities of the autonomous individual (as market sectors), establishing a new cycle of morally economical media.

It was not until after the introduction of the first wireless remote controller that a (slightly more) democratic participatory experience could also occur wih television. By giving the audience member immediate control in the form of choices and instant feedback, the individual felt greater power and authority over the domestic technology. The burden; of having to get up, walk to the television, change the channel, and, go back to your seat was a special way to keep you tuned in. Before the 1970s, only a very few analog television sets came with accompanying remote controllers attached via cable; needing to be able to reach significant distances. Even with the luxury of having a cabled remote controller, the cable came with the need to cautiously avoid tripping over the wire while someone changed channels, a problem in any domestic context. The market demand for this accessory generated a need for alternative solutions to the cable conundrum; without trying to redesign the entire device, a method that could be attached

to the existing system became the ideal sought after solution. In 1959 the wireless remote controller was patented with E.J. Polley's control system (see "2" in Fig. 1.1 List of Patents), introducing home owners to authoritative control at surprisingly low learning curves; to be used on any existing television set.

The Flashmatic solved this issue by allowing anyone to attach and activate four photocells to be placed along each corner of the television set. A light emitting diode (L.E.D.)14 on the controller would emit a low-intensity infrared light signal, triggering one of the four photocells, changing the channel in an instant. The wireless communication technology used with television sets became the start of establishing control over consumer network television. The passive grasping of remote controllers triggered a new domestic convention towards the interfacing with active technology; the expectation that technology can be a bodily extension through

26 - Identity Breeding Grounds

Identity Breeding Grounds - 27

buttons and receivers, the fingers alter the hegemony between alienation and democratization, moving towards greater and greater complexity of interactions that built on older technologies.

device, media institutions and old analog formats were threatened by the possibility of losing formerly captive viewers because of the availability of new, diverse, and participatory experiences. Promises by cable TV, videotapes and electronic games that family members

through the guise of suburban white American family life.15

By 1973, the first "television gaming and training apparatus" was invented by Ralph H. Baer who adamantly argues that televisions "[should be used

The technical complexity of creating a controlled device to be operated with television sets afforded families with the ability to manipulate geometric figures with their television display and a remote control. This could not have been possible without certain advancements in micro-processing, where it became possible to

for something] other than watch[ing] stupid network, programs"16 suggesting that play and competition rewards audiences with the benefit of sociability and interpersonal communication between friends and family.

With the adaptation of more appliances came a learned knowledge that innovators could continuously exploit in an effort to democratize mass media towards wider choices and greater convenience. The domestic context began evolving the way family members interfaced with technological appliances, as the home became a private space for the stability of television, in the hopes that the future would open up to the potential of a participatory mass society within domestic spheres.

could "watch whatever, whenever" and giving audience members agency to program according to their personal schedule.

Departing from leisure; consumers could grasp a deeper understanding of alternative methods for interfacing with new domestic technology. The gamification of media revealed the revolutionary potential to utilize technology for the purpose of entertainment while providing agency through control, shifting from passive

exploit the connection between video signals and receiver antenna terminals. The design of a circuit board determined the flow of electricity, such that it could be manipulated towards the displaying of video signals. The closed circuit would consist of (see "6" in Fig. 1.1 List of Patents) resistors, power sources, oscillators, silicon, etc. All of which, are responsible for accurately stimulating the photo-electric cells, generating an image. The logic board was a literal representation of all manipulations contained within and configurable by the person and television.

The learning curve was now based on how quickly a person could become competent at a game they had never played before, thus domesticating a device based solely on training as opposed to the conventional learning of a persistent function. A significant amount of time could be spent competing against family members on a system with seemingly limitless potential - as opposed to the television's limited number of channels - rewarding audience participation in a new productive spectatorship, especially when you consider geometric complexity and processing power as the only two limiting factors.

1.5 Role-Play for Adults

to active engagements (a closed loop system). Rather than patiently waiting to tune in to regularly scheduled programs, there began the opportunity for play without commercial breaks at any time; advertising was now accomplished within the identity of video games,

Video games remediated television by trying to improve the passive techno ambivalence. Disrupting television's status as a pop culture entertainment

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2018

28 - Identity Breeding Grounds

Identity Breeding Grounds - 29

By conditioning family members away from the various choices offered by the button, domestic technology had suddenly evolved into numerous switches, dials, and buttons providing more control and complexity. Video games were advertised as intelligent television, orienting audiences away from the stigma of the televisions as a lower class, feminized domestic product. Neutralizing the domestic sphere of the family room as a feminine context, video games sought to enable masculine empowerment through the acting out of fantasies and the development of skill based video games.17 Analog dials were designed specifically to hold for longer periods of time, forcing the need to grip and adjust your fingers quickly and comfortably at any given moment. Features like knobs made for an awkward but highly intuitive framework to understand a broader scope from which to access greater computational logics, all of which became fundamental to the theory and interactivity of new video games. By letting families "Play TV", a number of

cultural, social, and economic pressures and anxieties were slowly alleviated in favour of a much more democratic perception on the side of class, ethnicity, and location, it became a platform for expanding concepts of participation rather than alienation.

as they wished. Technology revolutionaries actively worked towards building their own vision of the future beyond computerized televisions. The dream was to transform domestic technologies into multi media terminal networks, converging news, libraries, shops, offices, and autonomous information into a single

to sell handmade I/O boards among members of the club. Generating additional microcomputer companies that could advance quality by criticizing and speaking out against faulty equipment and specs. Eventually, the Home-Brew Computer Club grew large enough to make or break new companies trying to enter into the market, claiming dominance and control over big business corporations that were soon unable to begin

1.6 Steve's

source.

The promise to liberate mass society from corporate and government agencies once and for all would not be fulfilled completely until the end of the 70s video revolution. A growing grass-roots culture in the San Francisco Bay area started to solidify the future of customizability and individualized agency through a movement called computer-power-to-the-people.18 If video consoles remediated the television from passive to active engagements, then the computer took engagements and made them customizable through the use of software that enabled the creativity for anyone to represent themselves (within limits)

The Home-Brew Computer Club would gather a number of (predominantly young, white) men who shared the interest of building their own personalized computer while keeping themselves informed against powerful technology agencies. By the end of the1960s, IBM and seven other companies (Burroughs, Control Data Corporation (CDC), General Electric, Honeywell, NCR, RCA, and Sperry Rand) were all in competition with each other. With no love for IBM19, the Home-brew Computer Club exchanged information through newsletters and subscription magazines and organized monthly meetings aimed

competition even if they tried.

The hobbyists-turned-entrepreneurs could ignore the biggest computer companies by collaborating figuring out how each device functioned, scrapping it, and independently building and selling their own components. It was suddenly possible to start a populous revolt against big business tyranny, shifting from hobbyist, to consumer, to creator through a development of standards and committees now in a position of power and leadership. The first grass roots company to properly exploit the growing culture of big

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2018

Indexing Domestic Appliances

Identity Breeding Grounds - 31

business revolt started by participating and influencing Home-Brew thought from within. Apple20 was initially

process of self exploration, introducing a new culture of computer related activities. Family members were yet again afforded the opportunity to appropriate and generate personalized media that could be reproduced and exchanged within their private moral economy - without really understanding the implicit potential embedded in personal computers. The household quickly shifted from "family time" in front of the television, towards individual and private screen interfacing with the active exchange between analog and digital interactions sitting away at arms length.

$25 $1799 $100 $25 $25 $1799 $100 $37 $37 $37 $179 $179 $1000 $1000 $1000 $1,298 $1,298 $25 $25
®
822 82 26-02 01/12/01

a small company that started within the Home-Brew Computer Club and tackled the hurdle of big business by inventing their first personal computer called "Apple II", designed with the everyday consumer in mind. With the intent to rival the Commodore 64 and TRS, the Apple II would not have worked without the support and cultural exploitation of the growing grass roots computer community in the San Francisco Bay Area.21

www.electrolux.se/trilobite

The personal computer began a paradigmatic shift,22 from what was once an elitist technology; there now developed the ability to consolidate past technologies into one totalizing system. Allowing domestic technology the ability to advertise itself as a machine for work, playtime, and leisure consumption all at once. Customizability was a big step in the creativity of self-representation; computers took one step further and made the experience of consumption a With advancements in the design and manufacturing of central processing units (CPUs), there would also be higher demands on the production and innovation of similar technologies; the aim here being profit. With the engineering of computers also came the newfound ability to interface written rules of software code strung in ordered sets of logic, such that they could be displayed in a visual format via graphical user interfaces (G.U.I).

$500 $500 $99 $99 $99
Fig. 1.4 Advertisements of Popularized Domestic Appliances

32 - Identity Breeding Grounds

Identity Breeding Grounds - 33

The ability to interface coded information, also enabled highly specific control over how information could be processed, consumed, and digitized at rates well beyond our physical sensibilities. For young males, the activity of breaking into protected software contributed to the development of a culture of hacking highly specialized processes of information. The ability to exchange and build customizable logic boards, generated an economic and cultural exchange of power, storage, and code. By the late 1970s, the microcomputer patented by Stephen Wozniak became one of the first aimed at introducing graphic standards for colour and high resolution video, generated directly from digital signals "by employing a recirculating shift register" (see "4" in Fig. 1.1 List of Patents) that was first showcased at the Home-Brew Computer Club. Again, computers like Bears gaming apparatus - exploited the control of energy by stimulating and exciting rare earth materials at high frequencies so as to translate data in the format of 1's and 0's that could later be assigned and displayed

with specific meaning beyond there binary function.23 By 1979, it was common for young males to forge their own personalized I/O boards with additional hardware and parts to be inserted in the available slots - without really needing much understanding of the intricacies that go into the design, processing, configuring of information - what mattered most at the time was the freedom to customize, swap, switch, and merge together various electronic elements and faster computation to be displayed graphically.

(CPUs) came the need to write code (software), with physical layouts of densely packed transistors to be comparatively understood as the "hardware." The development and design of both hardware and software needed to be treated as one system; Bear's gaming apparatus introduced conditions evolving the personal computer; it became accessible once more understood the interactivity of a mouse and keyboard. Instead of teaching and learning a new language called "code" used by software engineers, it was better to focus on a user interface (UI) that translated the

generated a new culture of computer talk between youth as a means to develop and change products and to activate new procedures at their will. This, however, was not something the software producers had intended; it was extremely difficult to secure code, and it was easier to attain software from a friend who had already made the purchase. Otherwise, clusters of predominantly male youth would group at a friends' house to try out the latest games or software in what was also an opportunity to exchange software and make contact with others who share an interest, in a collective setting. Thanks to video games and new software, it was relatively easy for most to deduce and

The computer is really only responsible for interfacing the inputs and outputs of information on what was initially a terminal. So long as that information is coded and translated into a language for the coder, information inputed is compiled and spit back in a closed loop operation. It was from this that engineers and designers could make it technically possible for anyone to access the computational potential within the machine. With central processing units

functions of a code into a comprehensive format.

From this hidden UI, young males and adults began partaking in hacking efforts to break into and manipulate written logics of code, by appropriating and borrowing each others software for fixed amounts of time, many engaged in a collective exchanging and lending of each others' software in schools or neighbourhoods (bootleg/illegal copies). Hacking

challenge themselves through the inputs of functions and information to be seen on screen. The introduction of XY-tracking and one simple point and click button (mouse) was enough for boys to appropriate space in the pursuit of social home based peer group rituals, where everyone could gather, talk and game play.

34 - Identity Breeding Grounds

Identity Breeding Grounds - 35

Fig. 1.5 Chart of Domestic Appliances

E.J Polley

J.W Chamerlin

Philo Farnsworth

Charles P. Strite

Abel Edmund A. Jr

Steve Wozniak

Alexander Graham Bell

Percy Spencer

Duane D. Pearsall

Todd F. Mozer Forrest S. Mozer Enrich B. Adams

Ralph H. Baer

Palmer Lucky Brendan Iribe Trexler Graham England Jack McCauley

C.W. Rice E.W. Kellogg

DOMESTIC KNOBS INDEX MATRIX (100 years)
0
7 1 2 5 4 3 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 1

Do humor
1

Function

6

11.5''

Knock, Knock...

90*

First Appliance Patent

FIRST WIRELESS REMOTE

FIRST AUTOMATIC FRONT-LOADING WASHING MACHINE

THE FIRST PRODUCTION COLOR TELEVISION

FIRST AUTOMATIC POP-UP TOASTER

FIRST AUTOMATIC DRIP BREW METHOD

FIRST COMMERCIAL PERSONAL COMPUTER

FIRST AUTOMATIC ELECTRIC- PHONE

FIRST DOMESTIC MICROWAVE OVEN

FIRST SMOKE DETECTOR

FIRST VOICE-BASED AI DEVICE

FIRST COMMERCIAL HOME VIDEO GAME CONSOLE

FIRST COMMERCIAL HOME VIDEO GAME CONSOLE

FIRST ELECTRIC LOUDSPEAKER

FIrst Appliance On Market

Flashmatic

Zenith Space Command

The Bendix Washer

"The Merrill" RCA Model CT-100

Toastmaster

Apple II

Model 50AL CandleStick

RR-1 Raytheon Radarage

RR-6 Raytheon Radarage

SmokeGuard 700

Amazon Echo

Magnavox Odyssey

Oculus Rift

Radiola Loudspeaker #104

Year Appliance Patented

1959

1959

1937

1954

1919

1971

1977

1892

1891

1967

1976

1971

2008

1972

2010

1921

DIGITAL BOUNDARY nm nm mm mm

Primary Interaction

"Pull"

"Press"

"Twist"

"View"

"Press"

"Press"

"Press"

"Sound"

"Sound"

"Twist"

"Push"

"Press"

"Sound"

"Speech"

"Twist"

"View"

"Sound"

Mechanism

Trigger

Button

Dial

Display

Spring

Switch

Keys

Frequencies

Frequencies

Dial

Digital Punch Buttons

Frequencies

Phonetics

Dial

Display

Frequencies

Interfaces Gestures Gestures Gestures Gestures Gestures Gestures

Frequentations phonetics

Frequentations Gestures phonetics Gestures Gestures

Frequentations

phonetics Interfaces Gestures
Positions

Interfaces Gestures

Frequentations

phonetics

Organizing Past Appliances
120 years of Popularized Domestic Appliances An Index for Architects

36 - Identity Breeding Grounds

Identity Breeding Grounds - 37

By the early 1980s, domestic technology was not about passive ephemeral trash anymore; family members were given the limitless potential to commodify ephemeral entertainment to be reproduced and distributed within their own moral economy, as opposed to complying with traditional notions of mass society thought; where individuals become atomized by channels of media to be watched and consumed. This cultural shift became a massive leap in sociality and privacy for family members struggling to identify with media that could appropriately represent them as an individual agent in a community of other suburban
Fig. 1.6 Excerp from the 1939 American comic book, "Archie Comics." Archie, gets a new computer.

The amount of time spent interfacing with domestic technology was greatly extended after the screen could be oriented towards an intimate one-onone connection between the device and individual. The keyboard and mouse challenged the ability to participate with others locally, and resulted in a private and secured method of storing inputs of information by the individual to later be accessed and interfaced with at will. Or conversely, to share and distribute to friends, family or neighbours for profit (money, gifts, prestige, etc.) accelerating the reproduction and value of a household's moral economy.
  1.6.1 Software

digital content with limitless potential and by using meaningful data, it was possible to accelerate the pace of digital consumerism through a larger agency provided to moral economies. Anyone with a personal computer could exploit the new utilities like wired communications technologies; giving access to services like the internet through modems to online networks. By the early 2000s, the hegemony between machine, household, and corporation shifted further. By 2001 it was almost expected that tasks like chores, leisure, productivity, and entertainment should be virtualized such that society can appropriate and sustain the progress of a long term moral environmental household through new accessible domestic technologies.
1.6.2 Parental Control

homes. The computer could be used for two distinct social interactions: either to promote interactions by immersing the individual within "game space" , or as a substitute for social interaction through individual and object.24

With the ability to mass produce microcumputers and their deployment at an unprecedented scale, in addition to the initiation of people and accessible software - family members managed to create a new culture of software developers (using software for independent activities.) Resulting from a newfound ability to capitalize on an unexplored market of

For parents, it was possible to curate and act as gatekeepers over what could be seen or accessed through downloads. Depending on what and where the location of exclusive digital content could be

38 - Identity Breeding Grounds

Identity Breeding Grounds - 39

accessed (both physically and digitally within domestic spheres) it was possible to regulate use and flow of media content. Creating a question concerning how far parents see the effects of digital information as either constructive or unhealthy depending on the household you grew up in (this could be through either parental or financial restrictions).

1.7 iChappy

moving away from their gender and cultural biases by breaking the need for anyone to do work (including family members who hire helping hands or disciplining a child). The creation of the first robotic vacuum cleaner brought an end to the cultural phenomenon of habitually tending to your untidy home on a Saturday afternoon.

while picking up the location of the magnetic strips. Rethinking what it means to finish chores, the affects do not require active engagement as a means to complete physical labour. Generating greater amounts of time for family members to interface other technologies, acting like a small helping hand in the kitchen, living room, family room. The autonomy of domestic technology lets family members disengage from their surroundings

Domestic robots revolutionized household machinery; changing common home activities and rituals by automating chores and busy housework. Such weekly tasks exclusive to owning a home like cleaning or stocking the kitchen with groceries, eventually found their respective technological solutions by the end of 2010. Automated robotic mechanisms could now carry

The personal computer in its early days was a tool (quite similar to the way the telephone was treated), that if allowed into the home, inconspicuously sat on the desk.25 Whether it be for work, entertainment, games, leisure, privacy, etc. the computer was seen as trivial for sanctioned moderate work, depending on the sensibilities of the parent. The notion that all past domestic technologies were somehow accessible in a single tool (assuming access to high bandwidth) made it an easy replacement for alternative social contact and it is for that reason (and many others) that this device is like noother domestic technology leading up to this point, and is arguably the most powerful domestic tool to this day.

out mundane chores such as sweeping, mopping and vacuuming - a manual chore in every domestic context in addition to its portrayal as a feminine and lower class activity within certain domestic spheres. That the house-wife would spend her time cleaning and doing daily chores, still remains a cultural construct of societal thought regarding assumed gender roles within domesticity.26

The advent of domestic robots began when the Swedish corporation demonstrated the Electrolux Trilobite, commercializing the product as the first autonomous vacuum cleaner. The small robot was advertised with obstacle avoidance capabilities, automatic recharging, and working well on both deep-pile carpets and wooden floors. Proximity sensing systems, made it possible for the the robot to perform as a fully autonomous machine. The Trilobite required the family members to

even more, neutralizing the exclusivity of the upper class luxury lifestyle and making it accessible to the masses, redefining the private suburban condition by democratizing what it means to live "comfortably."

The ability to give machines autonomous agency within the home, consequently created the desire for more and more capabilities in computational power for practical home applications. After the autonomous vacuum cleaner, an influx in autonomous everything started: devices like mops, lawnmowers, robots as pets, versatile robots, and the whole home as an interface, 

Robots supported our ascribing of meaning to neutralize labels placed within domestic spheres,

apply magnetic strips as a method for blocking off areas to avoid and not enter, avoiding stairs or ledges; using infrared sensors made it possible to prevent falling

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2018

40 - Identity Breeding Grounds

Identity Breeding Grounds - 41

producing new smart homes designed specifically to be marketed to elderly individuals. Visual recognition software capable of detecting faces, allowed machines to identify up to 100 different people and respond to those it did not know, like a personal butler. These technologies failed immediately and are recognized as either a niche or a gimmick system. The robotic vacuum cleaner also had limitations as a device that only managed to maintain a level of cleanliness as long as the space was initially clean. However, robots designed to automate the future "smart house" found interest by those not willing to manage menial tasks manually; like shopping, watering the flowers, opening doors and shutters, turning lights on or off, setting the heater or air conditioner, making almost everything automated. In 2001, the prefabricated smart houses designed by Kaufman & Broad (now KB Home) were marketed to consumers after a joint venture with ITT, French Telecom, and Cisco for under half a million dollars. It was desired that smart houses be a product

(like any other appliance), however Kaufman & Broad never got further than the experimental stages due to insufficient home buyers showing interest.27 "The notion of a humanoid robot living and working in a household is far more natural than that of an automated dwelling ... around 2020... according to Hans Moravec, it will probably [be] an android ... like PC users today, a robot's owner will simply tell it which software to use for it to know what tasks to perform."28

easier to ask, "What's the weather like today?" or if you're running low on razors, "Can you order me a new pack of my favourite disposables? I think I've run out" (This also works with groceries and fast food deliveries.) In both instances the technological bot has not only understood the individual phonetic pronunciation of each word, it has also built up the grammatical rules and logic to every sentence. Resulting in a complex algorithm that successfully manages to mimic back the same process and code of which it responds to,

slangs and slurs specific to the language a person is speaking can later be understood over time through brute force algorithms that learn by collecting new words and sentences introduced to the system.

Today, when giving access to your voice at home, key phrases like, "We need a new ..." let's say "bike," is immediately monetized as advertisements that spit back information on the hottest or most popular bike on the market. Bots are determining new formats of response systems that depend on the phrasing of a particular subject. In that way, your voice, which can be measured in decibels, is constantly occupying monetary space loosely situated between a bot programmed for

1.8 Hello, H.A.L

sometimes to the degree of a conversation that exploits "context", depending on the subject and all possible outcomes.

At the end of 2010, the best way to consolidate issues of automation and homes would be through communicating vocally. A "personal assistant" unsurprisingly became the next popularized domestic technology from software/hardware advancements. A.I. is designed specifically with the function of sitting in the house at all times, making life at home "easier." For instance, instead of looking outside, it would

The first commercially successful product to ever be sold and marketed to consumers was the Amazon Echo released in 2008. Since then, these devices have learned to adapt over time in order to self-improve through the multiple errors and corrections that arise out of the complexity of language. Where ideas like

understanding phonetics and wherever you happen to be speaking. This boundary has generated a new format of language that bridges written code and places an entirely new domain that even we as society are just getting familiar with. Ever since the physical drop in our larynx we could not communicate as easily

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2018

42 - Identity Breeding Grounds

Identity Breeding Grounds - 43

as we do today, however the language generated by artificial intelligence is actually undergoing a similar evolutionary step that it created, while we are only helping it evolve.

create and liberate individuals towards knowledge of self expression and identity, to be commodified and valued in the reproduction of their complex moral economies. Mass society is, like never before, operating within domestic spheres that are

1.9.1 Predicting the potential applicability of a popularized technology

As culture and daily life evolves, we cannot imagine the range of possibilities required by daily life, especially when a range of new consumer products and services might change the fundamental structure of the economy. Very little research has been done in determining the limiting fact that enable the transformation of energy into work; one way of answering technologies technical characterists stems from Eric Hirsch & Roger Silverstone in Consuming Technologies: Media and Information in Domestic Spaces.

Predictions made by technology journalists regarding the next revolutionary technology is inherently problematic as there are several forms a technology can take in society. One, the new technology may alter the structure of existing economies and change our understanding of day to day life at mass scale. Two, a new technology that has no less technically new application with little to no effect. Three, could be something in between or lastly, something else altogether. The difference between them is how we determine a technology to be revolutionary. The main issue however, is that we cannot immediately recognize revolutionary ideas as they emerge because their consequences have not happened yet. What makes a technological advancement revolutionary are the consequences that come with the technology itself, and so it is nearly impossible to identify at the time of their revolution.30

1.9 Normal Technology

public, where space is neither private nor sacred - it is expected that machines are listening to and

Domestic technology has for the past century, altered the hegemony between public and private production, consumption, reproduction, redistribution, circulation (sharing) etc. of information-based media. The household, family members, and corporation or software developer have all diffused and shifted agency, overlapping and sometimes replacing each other in the ongoing march of progress (change for profit.) Television was once recognized as a threat to society, but is today understood as one of many other domestic technologies that we use to reinforce the social circulation of ephemeral media. No longer as a means to exercise power, but rather a tool to

collecting as much data as possible, at all times such that the household's needs can be more effectively catered to in as unique and specialized a manner as the fingerprints of the individual members of the household. Moving us towards technology that caters to both public and private spheres that shape the individuals' identity, where the segmentation of space has transformed into a malleable public, safe, and secured digital boundary for the family to distinguish itself against existing victorian ideologies.29

In order to understand the consequence of a new technology before action can be taken, it is better to look at the patterns of consumption influenced by the new technology, and to see out of these patterns the emergence of social differentiation.31 It is more a matter of what economic and social changes can occur in order to determine and understand the pattern derived out of consumption processes, which is perhaps the only constant

44 - Identity Breeding Grounds

Identity Breeding Grounds - 45

Fig. 1.7 Interface Lexicon

Fig. 1.8 Novels on Future Fictions and Domestic Appliances

1 1

0

11.5''

Digital Boundary
A History of Technological Goods for A Home An Index for Architects: Drawing Domestic Interfaces

Syllabus
A Syllabus for Architects: Science Fiction Books Containing VR and AR Adapted from: https://www.goodreads.com/list/show/106036.Best_VR_and_ AR_in_Science_Fiction

46 - Identity Breeding Grounds

Augmented Virtual Reality - 47

change throughout the history of domestic technology.

Determining Revolutionary Technology 33

The difficulty therefore is not whether a technology has succeeded or failed in revolutionizing society, but how the technology will be of service to a future that is unknown, as we are currently in the blind spot of a domestic technologies potential. Virtual reality is the domestic appliance (device) of this period, the seemingly unrelated or unpredictable utilities may be just as important in determining the consequences that have yet to come - and worth further investigation in the context of identities formed in domesticity - failed revolutions can be a very good thing in the midst of progress.32

1.
 

How safe, efficient, flexible and  controlable is it at transforming  energy to work? How much physical space does it  occupy? How much does it weigh? Can it be used to transmit information? At what Speed? At what reliability? What is the cost of the technology? How will it be used in peoples lives?

2.


3. 4.


5. 6. 7. 8.

48 - Augmented Virtual Reality

Augmented Virtual Reality - 49

Chapter 2
Another Domestic Revolution: Virtual Reality Today

Online backers were the only economic support for a company without a legitimate product, and they needed to believe in a product they had never actually used before. Not to mention that purchasing also

of content by those invested in the collective moral economy. Where anonymous users exchange - instead of entertainment - knowledge; teaching and learning became more valuable as opposed to consuming and playing.

2.1 On Sale

for a product based on terms they could control. In 2013, "development kits" dubbed the DK1 acted like

meant commitment to product development and not just consuming. A new form of moral economy; one that shifts traditional notions of ownership, content and production, rather than buying to consume and reproduce - it instead required an initial intent to produce and redistribute, in a kind of decentralized exchange between the corporation and individual anonymous users; people, who thoroughly believed in a new product that could be shaped, valued and distributed by each contributing member. This unorthodox approach produced a moral economy that has to rely on the value of content exchange and not product produced - as more ideas and utilities for the tool become accessible; the greater the value of the tool itself becomes. The product therefore relies ultimately, not on the technological tool, but on the production

Purchasing an Oculus Rift in 2017 was intimidating at first, as the company considers the collective community of developers an accessible, free-to-use service - the meaning of this product may change depending on how you plan to use their device. Although virtual reality headsets are currently manufactured for the consumer market, the Oculus Rift was originally targeted at developers and tech enthusiasts, which have now grown into a kind of online cult following. The company really got its start in a similar fashion as the personal computer (see the previous chapter under section 1.6 titled "Steve's") by attending to a very small community of individuals who shared a personal interest in developing agency

the backbone that supports their current growth and success. Oculus VR originally began as an independent company interested in the development of virtual reality devices. What is especially important to note was their business model that initially depended on raising capital through crowd sourcing on Kick Starter. The company started by financing their future with anonymous, independent investors; there was also no market at the time, making their future uncertain from the beginning. The community of online users are the ones who supplied the initial capital, generating a space for a collective of anonymous individuals to share their concern and interest while also attaining a sense of validation by offering more financial support.

Today, an unprecedented level of support has flooded into the community, generating what is undoubtedly technologies' most current cultural zeitgeist. It's no coincidence the architect is outfitted in this device towards the Introduction. The coupling of social platforms like Facebook, and gaming consoles that prioritize their own private social networks like playstation live, and xbox live means utilizing existing systems with which people are already familiarized and interlinked with friends and contacts. The communication between strangers and friends allows VR owners the unique opportunity to actually connect with others from an alternate perspective. As of this writing, there has been a total of two developer kits released by Oculus VR,

50 - Another Domestic Revolution

Another Domestic Revolution - 51

Fig. 2.1 Diagram of the modern cyber subject and physiological location of digital boundaries

Gestures " Click, Double Tap, Triple Tap, Swipe, Swipe With Two Fingers, Swipe Up, Swipe Down with Two Fingers, Pinch, Spread Fingers Apart, Swipe Left, Swipe Right, Rotate 180 degrees, Press Button once, Press Button Twice, Push." Visual Interfaces "Webcam", "Camera", "Video-Camera", "Display" Phonetics "hi Siri!""hi, Alex!""Okay Google!" Frequentations "Auditory Range" Position "IR Tracking", "GPS Localization"

Gestures

Interfaces

phonetics

Frequentations

Positions

5 Digital Boundaries
A communication boundary that is always created when the mechanical function of a digital tool is triggered by the interaction of a human. This is really meant to be understood as a closed loop made by humans and software.

52 - Another Domestic Revolution

Another Domestic Revolution - 53

Determining Revolutionary Technology: Virtual Reality 1

with three new consumer versions anticipated for release by late 2018. It is not that virtual reality technology is incapable of meeting the demands of

Fig. 2.2 Equipment and Specs.

1. 1. 1. 
 

Howsafe, safe,efficient, efficient,flexible flexibleand and  How safe, efficient, flexible and  How control-ableis isit itat attransforming transforming  control-able is it at transforming  control-able energyto towork? work?200W/hour 200W/hour energy to work? 200W/hour energy Howmuch muchphysical physicalspace spacedoes doesit it  How much physical space does it  How occupy?An Aninfinite infiniteAmount. Amount. occupy? An infinite Amount. occupy? Howmuch muchdoes doesit itweigh? weigh?9.98lbs 9.98lbs How much does it weigh? 9.98lbs How Canit itbe beused usedto totransmit transmit Can it be used to transmit Can information?Yes Yes information? Yes information? Atwhat whatSpeed? Speed?90Hz 90Hz At what Speed? 90Hz At 110-degreeField Fieldof ofView View(FOV) (FOV)& & 110-degree Field of View (FOV) & 110-degree 2160X X1200 1200Resolution Resolution 2160 X 1200 Resolution 2160 Whatis isthe thecost costof ofthe thetechnology? technology? What is the cost of the technology? What $399.00CA CA(Before (BeforeTax's) Tax's) $399.00 CA (Before Tax's) $399.00 Howwill willit itbe beused usedin inpeoples peopleslives? lives? How will it be used in peoples lives? How ADoor Doorto toVirtual VirtualEnvironments Environments& &  A Door to Virtual Environments &  A

consumers or that the cost of these devices is suddenly out pacing demand. It is really quite the opposite, and the marketing for affordable and accessible models are plastered everywhere.
X2 Metal Base X2 IR Sensors Including USB 3.0 with 2.5m cable

2. 2. 2. 


3. 3. 3.  4. 4. 4. 


I purchased mine on sale during the summer of 2017, in the box I received the following:
X1 Sticker x1 Consumer Version 1.0 Adjustable Head-Band IR LED Array HDMI with 4meter cable 2 Fresnel Lenses 2 OLED displays with 456 ppi X1 Pocket Manual X1 Plastic Flat Head For HeadSet adjustments

5. 5. 5.  6. 6. 6. 
 

Atwhat whatreliability? reliability?  At what reliability? At 

7. 7. 7. 


X2 Wireless Touch Controllers R With motion sensors

8. 8. 8. 


More More More

Oculus Rift CV1
On Sale for $499. I managed to save $99, the sale has since ended.

54 - Another Domestic Revolution

Another Domestic Revolution - 55

Positions

Fig. 2.3 A Timeline of Future Domestic Technology in Pop Culture
Positions

Interfaces

Interfaces

Frequentations Interfaces Gestures Frequentations Frequentations Interfaces Frequentations phonetics

Frequentations

Gestures phonetics

Gestures

Interfaces

Gestures

Frequentations Gestures

phonetics

Gestures

Alexander Graham Bell

Philo Farnsworth

E.J Polley

Duane D. Pearsall

Steve Wozniak

Palmer Lucky Todd F. Mozer Brendan Iribe Trexler Forrest S. Mozer Graham England Enrich B. Adams Jack McCauley

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2018

2030

Ralph H. Baer

Interfaces

Gestures

56 - Another Domestic Revolution

Another Domestic Revolution - 57

2.2 Room Scale

Room Scale requires setting up to two base stations (see Fig. 2.5 Equipment and Specs.), each containing

Room Scaling is a common feature provided with virtual reality headsets like the Oculus Rift, and is a core technology enabling the simultaneity of positional tracking within the user's 5-meter void. This physical void and tracking within the void is designed to work in tandem to provide the freedom of movement inside virtual environments with 6 degrees of freedom.2 Virtual space (roughly 5 x 5 meters) becomes a commodity that is also physical, creating a spatial paradox of value determined by non-existant space. As the volume represents the boundary created by the user. This activity happens while setting up the system - where they are defining the limits (boundary) of the virtual space. This also happens to look like a ritualized dance between the person and a "space" machine.

a number of infrared light emitting diodes (LEDs) and two IR lasers. They are positioned diagonally at opposite corners of a room; each laser alternates between horizontal and vertical sweeps of the room - generating a spatial map of the demarcated void. This allows for a 3 dimensional map that can verify the location of each infrared LED. This produces a double checking of speed, direction and orientation at roughly the same rate of the LEDs movement. This information is then relayed back to the PC, decoded and synced to your point of view in a virtual environment.

What happens during this process is absolutely fascinating, as it requires occupation of physical space that privileges perception of the virtual environments. Considering that virtual reality headsets are marketed as a consumer product, the domestic territory becomes a place for spatial consumption. 

58

59

Fig. 2.4 How to: Set up Room Scale

Positions

Interfaces

Frequentations

Gestures

Define Space
Space Ritual

Tail

Localization & 1:1 Position Tracking

60 - Another Domestic Revolution

Another Domestic Revolution - 61

Family rooms, garages, front lawns, dedicated spare bedrooms and backyards (previously underutilized domestic spaces) are suddenly highly valued as the territory of virtual occupation, which often produces a counter logic of re-positioning furniture and other miscellaneous objects to the periphery of domestic spaces. This is slightly different than making room for a Christmas tree. Furniture is suddenly responsible for defining the bounding box of both physical and virtual environments. Room Scale is no different than a gaming console, or a "play" fort, it still challenges the imagination of the user willing to consciously play into this perceptual trick.

primarily as a feminine technology and therefore made the family room a feminine territory within the home. The video game console neutralized these tensions with a device that sought to invite men and their sons into this predominantly female domestic zone.3 Enabling a female and male-centric bonding that could occur around the television, keeping all members of a family together in a single social/private room. Room Scale however can take place in spaces that are not the family room, neutralizing and activating other private and public social spheres. Rooms that should not be technologically active are being made so anyway. For example (see fig 2.6 -2.9):

Fig. 2.5 Virtual Reality Interface

40mm

40mm

It is however fascinating to discover the multifaceted ways in which domestic spaces - and the suburban typology - act in relation to a device that can liberate traditional formats of public and private social spheres that operate within the home. To reference a previous discussion in this section; televisions were seen

Oculus Rift CV1
Indexing Domestic Appliances - A General History of Technological Goods for A Home

62 - Another Domestic Revolution

Another Domestic Revolution - 63

Room Scale breaches traditional formats of interfacing with media content, and asks users to rely heavily on their ability to perceptually remove themselves from their existing environment and move into a new one. Operating in an ephemeral mode of spatial liberation from social, cultural and economic norms - Rooms Scale is the consumption of spatial digital content. A mode where space takes part in a moral economy based on sharing and exchanging volumetric media to be experienced with or by others - either as

spectator or participant, and introduces gamers into a new era of video game culture, one that amplifies the predominately male oriented players and social platform. If video game culture leading up to the introduction of Room Scale was chauvinistic and alienating of females, producing a singular experience within public domestic zones (spaces like the family room), producing interactions with others that would occur on social platforms and not with other family members - then Room Scale is the ability to utilize

video games as a means to masculinize existing neutral domestic zones through the process of atomization - giving themselves involuntary access to a movable territory that is simultaneously hyper-private & hyperpublic; this happens at the expense of becoming the spectacle in the comfort of one's home - which is odd, at least on a surface level.

rooms to create a private den for storing notes, books, guns, etc. However, the den now becomes a completely alternate arrangement of internal needs. As opposed to reading material, there is included a central station of desktop computers and three monitors. In an effort to resolve issues of overheating, fans are placed on the floor in order to cool the single individual. The walls are fixed with green curtains, blocking out any

Using the spare bedroom as a prime example, the "man cave" - is nothing new; men would often utilize leftover

natural daylight and producing the desired cave-like atmosphere. The space is unrecognizable as a spare

Fig. 2.6 Dedicated Guest Bedroom (3m x 3.5m)(2 IR Sensors Fig. 2.7 Garage (3m x 5m)(3 IR Sensors)

2.6 Three monitors and three high performance desktop computers with the addition of fans comprise the boundary of the room. The 4 windows have been barricaded and masked with protective coverings, in front of the windows are multiple green sheets hung from the wall to floor. The space is otherwise completely empty and devoid of natural light, lighting is instead fixed to the ceiling in order to control any potential shadows. Cables are strung along the wall and connect the two IR Sensors that have also been fixed to wall.

2.7 The garage has been modified to utilize the entirety of the space. Positioning the computer at the center of the room to be supported by the trusses that also support to the roof.

Positions Interfaces Frequentations Gestures

64 - Another Domestic Revolution

Another Domestic Revolution - 65

bedroom and takes on the qualities of a basement or backyard shed, effectively changing the accessibility to the room and further isolating what is typically a space for guests and other public affairs into a space that isolates itself and the occupant from any surrounding rooms. However, when Room Scale is introduced to a domestic sphere like the family room, something very different happens. It becomes both a public and private social zone amongst family members and replicates an interaction similar to the original purpose

of introducing video games into the home; this being to neutralize as opposed to amplify.

Fig. 2.8 Front Lawn (2.7m x 2.8m)(2 IR Sensors) Fig. 2.9 A Mothers Living Room (2.7m x 2.8m)(2 IR Sensors)

2.8 The context is stripped away and aptly defined by 3 tripods, and a table respectively housing the desktop computer and monitor. An additional tripod is set-up for the use of a camera for recording. Cables are strung along the grass and connect back to the desktop computer.

2.9 All elements that previously comprised the living room have lost all function, the fireplace, coffee table and couch have become boundary conditions that make up the virtual environment. The television housing a cable box acts as the secondary interface between the virtual environment and the user. Cables are strung along the carpeted floor and tripods are inserted to house each IR sensor. Positioned at 6ft in this case almost reaching the ceiling, speakers also sit atop vintage cabinets that have also been relocated to the most outer edge of the quaint living room.

Positions Interfaces Frequentations Gestures

66 - Another Domestic Revolution

Another Domestic Revolution - 67

2.3 Room Scale & The Family Room

The room without a name showed distinct and definite characteristics, it needed to be adjacent to the kitchen,

simultaneously maintaining itself as a space for any family member, and a room that relies purely on a "public" presence. Virtual reality and the family room share an uncanny nature between them; both provide family members with the opportunity to develop a general living area that is freely organized - virtual reality has endless organizational strategies as it is dependent on the virtual environment and not the physical arrangement. The family room sought to be a recreational space that conforms to practically any purpose - making it virtually anything so long as it meets a family's recreational needs. Coupling virtual reality and the family room makes for an extra room in the extra room, and amplifies privacy due to

When used outside public territories within the home, social spaces shift and diffuse other programmatic functions. private spaces become unconventionally public and public spaces become unconventionally private. As a result, an awareness of not being seen turns the user into a public spectacle to be observed. Furthermore, this paradoxical exchange in many ways neutralizes traditional labels and notions of domesticity, going even further to neutralize any and all lingering gender, social or class norms when used strategically.

Room Scale gives each domestic sphere the opportunity to dramatically change existing social, cultural, spatial and territorial relationships within the home. As virtual reality is a tool that `1 separates the user from their existing context, it becomes a powerful device within the family room of domestic homes - introducing a new "room without a name"3 in need of one.

to be accessible to any family member, a room that appeared to insist on its public nature and be totally lacking in privacy.4 By placing the room on the ground floor, it could be visible from the street and naturally public, it also provides a way for families to cover all social recreational needs, abandoning territories based on adult-versus children and vice versa. The room was later called "the big room" and because of its need to

In early 1950s suburban developments, basement playrooms were built as leftover spaces for children. This created confusion amongst architects who all sought to introduce a new left-over space on the ground-floor. A space that was not always for children, or where a mother might keep her sewing equipment - if she sews, or where a father; his library, cigars, etc. The ground floor eventually included a recreation room called "a room without a name", in an attempt to resolve the issues created by the basement playrooms.

establish and meet the normal requirements of family activity, it eventually was just called "the family room."

The family room has maintained its place as a public domestic territory amongst other segmented private zones. Virtual reality headsets challenge this public zone by providing the ability to generate additional public or private virtual zones - amplifying the originally defined characteristics of the family room, producing a fluid space that totally lacks privacy while

users not being spatially aware in addition to the family room operating as a public room. Therefore, virtual reality in a family room does not shift existing social domestic relationships, but rather amplifies them by introducing an additional layer of spatial public-ness, increasing an awareness or sense of privacy when occupying other (more private) domestic spaces.

68

69

PART TWO

70 - Augmented Virtual Reality

Augmented Virtual Reality - 71

Chapter 3
Migrant Flows Across Augmented Borders : Family Matters
3.1 Ethnographic Studies and Research

new immigration laws were put in place to restrict migrant flows to the United Kingdom,2 triggering rapid adoption of similar legislation in other nations, like Canada and the United States, just as both my

gender, and cultural stereotypes amongst regionalized and nationalized groups of the Jamaican diaspora.4 Deborah's work will be a leaping off point for the rest of this section, as I try to engage with the complex political forces faced by local and national concepts of citizenship and the identity of communities operating across territorial boundaries. My parents grew up while the proliferation of media technologies altered the way people conceptualize space, community, citizenship and racial identity. These issues would only be intensified further with transnational migration. It is easy to forget the struggle and hardships faced in their efforts to transform themselves and simultaneously empower generations to come.

twentieth and twenty-first century. Bringing forth topics and ideas presented in previous discussions,

parents sought out new foreign landscapes to begin a family. Admission to Canada was made possible after increases in the acceptance of those with education and knowledge-based skills, ensuring immigrants like my mother job security if their education was acquired prior to immigrating, making countries like Jamaica, with a strong education system, a major source for Canada's increase in migration flows. It is critical that this discussion be contextualized in the conceptual

Roger Silverstone and Eric Hirsh's discussion in Consuming Technologies: Media and Information in Domestic Spaces, gives ideas and thoughts that have been frequently cited in earlier sections. Both authors argue a need for more ethnographic content oriented towards the single family experience, specifically members growing up in middle class or upper middle class ethnoburbs, as I have. To respond to this specific
1

ones that dealt mainly with the past 120 years, and the contributions to creating activities of consumption through social and cultural pleasures (entertainment consumption and appropriation). What exactly are the issues that form households and family members into cultural transaction systems?

I will have to first provide context regarding my background and why I have chosen to situate the bulk of this content within Canada's contemporary process of transnational globalization.

framework of moral economies (as previously discussed in chapter 1, section 1.1), as I begin to recount my own societal, cultural, and economic pressures. New concepts provided by Thomas Deborah, who coined the term "modern blackness" will be my entry point from

topic - a topic that I have also invested my own interest in - it makes sense to provide my own account of consuming technologies as a way to locate ideas about the architect - ones that sit at the intersection of identity and technology. After assessing the political, cultural, social, racial and economic climate of the late

3.2 Jamaica to Canada

Both my parents are first generation Canadian citizens who emigrated from Jamaica after 1960 when

which to recognize the continuing3 process of moral economies found in colonial hierarchies of colour, class,

I would like to highlight the gender and migrant flows in the 1960s and 70s and how they have managed

72 - Migrancy Flows Across Augmented Borders

Migrancy Flows Across Augmented Borders - 73

to heavily impact Jamaicans moving to the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom.5 The historical context offered should be considered as a framework to understand the choices made by both my parents, and will help broaden discussions about their experiences. Jamaica found predominately female migrants in the 1960s and noticed a decline in total migration flows between 1970 and 1990.6 Spiking slightly again during the mid 1990s with entire families relocating or joining first migrators. Women would have taken on greater responsibilities in terms of economic and social conditions, with husbands often joining the women at a later point in time. Some 123,500 Jamaicans situated themselves in Canada between 1960 and the end of 2005 with at least 28% native born Jamaican women having a bachelors degree, 9% of whom are employed in health related occupations.7 Upon moving to Canada, my mother could find work in her career. Today, she has maintained her place and field, attaining a Doctorate in Pilosophy of Business: Healthcare Administration

and has worked as a nurse at Sunnybrook Hospital in the intensive care unit for many decades. My father, attained a job teaching, he was hired by the TDSB, his responsibilities primarily require working closely with students in need of special care. Both my parents have since settled semi-permanently with their three children (myself included) in a bedroom community in the southern Ontario region, called Markham.

how they would manage between feeling "at home", away from their family, island territory and culture, while they also tried to build their concept of a people.8 Regarding my parents as first generation immigrants in Canada, many preconditions made it difficult to find a comfortable space and community to call home and to settle into.

reflects a vision of progress that is important to many first generation Canadians. With these sensibilities it was possible to build on an image of what it should mean to be a Jamaican, taking on early forms of nationalism that excluded earlier popular cultural expressions of black identity. However, immigrating produced an opportunity to be perceived by other established nations, communities, and neighbours

Jamaica needed to first struggle for political
3.3 Waning Troubled Waters

within Canada and the United States, making it possible to practice and demolish the influence of colonial hierarchies11 placed on Jamaican citizens by the British; their vision of progress could instead occur once obtaining control over public perception. It was the responsibility of transnational migrants leaving Jamaica to demonstrate "modern blackness"12 and to take with them a political and cultural knowledge to be understood within their households and their new surrounding communities. A great responsibility, that both my parents knowingly shared.

independence before it could legitimate and value indigenous cultural practices - practices that were

Emigrating from a small island required a need to negotiate relationships between new off shore communities and those who still lived on the island (cousins/relatives - those who were unable to move immediately). It required Jamaicans negotiate themselves in a landscape of Americanization; deciding how they wanted to adapt and implement their beliefs within an existing culture of Canadian values and practices. A sense of belonging came with

first denigrated under colonial rule. Jamaica, being a country of hard working people with rich cultural sensibilities, produced cultural policies that could promote their ideals of cultural citizenship.9 Values that emphasize education, thrift, industry, self sufficiency via landownership, moderate Christian living, community uplift, the constitution of family through legal marriage, and leadership by the educated middle class.10 Each of these values are a political tool that

74 - Migrancy Flows Across Augmented Borders

Migrancy Flows Across Augmented Borders - 75

The biggest challenge for first generation Canadians in prioritizing the cultivation of respectability was their ability to tackle racialized visions framed transnationally, where constant tensions challenged the legitimacy and territorially defined boundaries of belonging. Amongst these alternative cultural narratives of political sensibilities was a nationalism framed by (well known examples like) the Garvey movement and Rastafarianism, the Claudius Henry Rebellion in 1960, and the Rude Boy phenomenon that also developed in the 1960s.13 Within Americanized societies of Jamaican cultural production, the political appeal of racial solidarity took on production at a global scale and therefore could not be monopolized by the cultural dominance of the United States. Dancehall and Reggae music became formats for cultural expression of political struggle. Within generational differences, hip hop was used to counter the dominance of reggae and dancehall, in what was an effort to forge new racial identities within multiculturalism - this will be discussed further in

Chapter 5 - how some of these racialized visions made their way into homes despite not necessarily reflecting Jamaicans and their vision of progress. Also, alternative politics divided relations of race and nation amongst first generation immigrants, those who were forced to negotiate class, gender, identity, and race amongst multiple distinct spheres of Jamaican, African American, and modern blackness, represented by communities as bounded groups with influence and separate futures, 14 forcing them to choose between three distinct political cultures - maybe more. This is key to understanding the value placed on generation cultivation; and how it is used as a critical tool in the establishment of difference and racial solidarity in political structures - considering that I, myself as a young second generation Canadian will need to choose between racial concepts of identity. Relying on the resource and foundations laid out by my parents, siblings, relatives and now profession, using ideas that can be regularly mobilized to co-produce new concepts of a self as a generation (family members)

"resource," circulating new ideas about race and nationality.15

The proliferation of media content was regularly policed within the home in an effort to maintain their vision of what Jamaicans should stand for, cultivating a modern

Speaking strictly with respect to the domestic context I grew up in, I can say fairly that my parents brought with them - and still hold to this day - strong sensibilities on the cultivation of responsible racial identity, and they have generated a household of conservatism redefined by Jamaicans and Canadian-Jamaicans "expand[ing] from an island territory to a concept of a people."17 Building a sense of family was and still is in large part constituted by modern Christian living, where both of my parents, my siblings, and myself would regularly attend church throughout my teenage years. Today, both my parents are well established Pastors organizing service and regular prayer meetings on Sundays and Thursdays within their community. Both my parents stand for a racial solidarity that rejects many of the alternative political sensibilities and protests of the 1960s, leading all the way up to today.

blackness through spatial means - ones that operate between boundaries generated by contemporary processes of domestic technologies. It was important that the perception and conceptualization of space be controlled at all scales; authority was reinforced through control over what we were allowed to be exposed to within public and private domestic spheres (spaces like the family room, basements, etc). All of which depended on the kinds of technologies we were allowed to access, this includes all family members; what was accessible on television in terms of stations networks, the types of calls one made - be it long distance or local, the kinds of music and video games played or watched. Creating household tensions through adversarial genres of competing identities; identities that either sought to maintain cultural responsibilities, neutralize them,

76 - Migrancy Flows Across Augmented Borders

Migrancy Flows Across Augmented Borders - 77

activate new ones, corrupt, or even reject existing ones altogether. Media would circulate amongst family members spatially, producing a moral economy of culture exchange. Depending on the amount of domestic technologies present, there resulted an
Fig. 3.1 Christmas Day early 1990's, my siblings in front of our personal CTR television set with an on screen ad for nachos.

will speak in the first person to separate myself from other family members, accounting only from memory the building of how I have come to identify as Canadian and possessing a sense of modern blackness (as suggested by Deborah.)18

ability to cross scales as large as nations depending on the room one occupied.17 Our household had access to most, if not all forms of domestic technology and this created a serious challenge for both my parents in their need to maintain a vision of Jamaican modern blackness as they understood it; while also keeping a seamless relationship across the borders of cultivating new generations and old territories.

I will preface the following section by saying that I will only speak on my own experience, and not the members of my family, however I will try as best as possible to provide as much context surrounding my social, political, racial and cultural boundaries - to keep their privacy while relinquishing my own. Therefore, I

78 - Augmented Virtual Reality

79

Chapter 4
Markham's Songbird: Continued

Fig. 4.1 Locating Home

HOME

4.1 On a Neck, On a Spit

remember staring into for hours without batting an eye. As one of three children growing up in a nuclear

65 Songbird Drive Markham ON,

Moving to the suburbs in 2003 meant acquiring a specific set of electronic appliances to fill new and empty rooms of what initially seemed like redundant living spaces. At the time, I was 9 turning 10, coming out to the ethnoburb from an inner city townhouse made for an unusual leap. From bedrooms shared with siblings - a brother 5 years older and sister 3 years - to separate bedrooms and a backyard for private open space that seemed endless, and a garage for storing cars and even more technological stuff. In a modern ethnoburb, it was not immediately obvious to me, but it is now clear that technology needed to be embedded into the foundation of how we evolve for domesticity. The television was something that I distinctly

family, I can easily recount the numerous devices, technologies, and utilities that my family and I would interface with on a daily basis. Some content was not allowed to be consumed within the house - either as a result of age restrictions, religious beliefs, or racially charged cultural tropes engaging in political protest. Of course, as we got older these conditions changed, it was up to us to decide what was appropriate, right or wrong or otherwise worth consuming.

80 - Markham's Songbird

Markham's Songbird - 81

Fig. 4.2 Living Arrangements

Interfaces

Frequentations

Ground Floor
Plan: Drawing of grade condition

82 - Markham's Songbird

Markham's Songbird - 83

Frequentations

4.2 "When You Were Young"
Gestures

and consuming. Making it a rewarding experience of attaining information that was both accepted by my siblings and found originally by me; ownership over taste and cultural preference. This was not always true; songs that I enjoyed were not always shared and vice versa; specifically songs and genres of R&B, artists like Trey Songs and Boys to Men, gravitating instead towards independent artists mixing new genres of sounds
2018

hop scene, I had already generated my own sense of taste and preferences, ones counter to his - but still owned by me. However, I became adamant to avoid tension between genres and to treat my taste as a private affair, to be consumed alone with low volumes and through headphones, sharing and exchanging sounds strictly between my sister and myself.

DISTANCE BASED ON FREQUENCY OF SOUND

Interfaces db

db

4.3 Frequentations

phonetics

Frequentations

From the opposite room, I would wonder what sounds were getting buffered between indistinguishably low basses and high melodies, wondering who that could

Positions

Alexander Graham Bell

C.W. Rice E.W. Kellogg

Philo Farnsworth

Duane D. Pearsall

Steve Wozniak

be but never quite being able to make out an artist.
db

Palmer Lucky Todd F. Mozer Forrest S. Mozer Brendan Iribe Trexler Enrich B. Adams Graham England Jack McCauley

db

Sound has a funny way of moving through space, diffusing in ways that seem unexpected; it can spark
Frequentations

1900

1920

1940

a conversation "did you hear so and so came out with a 1960 1980 2000 new single?" Making the rest of the day an impromptu public listening party open to anyone wandering by.
Ralph H. Baer

like Grizzly Bear, Passion Pit, The Killers or Phoenix (TokyoPoliceClub to name one more). Between myself and my sister, the genres and taste in music introduced - as I got older - an interesting dichotomy between both of my siblings and each of our independent tastes of preferred genres and tastes. My brother was very much embedded in a generation of artists that sought to protest and appropriate sound through cultures of exclusion and racial marginalization, artists struggling to find a voice and presence in dilemmas produced out of global Americanization. Before coming into this awareness of the L.A, Chicago, and New York based hip

Eventually, hip hop was unavoidable in our public domestic zones (spaces like the basement), and I became curious; I wanted to know who I was hearing, what they were saying and where to find more. Understanding immediately that behind the artist's words came a sense of racial protest and political lyricism - it also just sounded good. I knew, despite listening to artists in our household's public sphere, it was still heavily policed by both my parents. However, the music I enjoyed was not policed, although it still produced a sense of insecurity when played in public, as it did not fit into any norm outside our home (I

These experiences more often than not happened in the family room (as discussed earlier), a place to eat on occasion and work when all nighters were pulled. Music, for me, needed to be collected in discographies, especially as I began getting introduced to artists while overhearing my sister playing music in another room close by. There was eventually a sense of needing to share, download, burn (onto CDs), upload and relate to the kinds of artists and genres I was discovering

84 - Markham's Songbird

Markham's Songbird - 85

avoided sharing these musical interests with friends, for whatever reason). Back to the topic of dichotomies, my private sphere and the openly public spheres created by my brother and sister required that I choose between the two, or at least be influenced depending on the domestic spaces I occupied. The basement, a public sphere to play games, watch, and consume whatever we could find. My brother liberated our television with burned copies of CD's to be uploaded and stored locally on an Xbox, while playing video games it was possible to simultaneously listen to whatever we wanted. The computer made independent artists accessible, downloading complete discographies was free and easy, the basement was a sphere to consume, exchange and appropriate new sensibilities.

Capital, where We Murder for Capital ("Lucifer Lucifer, don of the morning! I'm gonna, chase you out of, earth") Kanyeeze you did it again," Jay-Z's BluePrint 2.1 (2003) and his "Lucifer Dawn of the Morning" blasted over the speakers, enclosing the space in a public exchange of consumption; consumption that was also susceptible to control. Depending on who occupied the open sphere; music could change dramatically. For instance, at the sound of anonymous footsteps coming down the stairs, we would steadfastly reach for the remote, shrinking the volume to avoid the rhetorical question "is that swearing I hear?" and the guilt that followed. Of course, it was my choice to participate in the consumption of politically charged media, however, it generated a new avenue for identifying with racially charged genres and ideologies. Reinforcing the dichotomy of taste

compromise the ones I had spent building on my own. I made sure not to share my tastes with my brother while in the basement, and preferred to consume the ones he presented in that moment. I accrued artists like Naz, Mos Def, Nelly, Tu-PAC, Biggie Smalls, Kanye West's College Drop Out (2004) memorizing songs like "All Falls Down," "Man I promise she's so self conscious, she has no idea what she doing in college..." the moral exchange between my siblings breached foreign economies of cultural identity and values. Ones that I otherwise could not have known if I had been a single child, my siblings acted as cultural loopholes within a home of Christian sensibilities.

to maintain the privacy and security of not sharing music I discovered, and still to this day, preferr to listen through headphones. Artists like, Interpol, Billy Talent, My Chemical Romance, songs like "Shiver" by Coldplay or "Doe Deer" by Crystal Castles altering to more of a local taste. Because headphones were naturally mobile and private, it was easy to move through the house and other public spheres without the interference of other media breaching the barrier of sound that followed me. Also, it allowed me to maintain a sense of mystery in having to navigate the ideals of both parents and siblings, I could be listening to anything - and not have it be perceived - generating a buffer between my identity and cultural expectations.

I began to prefer both, broadening taste into more eclectic pallets of artists and musicians, those who made it easy to racially identify with and those without any known form of racial identity (music that was simply good perhaps?) - building instead a distinct identity that I consider to be my own self. I preferred Eventually I abandoned my discographies for something entirely new; because of my siblings I was able to envelope myself in their generation. Attaining instead, a copy of their discographies, and deleting my own. Skipping, repeating and playing artists I'd never

Eventually games could not be played without a curated list of what were respectively the most popular influences in the hip hop genre, dubbed over "Tony Hawk Skateboarder" played "I'm from the murder

when entering and leaving rooms like the basement; spaces where my brother played video games, and my sister working on homework. I, in wanting to consume new tastes and cultural preferences, preferred not to

86 - Markham's Songbird

Markham's Songbird - 87

heard before. This also came with a sense of liberation from privacy, presenting me with the opportunity to play music within public spheres in an attempt to "fit in," relieving all sense of insecurities as a result of someone else's identity with respects to a culture that was not my own. Playing music without headphones in a public setting became an opportunity to say, "I listen to this too" and not "have you heard of so and so?" hiding my identity in order to feel included in what I imagined was the expectation of modern blackness. Assuming a new identity within and outside our home, however, did not last - the appeal of hip hop ended quickly - one could argue that I overlooked the gateway into the racial protest of the 80s and 90s altogether. Perhaps because I was never listening, music was and still remains more of a barrier between myself and others - it does not require a message deeper than "I love so and so, why don't they love me back?" consciousness - it only needs a melody or an unforgiving baseline then I'd be hooked. For that moment of attaining an

alternate sense of self, it is invaluable to know that it is possible to assume differentiated modes within one racial identity - however, this act of listening will, for me, remain a racially cultured facade. One that is too often confused and transplanted onto cultures of many racial orientations, where we expect a "one size fits all" attitude; this of course, never actually being the case.

4.3 Is That Swearing I Hear?

the beginning as a space to experiment with alternate domestic technologies - ones that vary in consumption

The basement remained "the children's big room" throughout elementary school and high school; a space at times used by my parents in instances of storing more books, food (cold storage), and now clothes and other miscellaneous domestic appliances. Frequently moving in and out to gather and store things we didn't immediately need, but knew where to find when the time came. Between all my siblings I spent most of my adolescent years occupying this space (see figure 4.4) When we moved, my father plunked the rather oversized 20" cathode ray tube television into the finished basement, designating this space as the entertainment room. The television; outfitted in wooden veneer, became a family heirloom from the 80s, matching any aesthetic of our furniture until it didn't. We often needed to bang violently on the box when images got grainy or blacked out, the basement became a loud zone of consumption and was designated from

and appropriation. New domestic technologies were often acquired once it came time to replace or exchange old ones. Our television, the computer, gaming consoles, speakers, are all in there 5th or 6th generation. These decisions were always made by my father, new appliances always came as a good surprise to the rest of our family. It did however seem that through these exchanges and replacements there was also a need to experiment and shift the constant arrangement of items contained in this space. Sometimes we would suggest alternative arrangements, but it was ultimately up to him, his choices were usually good, I will add. However, it often seemed as though he could never be truly satisfied with his purchases, despite the obvious fun the rest of my siblings and I had. By providing us with access to his curated selection of technological goods he also became an authority figure for each of these appliances; he provided discipline (and punishment)

88 - Markham's Songbird

Markham's Songbird - 89

by either restricting or removing access to the use of technologies within the basement, as a way to teach us a lesson.

things work and what to do when it came time to fix them. The fascination was extended by my fathers influence; with each technological appliance he purchased (both fixing and counterfeiting) we would

Fig. 4.4 The Entertainment Room

Interfaces

Frequentations

As we all got older, policing changed to informal consequences, and made the basement more of a democratic space for every family member. Bootleg movies and television shows would be purchased from local convenience shops and put on shelves to frame the television set. These counterfeit copies of original media were exchanged between my father and everyone else in the family, where we would watch movies together; ones selected by him. This also applied to new software, upgrading each of our computers with legitimate versions - from an unknown source. In a way, my father appointed himself as the hardware and software diagnostic operator; he ensured that all technology was up to date and working smoothly. Until of course my brother and myself acquired similar sensibilities and skills; discerning for ourselves how

learn something new. The basement during the first years of living in our new suburban home became an exchanging ground, where media and all our domestic technologies were stored, maintained and used by all members of the family. Never moving, and kept in a very shrine-like condition - cassettes and cd cases were arrayed on shelves, black, green, silver and sometimes gold cases - they maintained a constant line of sight for anyone to discover new additions. When more space was required, we would get rid of old furniture and seek out items designed to hold CD players, tapes, DVD's, equipment etc; organization was key, cable management was something of an art form in our home, wrapped carefully through the drop panels of the ceiling, everything needed to be hidden - no matter the arrangement of the room. The basement
Gestures

Below Grade
Axonometric spatializing existing digital boundary conditions

90 - Markham's Songbird

Markham's Songbird - 91

was our first entertainment centre, we grew up in an
Gestures

m

underground room - where each of us mined to gather and exchange content that we then circulated within our own hidden moral economies. We didn't need sunlight, we had televisions, monitors, and projectors.
Alexander G raham Bell

Gestures

Interfaces

DISTANCE BASED ON ACTION OR MOVEMENT WIHH HANDS

4.5 Gestures

phonetics

Frequentations

Positions

s
Palmer Lucky Brendan Iribe Trexler Graham England Jack McCauley

Charles P. Strite

J.W Chamerlin

E.J Polley

Percy Spencer

Steve Wozniak

1900

4.4 Finders Keepers

1920

1940

This meant that whomever wielded the remote, also 1960 1980 2000 possessed control, authority and influence over what others watched. It would ultimately be in the hands of whomever got there first.
Abel Edmund A. Jr Ralph H. Baer

2018

Using the remote was always a question of who could get their hands on it first. The remote dictated an unspoken rule that all my siblings and I followed religiously, a rule, that determined who was watching what, and for how long before power needed to be forfeited. The rule being as long as you want and when ever you stepped out of the room for give or take 5 minutes. Unless everyone shared a mutual interest in what was being watched and consumed, this rule applied to every mode of television consumption.

I preferred the remote controllers used to play video games, my brother was split between console, DVD player, and television, my sister, stuck to the television and at times the DVD player. I must have purchased well over 30 games by the time I started high school. Over the year, I had acquired a rather mild addiction by that point; playing games like Call Of Duty 2, Guitar

92 - Markham's Songbird

Markham's Songbird - 93

Hero, Splinter Cell, Halo 3 (first person shooter), etc, role-playing what I imagined it must have been like to participate in war; conflicts derived out of nuclear threats and global acts of terror. You, the hero, needs to neutralize the target - where the patriotic good guys constantly reinforce justice in the form of some politically charged act of violence against the enemy. This narrative rotated endlessly between any game approaching violence, and respectively received the label of first or third person action shooter on the lower left hand corner of the box. The same game mechanics would follow in a similarly styled multiplayer system - where the narrative would once again be refreshed in a cycle of matchmaking game modes, the good guys vs. the bad (Allied forces vs. Axis forces), simulating real world locations to play out an artificial war. These games were intentionally mindless, and engaging at the same time, not because of the role-playing - this was a key component to its success - however, the satisfaction of reward in having won a game was gratifying and addicting.

4.5 Fake Narratives for Real Characters (GTA 3: San Andreas - "End of the Line")

members and myself. It was a world that I could slip in and out of, through the controllers and feedback gained from perceiving the screen - my actions and what was simulated represented an extension of what I did. If it was suddenly perceived by anyone else, they too, would gain a sense of what I was up to, (robbing someone's car, engaging in random acts of violence, flying a fighter jet, driving nowhere, eating a meal) these became the public boundaries between other family members - it was both an auditory and visual zone that I occupied while playing these games - and it wasn't easy to escape.

of an acquired aesthetic the player could create and assume through CJ. The very last mission forces CJ into a tough decision, one that makes the player question the characters' enemies and friends - a game of who's who? Big Smoke, a relative you grew to protect and keep safe confesses that he betrayed the gang, that he wanted power and money as a means to escape and never return. To my surprise, CJ is tasked to defeat his closest friend, the player has no other option but to kill Big Smoke. In a violent rage of anger, Big Smoke's money and life is taken away from him. Tenpenny, a local police officer who, throughout the story keeps a close eye on CJ, appears from nowhere. CJ, now held at

One game in particular would not follow this guaranteed formula of success, and instead sought to key into the idea of role-playing; this time to the degree of an open world action adventure. Where all your choices are governed by a single player, someone whom you could actively watch receive all of the consequences of the choices you made. The game contained more and more complex systems and mechanics that emulated a number of other games ones like Call of Duty, Oblivion, Halo etc. It was made out of randomness - a flowing system of simulated events depicting very realistic yet artificial conditions. This game in particular generated a sense of escapism and opportunity to explore like no other game at the time. It was easy to get lost in the fictional world that Rockstar created, as it didn't require music to generate a sense of boundaries between other family

Towards the end of the game, CJ (our main character) became what you expected of him, representing a combination of clothing, physical appearance (fat or skinny), fighting capabilities, ownership of weapons, properties (homes), tattoos, jewelry, relationships (platonic), and vehicles etc. all of these items could be purchased by the player, and became emblematic

gunpoint has to watch as Tenpenny seizes and escapes with Big Smokes' cash, he takes off in his vehicle and loses control in the wake of the chaos - followed by CJ and Sweet (another one of CJ's friends). The crash leaves Tenpenny with fatal wounds, he dies as he attempts to crawl from the wreckage. CJ is left standing in the cul-de-sac where the game all started, with the cash,

94 - Markham's Songbird

Markham's Songbird - 95

family and friends looking over the wreckage behind him. CJ turns to leave. Taking the money - the game rolls through its credits - but rather than ending, you're put back where you left off - in Los Santos.

play, simulating conditions and stories like the betrayal of a family member seeking escape (a way out - of the game) at the expense of others, those who trusted and protected him. This is what we're meant to think when we try to make sense of the violence within racialized

characters, it did not translate culturally. However, some characters (Bad-Mon) introduced me to alternate depictions of Jamaian immigrantds, and how they navigated in new communities and identities of Americanization - carrying accents and dialects (patois) that appear inherently out of place - but I, in many instances, could pick up and translate their slang; I could contextualize their dialogue within my home. A space where both my parents, could understand what is said by the Character (laughing it off) or perhaps going through, assuming of course that they are also

it possible, I think, to assume additional cultural behaviours and actions emblematic of the characters. I however, found it difficult - but highly entertaining - to play and assume alternative representations of a culture and racial identity that in no way translates to how I perceived myself while playing these characters. They were nothing like me, or the family, friends and relationships I developed - making it come across for me - as either pure fantasy or a failed portrayal of a community - of course realizing it is neither. It is a game first and foremost, and Rockstar, for the first time successfully managed to hold up a mirror to a culture and identity that could be witnessed and played actively by the culture itself. In the midst of other non-

Once the game ended, you kept playing, - avatars, violence and the appropriation of American culture continue endlessly. CJ was special, because as a protagonist, he was the first character in a videogame to successfully popularize - and capitalize onrepresentations of African American Identity. One that depicted violent acts of gang culture, consumption of drugs, purchasing and using weapons to kill introducing players to virtually all stereotypes, CJ represented every notion of modern blackness in 1990's L.A America. That you could do this too - because unlike CJ, the world is yours - this is what made the narrative appealing in the first place, because there existed communities where this was possible. They could be exploited and turned onto themselves in role-

gangs who turn against themselves. Where we can then make sense (because we have played these characters) of the culture through storytelling, such that real stories and media can be contextualized further against real narratives within these appropriated communities.

Rockstars GTA: San Andreas was art, despite being a fictional world, Los Santos argues for a landscape of attainment in the unlikely culture of loss and disenfranchisement, that the world can be CJ's if he is so willing to take it. GTA was more than a game to be played in my basement while I grew up, the avatar was also a scapegoat for players who cannot identify with the character themselves. For someone one like myself, who could identify racially with the

occupying the same domestic sphere as myself - this however was not often the case while playing games.1

Video games produced two drastically different modes of identities between narrative and characters. The choices I could make and the ones I didn't feel comfortable choosing - shooting your friends and family for instance. The racial identity was a gateway into the culture represented by Rockstar and made

related groups and individuals eager to orchestrate these characters into their own elaborate displays of violence and anger through the frustrations of black identities. Control and witness these characters, listen to their dialogue, dress them, become them, because wrapped in all facets of this game are real stereotypes

96 - Markham's Songbird

Markham's Songbird - 97

waiting to be addressed and manipulated however you want them to be. I may not have wanted to pull the trigger on Big Smoke, but that was a deliberate decision of the writers and directors of the game, because they knew the significance of racial solidarity that existed within this community, that was always the point, no matter how far you went depicting the character you wanted to see in CJ - you couldn't change CJ's story.

4.6 Dismantle Everything

the device, however the pay off was much greater. An endless source of unlimited free games at the expense

friends who didn't want to pay for a particular game - however things did not always go as planned. When you break into an Xbox you lose the social connectivity of the device, forcing it into a permanent offline state (crippling any social connectivity - making it impossible to enjoy the best part of consoles - friends owning one too.)

The basement remained "the children's big room," this space is where I obtained a few sensibilities derived from lessons learned while playing GTA, I sought to modify my own domestic technologies, similar to the artificial cars and character - the need to tailor and manipulate attributes that comprised my surroundings. These were suddenly very important and in many ways the opposite of the devices purpose. I discovered after a year or two of constant consumption that there were games I was too reluctant to own but eager to try. I realized that behind these machines existed the ability to alter certain codes and protocols - software used to maintain security and updates. I found that it was possible to tweak these protected DVD-drives, such that anyone could force these machines (Xbox and Xbox 360) to play un-licensed copies of virtually any game found online. It took a DVD-R disk and the digital file of the game - this of course voided the warranty on

of never playing one again - should something go wrong. It worked like a charm. It felt like breaking into a digital bank, the system protected by faulty security measures needing small tweaks here and there - just enough to get inside. Autonomy and ownership over tools was always important to me,2 I needed to know everything behind them - pulling apart and building most of my own appliances (desktop computers) in my spare time - just to know why. It required using your hands and getting a little messy throughout the process, something worth the reward of putting things back together again, swapping parts for new ones, hacking old ones, modifying disk-drives with Blue-ray players, trying to get the Xbox to work on the computer (to no success). Anything seemed possible once you understood how. In this sense, I would say my identity shifted towards that of a nerd, but I made it a point to socialize and bring these discoveries to the attention of

Fiddling around with the inner workings of my computer - not knowing what I was doing - I often did so not with the intent to alter things, but to see how they operated in the first place. I would dismantle Laptops just for the sake of it, (once they were broken.) Pealing back the acrylic and L.E.D's responsible for lighting the back of displays - wondering how they determined this particular distribution and density. This space is constantly kept in secret, hidden away behind the magic of domestic technologies, and in a very industrial sense - private. I, however sought out these spaces once games got a little too repetitive

98 - Markham's Songbird

Markham's Songbird - 99

- what are the codes contained in these enclosures? They produce and enable transnational, global and local connections amongst family, friends and strangers; these were global scales without visible borders. Hidden in domestic spheres, the zones generated by my console were public - and acted as internal social fields and boundaries created wherever I played on them. You were giving and receiving access to other domestic territories while playing online - listening to arguments between foreign families - strangers on the other side of the microphone. Inviting others into your own domestic sphere - participating in both the production and exchange of what seems now to be a very informal yet intimate moral economy. The types of games played online, and who they were played with, introduced global cultures of consumption with tiny spaces made up of nodes comprising users - all of them acting with their own internal culture. Households with their own family structures - seeking their own format of domestic entertainment consumption.

4.7 Lucky Number Slevin

Fig. 4.6 Family Room

Eventually, more television sets would be introduced within other spaces inside the home, not of a large size or quality - ones that just worked. We got comfortable as a family once we had access to our own individual zones, ones that were still public but dispersed. The family room was the second room to receive a major consumption appliance. Located next to the kitchen, we couldn't resist having breakfast without also having something to watch in front of us. The family room became predominantly television related consumption, the basement (although still having access to television) remained more of an entertainment centre for movies and video-games.

Interfaces

Frequentations

Gestures

Once we attained another television, there was a slight sense of luxury created by the ability to choose - something that we never had before. With the family room, there was no privacy with regards

Ground Floor
Axonometric spatializing existing digital boundary conditions

100 - Markham's Songbird

Markham's Songbird - 101

with regards to consumption, it was for that reason, more often occupied by my parents as opposed to all of us. Although, this space is meant to be purposefully open, it did however make it difficult to enjoy anything, because this space was susceptible to other family members walking in or out at any given moment. The boundary created by the television would occupy all other rooms adjacent to the family room, making spaces like the kitchen and living room an extension of television consumption - mainly through auditory means. The family room increased the rate of exchange and circulation of media, by reinforcing - not just what my siblings consumed - but now my parents. In a very informal way, what you watched could either deter or invite anyone else into this public zone of content consumption. This also extended to guests, visitors standing by the door or welcomed in - they too occupied this auditory domestic sphere. The arrangement of furniture in this space remained static, never really changing - the glare of sunlight

has affected the possible outcomes - and so in order to attain a sense of visual understanding you are required to be in the space. The dynamics of this room (prior to having a television) changed drastically, and is very different from others as a result of furniture - as it can be both private and remain very public at the same time (see fig 4.6.) You are always in view, but what you consume is not.

that they wanted see themselves or felt comfortable watching with us. Tuning into channels and stations on a weekly bases and dipping into other less familiar shows. For my mother, I could over hear or join her while she watched shows like Oprah, CTV, CNN, B.E.T, Oz, Entertainment Weekly, and other daytime television. My father, preferred sports related networks, often tuning into soccer, the olympics, but most frequently basket-ball. Both my parents spent an equal amount of time watching the news, but not always. Sunday
Interfaces

Interfaces
Gestures

DISTANCE BASED ON AREA OF DISPLAY

Interfaces

4.7 Graphical User Interface

phonetics

Frequentations

Interfaces

Positions

Philo Farnsworth

1900

1920

1940

1960

4.8 Kick off Your Shoes and Relax Your Feet

became an opportunity to spend the day watching Christian themed media. On B.E.T, there would be

The family room, I think, introduced my parents to greater amounts of media exchange and consumption, finding and sharing shows that they might not have watched before, consuming new ones we would watch, policing shows we shouldn't watch. This isn't to say that this was their first experience watching television, but that it was the first account of a public consumption and exchange within the house - shows

nothing but songs and recordings of shows that catered to audiences of a particular modern blackness. To frame things simply, they understood that most families on Sunday would also be in attendance of their local church later that day. Making Sunday, leading up to and after church - a day for my parents - to rest and tune into national sermons and preachers broadcasting their own service. This would echo throughout other

102 - Markham's Songbird

Markham's Songbird - 103

rooms. Of course, growing up and as I've mentioned before, the value of Christianity and faith in Jamaica was one out of the many responsibilities taken on by first generation immigrants. So to find on Sunday evening, both my parents sitting comfortably in front of the television consuming songs of worship made sense. That this should be public and influenced on us - their children - because it extended their responsibility throughout the home and generated a boundary of ideological beliefs. Something that I and my siblings could engage with or avoid; depending on the domestic sphere we occupied. The channels they were able to find generated a very specific selection of media that we involuntarily could exchange and circulate within the home, either to reject or accelerate alternate sources of what they consumed. For example, listening to artist that they enjoyed and hearing them for myself, of course learning about them - not through asking - but by walking by the television in the adjacent room.

4.9 Killing Them Softly

to consume what they would watch. Not to mention that the family room was a domain to share with others,

anime and action. I could oscillate between the two - knowing that their choices would be entertaining and culturally relevant to their generation; and mine my own. Networks like B.E.T (on days that were not Sunday), MUCH Music, Comedy Central, Showtime, Adult Swim, classic series that spoke to our racial and cultural interests/identity - "The Fresh Prince of BelAir", "Smart Guy", "Family Matters", Wayne's World", "That's So Raven", "Sister Sister" to name a few. We

Despite the shift from children oriented play spaces to family oriented consumption, there were still times that my siblings and I would find entertainment amongst ourselves within these rooms. Either because we were home alone or as a result of privacy. With their privacy came a sense of our own, and opened up to all of us - or just me - broadcasts and channels I might not have understood or consumed on my own. Like music, television was another gateway into culture; whether it be racial, political or both. Network television had a channel for everything, but more fascinating were the channels watched and exchanged between my siblings and myself. What they often enjoyed was more or less my introduction into something culturally influenced. Again, I would decide for myself whether I enjoyed these shows or if I didn't feel like their target audience. I, however, believe that sharing something in common with my siblings generated an unconscious willingness

making consumption in this space a matter of influence - rather than selecting what to watch for yourself - you were there to enjoy someone else's preference. This was always a two way exchange, you were simultaneously giving up your interests while introducing yourself to others, in an internal public exchange.

When a television series was especially good, we would ask each other, "did you see the newest episode of" such and such, or "remember the part when" so and so. There was always an incentive to share new shows that I was positive my brother would enjoy, or my sister, cause it meant I might discover something new from them through this process. Television was passive, consumed within the family room, we discovered new series, anticipated good and bad ones - consuming virtually every genre - my sisters appeal to dramas and daytime television, my brother; comedy,

became their audience - set up in a way that made it easy to relate and empathize with characters resolving their own racial and cultural problems. Episodes dealing with issues of discrimination and stereotypes derived out of Americanized cultures of exclusion. For episodes throughout the Fresh Prince series, Will Smith character ( played by himself) - was written in a way that forced him to question his relationship with his father. As it was written to be disconnected and mysterious - that he doesn't really know who his father is or how to identify with having one. His Uncle,

104 - Markham's Songbird

Markham's Songbird - 105

"Uncle Phil" was in many ways just that - a father figure. His authority and relationship to Will represented modern blackness in America - those without a biological father can still value their father figures - those who fit the glove of what was missing. This stereotype is riddled throughout black culture - that a father will walk out on their children - it was throughout this series that one could identify the exploitation of many similar generalities, used as a means to tell a story or episode. Each series, It would seam, tried to tackle culture in an effort to normalize what had yet to be understood outside a community of these individuals - those who carry multiple identities. Consuming these shows was an opportunity to - not necessarily relate (although, beyond racial identity it was difficult) but to witness alternate modes of a similar culture.

finding new ones; ones that dealt with a similar subject matter but remained in its own way original and unique. Between my siblings and myself we found a particular sensibility in comedy - specifically dry humour that was blatantly racial or overtly polemic. Shows that would later be played off of shows like "Family Guy", "Futurama", "The Simpson's", "Robot Chicken" - we would instead watch "The Chappell's Show" and "Boondocks". We each retained a strong sensibility about the nature of their content, that each of these shows dealt mainly with race, culture, strong language, and unapologetic stereotypes of the modern black American - save for the classic parental warnings before the start of the show. Episodes based around cultural themes that appropriated formats of alternative shows, demonstrating poverty, drug abuse, segregation, black identity, violence, class and discrimination. These series, I think belonged to my

As I approached the family room, I would unknowingly sit down to watch " The Chappell Show" - episodes like the "Racial Draft" (Season 2: Episode 1) and "Making The Band" (Season 2: Episode 10) or "Mad Real World: Chad's Dad Comes to Visit" (Season 1: Episode 6). Throughout the early 2000s, Dave Chappell made his living by subverting popularized stereotypes of white and black America, portraying honest narratives and characters based on perceptions of colour, class, gender, identity, and culture. That, rather than wallow in the disconnect - it was better to laugh and gather in front of the television - to treat issues surrounding race as less serious because that's what they were in that moment. Most of these shows were an appropriation of a culture of misunderstanding - that rather than allow for the elimination of misrepresentation - it is better to wear it and display it in all its non-sense. To capitalize on their struggle was for the audience (content, consumption and exchange) the cherry on top.

As we grew older, it was difficult to let go of characters and shows approaching their final season, it meant

brothers generation, and as a result, I was given access through the informality of our public domestic sphere.

106 - Markham's Songbird

Markham's Songbird - 107

4.10 The World isYours

enabled an argument for recognizing technology as a tool for vast arrays of consumption - neither god or

Fig. 4.8 Bedrooms

Eventually each of us wanted our own separate private domestic spheres, my sister occupied the living room, my brother the basement (on occasion), and my bedroom left for me. My parents by this time took it upon themselves to circulate older televisions into their bedroom; I, however, was the first to be able to use a computer - one that I had built - inside my bedroom. It took roughly ten years of living in our new home until I could be allowed my own personal domestic technology, this was due to a number of factors - some of them cultural. I don't believe my parents thought it was normal for kids to have access to the internet within their bedrooms - consuming whatever they wanted at odd hours of the night. However, in the context of a conservative Christian household it was a giant step forward in my ability to use a computer I owned within a space like the bedroom. Despite constantly recognizing this foreign activity in shows and movies,3 it may have

bad. That by being responsible, one could recognize the value of having access within a private sphere of consumption - one that allowed me to control the circulation and exchange of media privately.

Interfaces

Frequentations

As my father continued to acquire newer technologies, other less current devices began floating upwards into other bedrooms. My brother, getting a television without access to channels or cable, and eventually a desktop and laptop for his own private sphere of consumption; he instead opted for movies. My sister, never sought to collect anything within her room, and kept her bedroom separate with respects to technology. The upper floor slowly evolved into what the basement started as, a space to experiment and rearrange furniture through the process of testing out, exchanging and circulating within our home, media and content that we each collected. The computer was

Above Grade: Level Two
Axonometric spatializing existing digital boundary conditions

108 - Markham's Songbird

Markham's Songbird - 109

a platform that went one step further then all other domesti technologies. And became a tool to appropriate the collection and exchange of media - to create and take ownership of the ideas acquired through other formats of media. Within our home, the computer was a social, cultural and economic platform - this reinforced the existing pressures and tension by keeping everyone informed and conscious of their relationship to what they consumed most. Within a private domestic sphere, computers also enabled alternate modes of vicarious escapism, that what you did online did not necessarily have to be shared amongst other family members. Attaining a sense of separated spatial conditions that operated within private spheres. It was much easier to shift representations of identity while preventing overlaps between other household members, you could be someone else online and acquire new modes of cultural identities that didn't need to be shared or exchanged - because this could happened elsewhere - between strangers and friends. Alternatively, it was

just as possible to reinforce your existing identities - to use computers and a private sphere only as a means to consume and reinforce the culture you identify most with. Communities and content that become a resource of identity fulfillment - websites, downloads, uploads, LAN, torrent, streams etc.

which was essentially a source of users taking control over their own devices by appropriating tools to create and share with others - much of this content was in a way memetic. Some videos that went viral came across as unpredictable and unspecific. Within this online territory of collective anonymous individuals you could find a hub of curated content developed - not by corporations or networks - but users working by

entertained, or distribute my own creations. As I sought to appropriate the games and software I owned. I wanted to engage in the circulation and exchange of content - by participating in the user generated push of media - creating machinima and episodes out of games and experiences I had while consuming. This didn't last for long, I think the main appeal with content generated for websites like YouTube was the support and monetization of media created by users - through advertisements - anyone could generate profit and perpetuate the creation and consumption of new ideas - with YouTube taking a portion, as they provided these platforms in the first place.

4.11 www.WorldStar.com // www.YouTube.com

themselves or with other friends to generate content for their audience. Videos were created by those

There were two modes of consumption that I frequented most, one being the engagement with social platforms that connected me with other friends and anonymous strangers. The other - consumption of media through user generated content of individuals appropriating their tools - people taking control over their own devices to create and share with others. Throughout high school it became an everyday activity, where I would log on and browse through "www.youtube.ca", discovering channels and subscribing to ones I liked

who sought a digital display for others to consume their work, as it became a platform to exchange and circulate amongst themselves. YouTube, was an escape from the politics of television and democratized media through an opportunity to freely distribute whatever you wanted to create with economic potential.

Other similar website made an effort to adopt this model of consumption, "www.worldstarhiphop.com" became a domain to reinforce and cultivate an index

You could suddenly express through familiar formats like video and audio for others to relate to. YouTube became a platform that I would use to learn, be

of captured content to also be distributed through their website. This content, however, was specialized as it catered specifically to the development of Americanized

110 - Markham's Songbird

Markham's Songbird - 111

culture - servicing those who identify and fit into modern blackness. Music videos constructed by up and coming rappers, sketches created by black producers and directors - their was also the documentation of gang culture and violence - uploaded to be shared and commented on. Worthy content was boasted or dismissed by likes or dislikes, and catered to legitimacy and relevance. WorldStar, came as an opportunity to make something out of an identity that survived on the circulation of culture, those who saw themselves as emblematic of possessing a modern blackness - these were the individuals either consuming, producing or appropriating for the sake of circulating culture. It was off putting at times, and didn't come as a source of entertainment for myself, it was more an opportunity to understand the current moment of modern blackness - trends, hits, viral videos, dances (with accompanied choreography), artist, and the popularization of a cultures trends. These website were representations of what it meant to be, and similarity a lesson on how

to behave in America's depiction of modern blackness. These were expressions that me, my brother and sister could exchange and circulate amongst each other, because unlike YouTube, it did not require a separation of our existing internal cultures and identity. YouTube, for me, was very much an escape towards an alternate mode of a self, creating and leaving comments under a pseudonym rather than my own name. YouTube, was more an opportunity to dismiss my existing culture surrounding my modern blackness, that with a new name came a new identity. WorldStar, was however a space to reinforce, not separate my modern blackness, where I didn't need a pseudonym in order to consume or participate in the exchange of explicit content. Within this domain, you would find the making public of the lives of celebrity; R.Kelly, Kim Kardashian, Chris Brown, etc. their popularity festered out of these domains of judgement and acceptance. Sex tapes, domestic abuse charges, public indecency - captured and circulated between those who felt the need to

know and contribute in the circulation of opinion and gossip. These sites operated on clicks and user counts - I often heard about videos that were exclusive to this domain, and was more often cautious to avoid, because as much as these forms of media tried to entertain a specific community, I could not relate. In a way, the websites that did not require a sense of identity split, were also the ones I avoided, that they catered to my racial identity but not my cultural preferences.

video-game consoles or siblings. The domestic sphere became private to the extent that I no longer occupied a room, it was very much the screen. Folders and pages were stored and hidden - accessed by logins and passwords. You could curate yourself through an identity of media circulation - participating in online forums of consumption and shared interests. Adding to the exchange or taking away from what others sought to share. It was not something others family members could recognize immediately (like television or music)

I much preferred the measures put in place for websites like YouTube, the policing and monetary gain from advertisements. While in your bedroom, it was harder to police - and made judgment on what to do and watch an entirely private act. It was ultimately up to what you knew about what you wanted that dictated what you could find. It was also much easier to wander through the internet - stumbling across new and unrealized sources of media. Blogs and other peer to peer relationships that extended well beyond

- this sphere needed to be decrypted before others could understand or gain a sense of what exactly you were up to while browsing online (your history was one way). The added level of security alleviated all sense of insecurity and made it easy to create and share through false identities. On my computer existed a digital counterpart, one that I assumed while playing avatars of characters, selecting clothes and appearances that were emblematic of someone foreign, someone I could reflect on games and websites like MapleStory and

112 - Markham's Songbird

Markham's Songbird - 113

and Reddit. This is not to say that these characters become you (although it depends - you either leave them behind as I did - or they take on a whole other level of self expression.) I however, grew out of them, and they still remain to this day on their network. The computer, in our household, tried to generate an opportunity to separate oneself from all domestic spheres, and generated new ones internally through false identities that you created. I was adamant not to share my password with anyone, at the risk of giving someone else access to a very private part of my interests - a resource of content that generated how I understood myself in relation to what I consumed and created. The storage of media proliferated new identities, ones that didn't need to characterize themselves in relation to existing nations or communities. The concept of identifying through a modern blackness could not operate online - making it easy to detach from race, politics, class, gender; societal constructs that could be dismissed in an online

setting. I think in that context, computers made it easier to attain alternate modes of a self, protected by the individual who created them - either by passwords and unexpected encryptions. I could either be "insert gamer tag here" or "insert given name here", the boundary was the interface and started the instant you logged in. That you could somehow switch back and forth between the two - crossing global and local representations of an identity that was both online and off. Negotiating the two was a matter of responding to racial slurs or stereotypes - phrases that - although did not represent a virtual character, were still emblematic of the person playing the character. It was especially funny when you would meet others in person, those whom you've only known through online engagements. For me, their first response was often "you're black?" As if I had acquired this physical quality just before we met. The dichotomy was always polar, and made it hard to be either or in most cases, never totally demonstrating myself in relation to the virtual counterpart and vice versa.

Pages like Reddit and WorldStar were never comfortable for this reason, I could never separate these identities from the ones I developed offline. I eventually just grew out of using the computer as a means of playing my own digital counterpart, and today, treat it much more vicariously, like the television. Today, particular websites I try to frequent come across as a predominantly white-American or white-Canadian mode of identity and culture. In that their was never a need - if white - to wrangle with the possibility of responding to stereotypes or racial modes of discrimination - that they have one identity not many. Making it welcoming and accessible - white identity provides the ability to try out and wear almost like clothes - any alternate mode of a self for a day or lifetime, and therefore makes online platforms a predominately white space to show off new expressions of a self. Websites like, YouTube, tumblr and reddit, came off as a space for white identities to circulate their own anonymity - that a false (their

username) name could summarize who they were, unaffected by social conflicts of race relations - be it political or stereotyped. These pages of expression are predominately white for this reason, and come in the form of a modern whiteness collective, exchanging and consuming within browsers. As I tried to join into these communities it always came at the expense of leaving an identity behind for another - that these pages were generated by those who did not have an identity to leave in the first place - but were instead looking for one - feeling inclusion out of not knowing who others were - that this was how individuals of modern whiteness operate in a collective context. No real names, no real pictures, no real birthdates - just cake days. I try not to use these websites as often as I once did, I can't imagine contributing content, it's easier however, to consume and attain an understanding of white cultures that create their sense of community and entertainment online, where virtually anyone can participate and be someone else.

114 - Markham's Songbird

Markham's Songbird - 115

Fig. 4.9 Appliance Chart

Television Video-Games Computer & Monitors Playback Devices Speakers Telephone Cable Boxes

EPSON - Projector Xbox 360 Lenovo (LT) Toshiba DVD Bose Vtech Cisco -

SANYO - LCE(22A100F) Wii Toshiba (LT)

RCA - L26WD21

YAMAHA - HTR (3084)

Pioneer - V5X

NEXTBOX

Appliance Acrual
An index of Domestic Technologies at Songbird (2018)

116 - Augmented Virtual Reality

Augmented Virtual Reality - 117

Chapter 5
Appropriation, Autonomy, Anonymity: Continued

realizing how - consuming a new order of dominance; racial deception of lateral borrowing among black communities around the world. I'm meant to relate to the characters I grew up playing - CJ was a narrative

emerges.2 When this occurs we miss obvious but subtle structural changes within our inventions of new ideas forcing us to look back on our past mistakes (as I have tried to summarize here with my own) in an attempt to understand the disadvantages and unaware effects - missed while participating within the context of consumption. We are not however, able to recognize these changes and it is only after they occur that they can be called on, and addressed. Marshall McLuhan articulates this with the phrase "The Medium is the Message" 3 that messages are the change in scale or pace (speed) - in other words the rate of exchange between family members in a household participating in a moral economy. This has nothing to do with the content, it's derived out of transactions between each other - the shows we tell our siblings to watch, the ones we discuss

It took years of consuming and participating in the exchange of media content until I could differentiate between the value of authentic relationships/ identities vs those artificially fabricated online. That it was better to attain and practice an identity - be it conflicted - through physical routines as opposed to a singular mode of anonymous interfacing (online). It's easy to understand computers and other domestic technologies as neither intrinsically good or bad, that they can facilitate the exploration of new identities while also reinforcing old ones - be they artificial or authentic. I think this is where computers in our household failed - I don't think it was to the benefit of our sense of self to abandon one for another - we instead (as a family) preferred the cultural exchange that occurred while consuming television shows,

music and movies. That these came as our source of identities (be they authentic or not) that each of us could understand - relate to.

constructed by who exactly?1 Assuming the role of what a drive by shooting would feel like, as I capture the territory labeled in green - because it should belong to our gang and not theirs - that this was the

Suppose that as we get older, that we respond to these issues more carefully - for the architect; the issue being that of an authentic racial identity. Beyond the 1950s era of social mass deception comes a new era of regionalized deception - those of us who grew up with the need to navigate spatial hierarchies of race and identity, spaces that required us to separate representations of ourselves within our own domestic spheres. Identities of diaspora in terms of the power relationships and asymmetry created by races and nations, those who are mediated by class, gender, and culture (Brown 1998; Campt 2004; Edwards 2003). That we can be led into racial deception without

only way to understand cultures of modern blackness outside of my domestic sphere. (You have to know how to separate these narratives from fictional fantasies - to real events occurring around you - otherwise identities in black communities will continue their process of coproduction.)

This has always been the struggle of domesticating a technology, that when it does not provide us with the expected autonomy, it is either dismissed or considered a threat. Technology that facilitates autonomy however undergoes cycles of ridicule and protest until a new one

but haven't seen yet. "The message is the attitude or action on the part of audience!"4 The medium, being the ability to use technology as an extension of our innate sensibilities ourselves - in other words the moment we occupy domestic spheres within our household that activate the interface

118 - Appropriation, Autonomy, Anonymity

Appropriation, Autonomy, Anonymity - 119

responsible for enabling public and private consumption. That we can do more within these internal territories of sensorial perception, triggering buttons on the remote from a distance, watching a character in a televised show discover his father, etc. The message is how quickly we can exchange these modes of consumption, thus understanding the creation of the medium from which we consume. McLuhan warns us of the medium and the extensions we enable out of what is never immediately obvious - because the rate of exchange forces us to miss the alterations made to the formats of consumption. That we have missed something critical in our social, personal and cultural lives when introducing greater methods of exchange - ways that make it easier to share, consume, and circulate are all deterrents in the recognition of change - that they effect. McLuhan reminds us, "Control over change would see, to consist in moving not with it, but ahead of it."5 How does the architect move ahead of the inevitable change?

5.1 The Augmented Ego

Consumption and content has been to some extent manipulated like an augmented reality, so that it alters our understanding of ourselves and identities in relation to what we thought we knew. That the manipulation of self is a tool generated out of the stories and fictional characters that are approached and written by design a way to relate to - the episodes we watch and become transfixed by. That Will's character was lost because of his absent father, - it is automatically believed that these stereotypes speak and articulate something about these identities and races. They are in fact very virtual, and out of our control so long as we are consuming their tropes.

"They'd show certain programs on TV and I'd see how they'd handle black people, and I'd get so emotional that I'd turn off the TV," she recalled. "It's just recently I can really sit down and watch. I don't know if it's embarrassment or anger or what. I'd watch these programs and probably go out on the road and see [the one white landowner living in the community] and just hate him. I'd think, `you're one of those.'" - it is clear that mass deception is still retained within regionalized groups of racial conflicts and identity. It has not ended, it has instead become a tool to target marginalized groups of individuals without - spreading amongst communities like a virus. Confusing representation with fact and fiction, taking actions to reinforce a dignified sense of cultural ambivalence felt threatened by transnational forces. Culture displaced by misunderstanding and preconceptions."6

While online and off, we slip in and out of zones that begin and end through screens, microphones and speaker systems, that we introduce to each other ourselves - when we share and exchange within public domains, the family room, the basement etc. We lose the tangibility attained by our privacy - spaces where we can alter ourselves, becoming foreign forms within our home, unrecognized by those closest to you. Because you can be "anymoususer123" and live out that life, especially as the servicing of online platforms get more broad everyday. What are the spatial tools that might enable us to control the dials of class, race, and culture that minorities need to generate? The self perpetuates out of moral economies of consumption. We have become so attached to technology that the only real means to feel adequately domestic is through some physical attachment (devices to be worn), to augment our virtual ego, not augmenting reality take the medium and use it against the message, give people autonomy to chose the tropes that get

For that reason, these boundaries are very physical and are generated out of the spatial conditions derived from technology to be used by the architect. That we are all occupying an ephemeral gap between our devices, what we consume and share to circulate between each other - this is measurable. And therefore operates for the architect through temporal boundaries, walls that create global and local borders within our households.

120 - Appropriation, Autonomy, Anonymity

Appropriation, Autonomy, Anonymity - 121

circulated between them - enable and disable the message, the identities, the cultures, the spaces.

They are exchanged and made apparent by overlaying onto existing nationalities - being neither me nor what I assume, but an attachment of perception -

Fig. 5.1 Collapsing Digital Boundaries

This is what it will take to be an architect - recognizing that there are tools that facilitate a very spatial condition that influences the perception of identities adding instead of removing stereotypes that become transposed onto the image of a person - these carry into new roles, identities that we wish to assume, ones that come with their own agency - be they conflicting or (the image of the architect is a contradiction of the identity I have consumed and now represent) there does not exist a young black architect because he is not apart of the moral economy of content circulation (within that culture) - they are instead ravelled in an augmented narrative to be appropriated by other cultures. Built through the domestic appliance to be interfaced, realized and made legitimate - these representations are both belonging to and foreign to me - and breed within public and private domesticity.

one controlled by media and consumption. To be an architect - requires wearing these identities, so long as the tools we choose to domesticate and normalize become popularized in the profession and our household. Because they determine a perceptual understanding of how I see the architect, myself, each other, our histories and the next generation - towards the building of some national pride or cultural identity - one that is comfortable in new landscapes (my parents emigrating from Jamaica to Canada.) Virtual reality is a tool that can eradicate the expression of a culture - it is derived out of anonymity and affords the augmentation of skewed perspectives when normalized in mass-society. This tool removes the notion of identity, so long as it is worn and made civil - for cultures, groups, races, minorities it is yet another stain on the developing of a self to be expressed as is db db

The Identity Interface
Actions, Behaviours, Movements & Interactions: The Modern Man

122 - Appropriation, Autonomy, Anonymity

123

not hidden - that it creates a new layer of complexity in the relationship between multiple identities and the person. Losing - for the individual - the architect - the black male - the minority - the opportunity to find their place in a sea of anonymous cultures (those operating as the architect - able to express themselves incognito.) The young black architect has an ingrained sensibility of survival through lateral borrowing - to take from others of a similar culture - not operate alone (the individual - Howard Roark). Appropriation is - for the young black architect - the only means by which to be the architect - it will never come as an internalized force. Their ego, however, will exist through the act of borrowing. This is Deborah's final point - the biggest export and import for modern black identities and nations (Americanized or Jamaican) is their identity - that it operates as the commodity for economic resources and financial income - selling (in a way) themselves to be appropriated by other cultures, nations, and groups. Through their devices - they are

distributed in a process of consumption circulation How do you navigate device, identity, appropriation, autonomy and anonymity? (see chapter 7) This is the challenge for the black architect to be - wrapped up in the tangled mess created by the appliances made so readily available in their homes - interfaced spatially.

Fig. 5.2 Family Room

124

125

SE

C

N TIO

T

EE R H

N

Virtual Avatars: Egos in Space: The Virtual Booth

CJ

126

127

Legend

128

129

Legend

130

131

Legend

132

133

Legend

135

Legend

Fig. 5.3 Articles and Think Pieces

138 - Ego's in Space

Ego's in Space - 139

Chapter 6
Egos in Space: Enough about me, what about you?

identity) becomes the commodity. Each literature review (see Appendix) will outline questionable but real world conditions in need of answers.

this issue, VR arcades propose a new experience that targets a demographic of young adults and college students (who also happen to be early adopters) or an outside spectator eager to watch but not try. An arcade

6.1 Recognizing Ego's (Existing or Otherwise)

follow and track. Take this collection as an opportunity to view a frozen moment in time; as it looked today. These
6.2 Toronto's VR Arcades

will advertise itself as either a modern Internet cafe or virtual reality lounge most of which posses liquor licenses, offer catering, modular spaces, A/V setup, and free WiFi in addition to hosting launch parties, group outings, pop-ups, corporate events, birthday parties, and brand activations. Operating as an entertainment/ event space, virtual reality lounges feature an array of games, movies and shows that can be experienced in either single player or multi-player competitions. Fostering a very digitally based sense of community oriented gathering between like minded tech enthusiasts or anyone willing to enter and join. Most gaming communities are more often hidden behind a screen in the comfort of their home, where community is better understood as emerging online within virtual domains. Virtual reality lounges break apart the

As of this writing, the virtual reality market has an estimated worth of 4.5 billion dollars projecting to surge towards 19 billion by the year 2021. Articles on the current
1

are characterizations of egos that are assumed through avatars and digital counterparts - their identities are reinforced by the interface. They are however, occupants - moving within social, economic and cultural domains. These collected articles will become a tool to inform you about who you could become - the means to appropriate self, identity, anonymity and the image of how you want to be seen. Be it becoming frozen in time (memorialized) - or getting lost in a new expression of a self in a digital club designed for self exploration. Projects for identities - comingling in Toronto's VR arcades. Where collective virtual reality experiences happen daily and self exploration is no longer bounded by limits of physical space. Avatars become occupants and your digital counterpart (your A sizeable number of neighbourhoods in Toronto have suddenly started sprouting VR arcades. Today, a decent number of quaint retail spaces can be found gutted out, and transformed into a rather unorthodox program and layout. Where bright and open south facing facades designed with the intent of bringing in natural daylight, have instead become blocked out, leaving openings hidden in favour of dimly lit spaces. Not to mention, booths - tons of them - arrayed like cubicles along the wall, inside each of them, a gadget that will completely block out all spatial perception and contextual awareness. Many have heard of VR, but never experienced it themselves, and so to resolve

state of virtual reality shift at a pace that makes it almost impossible to keep up while discussing the technology critically, making speculation difficult. Instead, I would like to accumulate a steady breadth of knowledge derived out of current, real world events that have shifted original ideas surrounding virtual reality (a series of literature reviews). Think pieces, articles, journals, videos released throughout my time spent writing that can be curated in a way that highlights the impact of this technology between 2017 and today. The uncertainty and progression of virtual reality devices within the context of identity is difficult to

140 - Ego's in Space

Ego's in Space - 141

stigma placed on introverted gamers disinterested in face to face dialogue and alter what it means to play with others virtually in private spaces. The virtual reality lounge is an opportunity to extrovert the act of gaming, and to socialize with others in a physically close proximity instead of through a microphone over an internet connection.

aim of profiting every quarter, and having some long term investment plan for the future of their business. However, it is not exactly clear what the long term plan

Fig. 6.1 Locating Arcades

VRPLAYIN

will be for these spaces. Prices of virtual reality headsets are lowering; democratizing customer bases from enthusiasts to mass society, individuals that can afford to use their disposable income on new technologies. What happens after the public has been educated
TORONTO VR GAMES 55 Kensington Ave, Toronto ON, M5T 2JB
Denison Ave.

294 College St, Toronto ON, M5T 1R9 LEVELUP REALITY 384 Yonge Street Unit 28 (Lower Level, Towards Food Court) Toronto ON, M5B 1S8
College Street. Granby Street. McGill Street. Gerrard Street. Baldwin Street. D'arcy Street. Dundas Street. Spadina Ave. Bay Street. Gould Street. Yonge Street.

In Toronto's downtown core, you can find four virtual reality arcades evenly spread out between one another. As of this writing, the arcades are respectively named, Toronto VR Games, LevelUp Reality, VRPlayin, and House of VR. Having varying degrees of prices, business strategies, and square footages; all arcades give customers a diverse range of options when it comes to finding the right arcade for them. Each arcade has had its start as either a small group of individuals or a single entrepreneur trying to get their business idea off the ground; in most cases these businesses operate like a start up. Seeking capital from investors with the

is unkown, as many of these arcades began with the mission to spread knowledge and accessibility to those less fortunate to own their own device. Although these questions may seem unclear, to date there have been no arcades in the downtown core that have directly gone out of business as a result of venturing into the virtual reality arcade market. Making the future of these newly appropriated spaces rather uncertain for the owners, as Canada's oldest arcade turned 3 in June 2018, serving 20,000 customers and franchising virtual reality across Canada,2 including locations in Guelph, Ont., Red Deer Lethbridge, Alta.
HOUSE OF VR 639 Queen St. W Toronto ON, M5V 2B7

Queen Street. Richmond Street. Adelaide Street. Bathurst Street.

Downtown Core
4 Locations are currently located throughout Toronto, with more existing along the periphery within suburban areas or along the fringes of the city.

142 - Ego's in Space

Ego's in Space - 143

6.3 A Business Model

6.4 On the Outside Looking In

sense of privacy while immersed in VR. There was no formal aesthetic, at least not in the ones I visited -

reinventing a number of alternative programatic functions, in order to hack the traditional public lounge for web surfers. Virtual reality, and the internet, share the same entrepreneurial backstory in that, with new technologies comes a new resurgence of co-opting existing spaces for the technology itself. All of which takes an unusually counter factual arrangement of objects and space. The first successful internet cafe was founded by Glenn McGinnis in '96, dubbed @cafe, the 2,500 square foot cafe tried to function like a business for data consumption, paying or what was at the time an obscenely high bandwidth rate to supply costumers

The virtual reality arcades found in Toronto vary between hourly bookings; membership or groups, depending on the number of people and activities they wish to engage in. All arcades operate on half hour to hourly rates for individuals and friends, you receive an HMD headset, two controllers and an oversized cubicle to play in. The cheapest rate as of writing is $15/half hour per player with $60/hour per player offering a "mixed reality" screen experience and being the most expensive. One out of the four arcades offer a subscription based membership. Asking for $29/ month, you receive a "VIP rate" of $19/hour with one free hour per month.

In an effort to make VR accessible, many arcades have taken it upon themselves to introduce to the public how these new technologies work, function, and play, making an experience as user-friendly as possible while still operating as a profitable business. What might have sparked a surge in arcades is the fact that the average consumer cannot afford the expenses of owning their own virtual reality headset. Arcades can instead provide customers an opportunity to try these devices without necessarily needing to own or spend more than they have or are willing to pay.

however I did manage to recognize a pattern between all of them: booths with monitors attached to spectate users inside VR. I was fortunate enough to see others become a spectacle, unknowingly watched by others - although the strangeness of being aware made it just as uncomfortable watching. Waiting in line to play next, it would be revealed that while you played, someone would be watching you.

6.5 The Internet Cafe

with.3

In Toronto I was able to find and visit four of these spaces and was overwhelmingly surprised by the sheer ingenuity of spatial appropriation, finding exposed bundles of cables through cavities along the walls and ceilings, stanchions that divide the boundary between booths - green and black curtains to give players a

The initiation of the internet also spawned a number of sub-cultures for the public to better understand the cyber-struggle of their times. Out of these sub-cultures spawned "internet-cafes" in 1995, in an attempt to take advantage of the revolution in telecommunications technologies. Cafes began introducing and literally

It took months for VR arcades to surface after the initial marketing of commercially ready virtual reality headset, which compares closely to the access of high internet bandwidth and internet cafes. Rather than utilizing existing arcades, independent virtual reality arcades were first to surface. @cafe opened with a kind

144 - Ego's in Space

Domesticating Toronto - 145 164

of mission and intent to educate the public, after doing so, there would no longer be a need for understanding the inner workings of the internet or how to surf the web outside the comfort of your home. The original internet cafe was temporary from the beginning, and it was never intended to be a permanent programatic condition. VR arcades today may seem to be following suit, at least in the speculation of how long they will last as a sustainable business model for the occupant. Wireless communications technology became the straw that broke the camels back - in the context of internet cafes as it no longer required the novelty that came with local area networks (LAN) as a means to access the internet. To arrive at an internet cafe and be given access to the high quality internet speeds and bandwidth rates became both a ritual and commodity for exploring new domains of digital territories, so long as you could not do so any where else. However, @cafe and many like it, generated a kind of ripple effect, initiating a cluster of subcultures that could be found throughout eastern and western

urban cores, ones that followed in the footsteps of @cafe.

Franchises like Starbucks or Tim-Hortons, to determine services like wireless telecommunications technologies (Wi-Fi) as a kind of standard because of the failures of internet cafes that were not able to adapt to the innovations made to the core technology that they depended on. Standards really derive from past failure. Virtual Reality is undergoing the same pattern, generating a ripple effect of sub cultures and altered programmatic functions for the sake of the technology itself. Virtual reality arcades are educational by design and so they too share a mission like that of the internet cafe, suggesting the next ripple of subcultures waiting to be found in dense urban centres. @cafe closed shortly after its first opening, and was in no way a financially viable business. It has however become a kind of staple on the internet, due to its novelty and willingness to try something new, of which the internet seems to love more than anything.

Fig. 6.2 An interior of VR Playin, Located at 294 College Street. www.vrplayin.ca

146 - Ego's in Space

Ego's in Space - 147

6.6 Sex In Virtual Reality & Video Games

entertainment industry, tools need to be developed around the quality and processing capabilities of

aims to suppress disbelief. To simultaneously play into the subconscious awareness and hormonal demands of misguided judgment has revealed a newfound capacity for recording and capturing moving objects in space and has for this reason supplanted a new generation of economies that aim to generate financial profit from their digital star counterparts. Assuming infamy in the process of freezing oneself in digitally archived meshes of rasterized images to be accessed forever in public or private domains; downloaded as an .obj file format. The aim for an afterlife in the astral plane of digitization is shaping adult entertainers eager to have their digital replicant constructed by a team of software developers and engineers. They too are beta testers and customers, those who are eager to support a product that progresses the exchange of a new format in choreographed moral economies. To be remembered forever at the fidelity of 60 frames per second at a resolution indistinguishable to the eye. By placing the essence of an adult entertainer beyond the

point of uncanny valley. "It is them"4 their mannerisms captured and made animate to be used as a tool in the erotic businesses of Virtual Reality. How you stand, talk, gaze, walk - become measurements for generating an image of what is largely, if not alternatively, you. It comes at the price of losing a part of self and identity (the very opposite of what a minority seeks)- the part that makes them human to begin with, the knowledge of finitude not immortalization.

One of the largest suppport systems driving virtual reality devices are companies like Holodexxx. They have initiated a their own subset of social and economic opportunities within for virtual reality consumption, acting as an independent force driving the culture of innovation through new and yet unimproved systems of capture. It is unfortunate, especially as they move forward with the aim of answering questions later. Questions that leave ethical, moral, logical and reasonable doubt looming over all their creations, not that innovation should be necessarily daring or remembered for its shock value (remember - we cannot immediately recognize revolutionary ideas as they emerge because their consequences have not happened yet.) But that there is and can be real value behind tools that have yet to find the hands of a craftsman. Leading the economic flow of virtual reality consumption and its long term viability is the adult

virtualized media content in order to instil a future for industry and consumer. This makes relative sense. However, exactly how many polygons does it take until the pores on the 4k texture map can be individually distinguishable? When will we finally get taken into the moment of convincing fake representations of digital bodies, forgetting to take off the headset that activates the uncertain zone where it's very hard to tell what is real and what is fake? Ironically, this future problem and these questions are left in the hands of the adult entertainment industry, a space that has never been an advocate for the real, and manufactures a specific exchange of choreographed moral economies of repeating fake stories without endings. As they are never really supposed to change, you are left with what you came for and find little value in having any critical thought. Which is why it comes with what is generally nothing more than an irresponsible utility for a tool that

The issue of the male figure leading the advent of technological revolution has for the past century stigmatized the foreground of innovations waiting to evolve; perhaps it is better to lament the process of objectification at large and to recognize it as a possible means to an end for virtual reality. To suggest that it will never be more than a tool to render unobtainable, but desired genders seems possible. To insist that the use of technology has remained a masculinizing agent in society is more critical; that technological

148 - Ego's in Space

Ego's in Space - 149

progress comes at the expense of young and older women outside positions of power. That the hardware agnostic innovators are trying their best to make it more affordable, only stipends the power flows of all participating agents enabling the success of the tools, there is no balance and it will remain that way while society continues to propel itself forward by cultures of exclusion.

no awareness of responsibility for also constructed virtual systems and structures of security. In the case of Holodexxx, these issues come as an after thought to be considered at a later point, and consent is simply a matter of asking if they would like to participate. The video game industry has gone through these very same ethical questions in the past, and have as a result generated communities of voluntary self appointed leaders that cater to self regulations and rating

entertainment. As it operates today, rating systems are comprised of two components: one, a rating symbol and the other content description. Descriptions will highlight the content that may have caused the rating, with symbols denoting an age group.5 However, while this may seem valuable; it is ultimately up to the discretion of parents, resellers and developers marketing the game. As there are technically no laws that require any of these actions, it is more a standard of practice within the industry, and for those who need to advertise their product or get it into the hands of consumers.

is one example, since Holodexxx has not taken steps to, at the very least, identify and notify their players and the community as to whether or not consensual or non conceal sexual content is possible. As the industry has dealt with this very same issue in the past and there are at this current moment in time video games that embed this mode of content within them, allowing virtual rape and other forms of rape fantasy experiences. A renaissance in sexual exploration comes at the cost of normalizing sexual violence without consequences, and is for that reason a very serious and contentious issue of ethics that still has no answers. At the very least, acknowledge ethical responsibilities

With that said, reports from the female actors in question claim that with the photogrammetric scanning of their bodies comes freedom and liberation, and in a way empowerment. Giving the actress a sense of agency in how their bodies are used and immortalized in a frozen image, to be used by whomever, whenever. Begging the question - However? To take your likeness in all its totality, to then relinquish your digital counterpart onto all facets of desire comes without any ethical consequence is simply irresponsible on the part of the engineers. In their current pursuit of sexual gamification they have

systems. Political agencies like the Entertainment Software Rating Boards (ESRB) who oversee the gaming industry's standards when it comes to determining what is inappropriate and appropriate in terms of the content contained in the video game. Simply an informal metric attached to games for distributors, parents and investors to understand the exact subject matter the game is trying to deal with. The same leaders are also tasked with trying to protect the innocence of children (who they feel the need to protect), while also enabling the circulation of adult

It is also a matter of asking what exactly is appropriate; in the context of pornography and video games it is at this point from this article (see appendix) and many others that it is not clear. Moreover, consent for companies like Holodexxx is non existent, and suggests a new cycle in video games that aren't quite able to get non-sexual violence right. Patric Lagnys

as a game developer and distributor of culture, and understand that this responsibility is not questionable. Unfortunately this is not the case as Richard Garriot, Steve Meretzky and other developers go on to argue, "that games of all types are fair and reasonable to create. I can even see how playing a game where the goal is to live out an unethical existence could be fun."4

150 - Ego's in Space



The 20th Century 151 19

teaching tool and that, while not recognizing a moral responsibility for developers should be required, it is up to consumers to make decisions for themselves. However, had these structures of violence not be present to begin with, there would not be a need to pose the very same questions, making it difficult to really understand the fundamental core of this belief, one without consequences. A game is just a game, so long as we can distinguish between playing a story versus having a story playing into your own. Culture and the facilitation of a particular view point that gets shared and circulated is a very influencing tool, latching onto narratives is one of the best formats from which to build a sense of identity and belonging, to write off any responsibility is missing this point in its entirety.

6.7 On Identity

To fabricate for both the virtualized and realized is a testament to how far we have come in our perception of what is real. To co-inhabit space that is not necessarily valued as a product of materials, construction methods, code, safety, etc.; that worldly elements do not penetrate through the walls or exterior surfaces is more a lapse in our judgment of what it means to feel safe and protected; or better yet, sheltered. It is not the case that we find shelter through the ephemeral agencies bounding digital media operating in liminal barriers generated by broadcasting outputs of selected content. That shelter can be progressing towards an alternative understanding, a form constructed by exchanges between economies of digital identities (avatars.) A new representation of what it means to exchange yourself, secured and protected. How often, by whom, for how long? Identity becomes a space to share, sell, exchange and capitalize; a representation of

Fig. 6.3 An interior of Levelup Reality Located at Aura - Unit 28 (Lower Level) 384 Yonge & Gerrard) levelupreality.ca

152 - Ego's in Space



The 20th Century 153 19

who we think we might be or who we want to become.

One major prospect for the future advertised by Holodexxx's three male engineers is the possibility of exploring sexuality in a territory of endless possibilities. Reshaping our current taboos and initiating a new culture of fetishization and infinite desire. Breaking into a territory of unconscious sexual fulfillment, spaces that are thoughtless and fuelled purely by hormonal fixations. Not for the sake of pleasure, but instead the possibility of undiscovered pleasures yet to be known. Realizations of unfamiliarity, unable to truly know if this is something you enjoy or find repulsively intolerable, in these moments nothing will make sense, and the only illustration to prove this point are virtual realms operating within this unusual space, never needing to make sense - it is unbounded primal sensibility - a pure fantasy.

Fig. 6.4 An Exterior of Toronto VR Games Located at 55 Kensington Ave, (Toronto) https://www.torontovrgames.ca/

154 - Augmented Virtual Reality

Augmented Virtual Reality - 155

Chapter 7
Policy Booklet: After Life Project 1

will undergo one of three processes per your choice, a burial,2 cremation,3 or liquid hydrolysis bath4 (a green energy process that feeds raw carbon energy back into the grid - supporting the systems and necessary hardware we use to scan and visit your digital bodies.)

Repurposed House of VR: Policy

7.1 On Your Visit

When you've decided its time to insure yourself in the event of your untimely demise, you will be digitally scanned and processed by a series of cameras set up in an volumetric array. A total 112 raster images1 will be used to represent your body in all its likeness, your body will be lifted, rotated, spread apart, dressed and placed back down gently, capturing poses motions and expressions for you. This is important when realizing your digital animations, such that you will be recognized by your friends and family during visitation hours. Once your body has been properly scanned it

While visiting a loved one or friend, it is required that you change your cothes, with an option of our complimentary medication5 (a small tablet to alter spatial awareness). The main floor is a common area that we dedicate to resting and waiting for your visitation turn. Sit down, relax and let the medication move into your bloodstream. We take your physical state very seriously and make sure you body level is at an optimal and calm state. The assistant will take you to the second level when you are ready to begin the ceremony. We offer a number of visitation modes, either as Individual - Single Family, Single Family + Extended

156

157

Members(Relatives) - Single Family + Extended Members(Relatives) + Friends not exceeding 20 members. However, we will host your friends and family via an accessible domain to participate - this is also an option for those who were unable to attend the ceremony physically6 (terms and conditions may apply).

headsets, resistant to shock and leakages, while you float aimlessly; the water will remain at constant body temperature, time is limited and enforced through the headsets, guests are not allowed anymore than 30 minutes per session - 15 minutes being the optimal amount according to rigorous testing and trial runs. Guests will be provided towels, swim suits and complimentary supplements (pure O2 - which

exchange, and manage all those under virtual reality with two 6-axis robot arms working in concert with each guest. A display station will monitor and output the experiences guests are having; your perception and virtual catacomb will be public but respected by other guests leaving and joining their own sessions. Noise will be canceled while attached to your station and things may feel fuzzy - do not be alarmed - this simply means that the medicine is working as expected - once you are finished you will be able to change out of our provided clothes. We will accommodate you should you need a private space to reflect. Once you are ready, we

in a collective order, members of the family must face each other before beginning their session together. chairs will be in a circular array, it is important that you can maintain a line of sight with each family member. Families with children and older relatives are accepted, so long as they are of ages 13+8 with no restrictions on the elderly. It is required by us, that all family members be scanned during their first session9, this is a process that will take place on our main floor. Once each family member has changed, he or she will be placed in our scanning rig, which we will use during the ceremony. If this is just a visit or if you have a saved scanned copy of yourself, you may skip this process - however this complimentary for all newcomers. During the

7.2 Individual:

is used distributed while breathing) provided by our anaesthetists, we will ensure you are back to your normal self before your session has ended.

Those that wish to visit their loved ones alone have a number of options; ranging from private suites7 to public shared courts consisting of recliner chairs with adjustable backrests. Within private suits, guests have the option between sensory attenuation tanks emptied per session, these tanks are filled with half a litre of salt water and filtrated rain water, these tanks are soundproof, and place our guests in a heightened sate of awareness. Within the tanks are water proof

This is available with all options - should you chose to use our shared spaces. We allow up to 20 guests the alternative option, spaces that are public and informal. Here, guests are provided an additional 30 minutes, as traffic can get heavy, and disruptive; we anticipate that more activity is likely to occur within these spaces. In order to manage each session and provide each guests a sense of value - we will clean, sort, refill,

will assist you to schedule your next ceremony with us.

7.3 Single Family:

ceremony you will witness each other as yourselves; poses and auditory phrases will attain the highest

Our most frequently and demanded option by our guests. Immediate family members and single families are able to gather together in a multi-level experience.11 Each member is provided a chair arranged

fidelity possible10, making your experience with your family seamless.

158

159

Following your session and after 30 days have past we will delete your family and their respective scans (*we will not host, store, maintain or share any records of your likeness without your consent), you will be required to do this each time or - we offer secure and safe storage of your digital counterpart hosted locally on our servers.11
7.3.1 Local Storage & Scanning Options

encryption14 and require you to provide us with a password and 8 digit-code to verify your identity for each session. It is your sole responsibility to keep this information secure, such that it is not shared with anyone. 7.3.1.3 * Our service requires a number of facial expressions, behaviours, phrases, poses, and activities in order to obtain a high fidelity mesh and render of our guests.15A total of 112 Cameras will digitally capture and record you, it is important that you treat this like any other photo or video, stay still and expect multiple takes each session - this can take upwards to 1 or 2 hours16 with breaks in-between. This is not subject to change.

7.3.1.1 * if you are using our service as an individual, this will not apply to you. 7.3.1.2 * if you wish to opt into our digital database storage service then we will require 5 check-ups throughout the year in order to archive a healthy version of your likeness.12 In the unlikely event of your digital counterpart being stolen - we will not be held responsible for any digital property taken from you.13 Our servers are designed with end-to-end P2P

160

161

7.4 Families + Extended Members(Relatives):

to the seating placement you have chosen beforehand. This will happen in pairs, on either side of the aisle you will see a familiar face being strapped into their chair and headset with the aid of our robot assistant, what you see will also happen to you. By this point your medicine will also have reached optimal levels of relaxation, easing nervousness and pain - we will not begin until all members have confirmed their anxieties are under control. Once all our guests are comfortably seated, the ceremony will begin - on our screens will be a prompt asking if you accept and are ready to initialize the commencement of paying respects to your digitally reconstructed loved one. If a guest selects no, the ceremony will not begin, all parties participating need to agree before hand.
7.4.1 Shared Ceremonies:

therefore more susceptible to misunderstandings of perceptual articulation. This is a term we've discovered and use to describe the discernment of a lucid state, what may appear on-screen during the ceremony is not real, these are representations of loved ones, like a photo. Please make sure to sit down with your children and the elderly to explain to these concepts we provide a brochure that outlines our methods and techniques and ways to deal with lucidity loss caused by these conditions - they are temporary and last for no longer than a week/month. Call your paediatrician if symptoms last longer. We are not responsible for any medical issues that begin after your session, and limit experiences to 30 minutes as a measure to reduce your risk. 7.4.1.1 * Extended family members are limited to 20 people, we will not accommodate more. Immediate family members will be located in a separate room, but will maintain a singular virtual space for all members to witness their loved one.

To Obtain Your Voice Please Read a Sample of Phrases: 1. "That copper stock she owns is looking up again" 2. "The text implies that method handles scaling, rotation, and translation" 3. "It should provided results comparable to the state of the art. I feel quite ambivalent about the article" 4. "On top of all that, the weeds keep growing and the garbage has to be taken out" 5. "Everything vintage you can imagine that can fit into a small space is there" 6. "It will be pleasant to have him living at the farmhouse" 7. "When it dropped, the skies cleared and the wind blew" 8. "Since he didn't, he only whined a bit through his nose" 9. "I'm one of the investors here, but the whole game is in your hands" 10. "The picnic was ruined by a marching band"

We offer a space for guests to host private ceremony services; events where all extended family members will be able to gather and obtain access to the platform as a means to begin honouring those who have passed and have decided to upload themselves in our digital forum. Each extended family member will be provided access to a digital counterpart; terminating once 24 hours has passed. On the day of, all other services will be canceled in order to give your guests and family members a proper space to respect and honour your loved one, staff and headsets will be accommodated, including all necessary maintenance and medicinal supplies (you are also encouraged to bring your own - please inform us before hand*). As a group, and while you're digital scans are processing, you will each change into our complementary clothing. On the second floor, we will usher in guests one at a time, our 6-axis robot will take you down the isle and

* Be prepared to expect temporary loss in presence, feelings of nausea and confusion - the digital reconstructions are replicated at higher qualities and

162

163

7.4.1.2 * Extended family members will receive a temporary low poly model of themselves, this will reduce time spent loading and processing data - it is first come, first served, the ceremony will not commence until all guests have their digital counterpart scanned and copied to our systems. 7.4.1.3 * Communication is internal, mics will provide the necessary feedback and response to your station.17 Each chair comes with a noise canceling visor that must be worn at all times around your mouth, as it will provide our guests with anesthetics and sound input. We will provide our guests a number of size variations to make it comfortable and less distracting, you will be advised not to remove these visors for any reason, as our assistant will do this for you. If you are not medicated we will diabake anesthetic distribution; sound input will still be enabled.

7.4.2 Collective Sensory Deprivation

services, should any member of your extended or immediate family not wish to participate in the

location. We offer two formats; a virtual reality service (limited to 20 additional avatars, see 5.1.1) and a video live stream of the service (see 5.1.2) both will function in real time. Our guests have to provide a contact list of every member that wishes to participate in the ceremony remotely - services are private and protected under our P2P encryption platform. We will invite and notify your guests on the date and time provided by us, you will not be able to join the ceremony once it has

Ceremony services require that you remove your shoes and socks as you will need to walk through a body of water in order to get to your seat. Chairs are positioned above the water level, a half litre of salt water and purified rain water will evaporate and circulate throughout the room, cooling the heavy machinery and data processing in addition to creating a humid atmosphere. Cables are coated in thick layers of rubber, sealing all electronics from leakages, it may appear that cables are submerged in these baths but this is the intent, you will not be in any danger while seated or standing, however it is important that you communicate with us and our 6-axis robot arm when you feel any anxiety or nervousness. We anticipate a calm and relaxed state of meditative reflection and provide these features for this purpose. Other rooms that are offline and disconnected from technology are available during

ceremony, they will have a space to reflect on their own. 7.4.2.1 * Spaces are limited to one person at a time. 7.4.2.2 * Accommodates children and elderly

7.5 Families + Extended Members(Relatives) + Friends:

started, we give each remote guests ample time and alerts before the session starts.
7.5.1 Hosting remote avatars

Like single families and extended family members, guests are given the option to invite 5 additional friends or acquaintances of the deceased. If guests would like to go over this limit we will not provide them with the same accommodations, and will instead open your ceremonial session to our online services.18 Anyone who is not an immediate or extended family member will be allowed to join the ceremony from a remote

* We limit additional members to 20 as we operate in compliance with occupancy loads, we treat each avatar as a physical member participating in the ceremony where they provide us with a financial advantage while joining our services. Access to our library of digital counterparts is restrict to ceremonial services, and are not subjected to individual visits.

164

165

7.5.1.1 * For individual visits you must be physically present in order to interface with the deceased. We do not provide remote access to your digitally constructed copy - they are here on our servers, and cannot be displaced (either moved, copied, download, uploaded or stored) once the digital ceremony (if chosen) has ended. 7.5.1.2 * Storage of digital copies of the deceased is local19 and does not rely on servers or cloud storage as a saving method, however, services that are conducted with remote users are online. We access our local storage during online sessions, separating the two once our guests have completed the ceremony.
7.5 Comunal Seating Options

166

167

7.5.2 Live Stream

* Invitation to live stream is the only method of joining, these sessions are private and encrypted. In a web browser, our guest will be able to join and login into their account to watch, comment and see a high quality video stream of the ceremony.

Level 2  1. Deprivation Array of Virtual Booths in the form of recliner Tank Rooms chairs and desktop monitors -floating in 2. Change Rooms a bath of purified rain water. 3. Washroom Level 1 Photogrammetry capture array. A rig of 144 Cameras for digitizing guests. Interfaces
Frequentations

7.6 Ceremonial Services

Gestures

We currently offer two ceremonial practices (with more to come at a later date) - scripted by our top engineers; we have designed and simulated for our guests a 40 x 20 virtual reality landscape to hold and host your digital loved ones. Choose between a traditional memorial day service or Filial Piety.20 This list will be updated at a later point.

Thank you for choosing virtual reality as a space to keep your loved ones, join now.

168

169

170

171

172 - Augmented Virtual Reality

173

Chapter 8
Policy Booklet: Avatar Clubs Project 2

Repurposed Toronto VR Games: Policy

At VAVATAR customers will be given a choice of how long they wish to stay in our facilities - we bill by the hour and provide; software, a chair, helmets (HMD), controllers, and monitors1 - this will require additional fees. Otherwise, we suggest bringing your own personal HMD - were we will then allow you the benefits of using our space as a means to get online in virtual reality. We do not block, prevent or prohibit anyone from participating or engaging with any simulated context - should they desire private or public activities - we will service you accordingly. We seek a democratic experience, and would like to maintain a

174

175

democratic experience, and strong relationship with our customers - host sermons, digitally scanned avatars, perform under false or true identities, assume the role of others, communicate with friends, family, loved ones, should they desire a little more of you we can provide the appropriate gear to make your relationships intimate and connected again. Perfect for long-distance relationships. This is a space for virtual reality - and therefore wishes to accommodate all its quarks and potentials in a single hub - for multi-user experiences and individuals in need of access. We hope to give our customers a space to lose themselves - whether its through their pursuit of a digital avatar - taking on limitless bounds that extend out to their true sense of self. We please only your avatars - place on your mask, sit down and relax - when you enter we want you to feel comfortable about the transition to and from the virtual and real. We will maintain a 24 hour - surveillance on you; our hardware agnostic engineers2 are trained to watch and service your avatar

- should anything go wrong during your stay.

8.1.2 Hourly

are not included - but are available for a small additional fee - please see 6.1.2 for more information

Like most traditional virtual reality based spaces - we
8.1 Available Pricing and Membership Options

on booths)

offer hourly bookings; members can come in either groups or individuals depending on the activity. We
8.1.4 V.I.P



8.1.1 Memberships

start pricing at $29/hour5 for each person- this includes access to equipment like a chair, controllers, HMD, If you are an avid virtual reality user then the V.I.P subscription package is exactly what you need. We supply a private 24-hour booth, equipped with our
8.1.3 Monthly

We offer subscription services for customers that want
3

monitor, ports, software and an avatar.

the added benefit of designated seats and helmets those who know they are likely to frequent our facilities should chose this option. As it comes with a lower cost with each visit - you will save and pay a monthly balance to have all your needs satisfied. Alternatively, we offer yearly V.I.P subscriptions or you will have to
4

on-demand hardware agnostic engineers, catering services,1 and the ability to designate and secure

If you sign up for the monthly subscription you get the added benefit of a designated seat in our line-up of available HMD units - come and enjoy virtual reality in your favourite spot whenever you want - our business will be open 24 hours for our monthly subscribers. We allow additional services like optional HMD's, hosting virtual domains on our servers, linking co-opted experiences between you and your partner all in your own personal booth. (optional: privacy arrangements

additional seating (up to 4) for friends, family, and partners (we provide them with HMD's.) Host on our servers, locally or online with added benefit multiplayer sessions - this can be done either private or publicly. Our V.I.P subscribers pay a yearly fixed price and receive upgrades and any additional services we hope to introduce over the year. This package is for anyone trying to get friends and partners who want to find their digital counterpart. All activities

pay by the hour - this is a fee that ccurs with each visit.

176

177

will be stored here locally (this does not include your guests). All play sessions and records of your avatar will be stored and kept here on a secure network - to be accessed at any time by you. - this includes changes you may make to your digital self - we will always be up to date for our V.I.Ps.



8.2.2 Experienced Users

Provided: (See Top Right Image)

For experienced individuals hoping to host, explore, change (avatars) or get lost in our virtual services then you've come to the right place. We offer private booths to get you online faster and in the digital domain where we will store - for you - avatars, lobbies, virtual

Accommodated: (See Bottom Three Right Images) Custom headsets that are built by visitors or guests can be accommodated for7 - we support all input varieties (HDMI, VGA, DVI.)

8.2 Individuals

environments/real estate6 - we have a strict "eyes only" policy that protects our users against virtual identity

8.5 Avatars (Assume - and be Yourself)



8.2.1 New Users

theft.

We encourage the exploration of your digital avatar create, remove, experiment with how you want to be

For those curious to try for the first time or if you are an experienced virtual reality user, then you're welcome to grab a seat. We however do not guarantee access to a seat or store any avatars created during the use of our services. Although, we do welcome those experienced with virtual reality to bring their avatar and custom HMD's (see 3.1 for more information on Headsets accommodation.)

8.3 Groups (Couples & Parties)

known and witnessed in the digital realm.8

TBD 
8.4 Headsets 8.5.1 Securing Your digital Avatar

In the case of stolen or damaged virtual avatars or We provide our guests with full headset support - get ready and strapped in - we'll be there to ensure the lenses and focal distances are properly adjusted for the benefit of your virtual experience. other digital identities we will take no responsibility for the loss or manipulation of your digital counterpart - therefore it is on the user to avoid any fishy digital

178

179

domains that actively seek out information9 - our servers are only as secure as the platforms found online - and we will try our best to maintain up-todate spyware and malware systems should anything be potentially lost or stolen.



Step 1 Choose an avatar

  Step 2:

Customize  Step 3:

Begin Role-Playing 
8.5.2 Backups and Storage



Step 4: Save online or locally

 (Additional costs may apply) have us create backups and authentic copies of your digital counterparts10 for you - on our local server we will maintain a detailed record of your likeness that is secured by us for however long you choose. 

8.6.1 Private Booths

For those who want to venture out into the unknown digital realm - while also being seen as your digital avatar11 - or those in a committed relationship but

8.6 Services

struggle with long distance12 - or those seeking to explore themselves in a new digital identity13 - with

We provide digital avatars of virtually anything - or you can create your own. 

others or alone - we offer private booths to showcase your true avatar. Inside you are afforded a space to practice any activity - it is a private room to be used on a time basis - 45 minute sessions each is the current

180

181

restriction we allow users within this space - it is kept clean at all times - with high maintenance.

8.6.2 Private Booths

Host shows with friends or groups - we provide virtual screens to view both digital and physical representations of real-time activities.14 Take to the stage as your digital counterpart - perform15, host a sermon16, there are virtually no limits to what you can do for your audience.

8.7 Save, Load, Delete

We protect our users data - and take saving, storage, privacy and access to information seriously - due to ethical responsibilities it is our mission to meet the highest standards of storing digital avatars safely.

182

183

184

185

PART FOUR
Playing Architect: Appropriate Objects

Note to Self: Put the Goggles Down:

188 - Augmented Virtual Reality

Augmented Virtual Reality - 189

Chapter 9
Appropriate Objects: Architecture Software

generate commodity, agency and autonomy in response to the normalization of interfacing with virtual objects. It is democratic in the sense that it can be programmed to be for anyone, and provides a unique opportunity to

and the spaces I grew up - their context removed to be made physical in a digital realm, a space that strips their meaning - making them apparently meaningless but still retaining their inherent value for me - because I can recognize them and their histories. The objects are appropriate because they will become a commodity in the production and circulation of their own moral economy, used like puzzle pieces that fit together in a process of design making through taking. They are elements that comprise shapes to be simulated and rendered - augmented and shifted - becoming unrecognizable yet new and old. They are appropriate because they are designed to be appropriated - in a software created for these objects - to be digitized, inserted, spawned, manipulated, simulated and exported. Forms will take on new meaning but their identities will remain anonymous. They will belong to the user manipulating them, they take ownership of a new shape and object objects to be appropriated - appropriate objects.

9.1 How to Steal Familiar Objects

of interface consumption through moral economies (as previously outlined in part 1 - Identity Breeding

also consider a means from which to navigate amongst device, identity, autonomy and anonymity. Tools for the young black architect. Be it through virtual reality device, screen, phone, etc. The digital boundary can be yet another spatial condition created by the architect to design for and inhabit, and allows the young black architect an ability to begin a production of objects for appropriation - to be coded, rasterized, made material, manipulated, captured, and distributed in any way that gives their presence autonomy, anonymity, and identity.
9.2 Appropriate Objects

I wanted to take the goggles off at some point. - because it also seams that here, sitting at the intersection of technology and identity - is where you might also find the architect that I have been searching for. A new device for the architect (one used for visualization and creation) - should also present a new understanding of how we theorize design in practice. Software is presenting a new idea of surface and space and the appropriation of the real (existing objets). Through the interfacing of the digital as a medium - be it through virtual reality or a traditional desktop monitor, it requires the architect recognize the quality of representation as a valid object - like any other. To "understand the software and digital on its terms"
1

Grounds) - as the architect normalizes the use of virtual reality - there is invariably a need to recognize the underlying utility and commodity derived for the system (the image). The commodity however, is purely that of a raster image made digital through the processing of a rendered representation. The classical architect does not consider the utility of the image as a mode of function or form - and uses instead - the image as a means for communicating design iterations or intent. The image, has in the past been used as a form of political protest, to either make a statement or as a polemic response to a critical issue. Software, is much more potent than I think we realize - and opens up greater avenues for creation, especially when treated as an appropraition tool to

Appropriate objects are the shapes and forms that I own - made digital - to be used as a tool and cultural resource. They are objects found in my backyard, inside my home

- this comes as a direct response to increasing modes

190

191

192

193

194

195

Fig. 9.1 Backyard Sketch

196 - Appropriate Objects

Appropriate Objects - 197

Fig. 9.2 3D Mesh Model Panorama

WATCH

Video

198

199

Fig. 9.3 Stolen Artifact I, Captured from a Suburban Backyard

Fractal Facade

200

201

Fig. 9.4 Stolen Artifact II, Captured from a Suburban Backyard

Fig. 9.5 Stolen Artifact III, Captured from a Suburban Backyard (Souffle)

Normal Air Conditioner

Brick Air Conditioner

202

203

Fig. 9.6 Stolen Artifact IV, Captured from a Suburban Backyard

Fig. 9.7 Stolen Artifact V, Captured from a Suburban Backyard

Metallic Facade

Wooden Air Conditioner

204 - Appropriate Objects

Appropriate Objects - 205

Fig. 9.8 Stolen Artifact VI, Captured from a Suburban Backyard (Souffle)

9.3 Building Software Fictions

opposed to using software to build (grasshopper is a tool built out of software - not a software built tool - it is still provided to architects as a program) - the architect can reimagine design making as tool generating, where functions, commands, autonomy, and agency become embedded into the foundation of a building (or idea) one that is coded with specificity of rules and logic like an architecture. Architects find software as an opportunity to subscribe, paying in monthly instalments with limited access to updates and plugins. As a ubiquitous tool for the architect - software architecture - should be understood like the making of a building, where geometry is mesh based, simulations are physics based, frame rates, normal maps, displacement maps, baking, etc. Many of which are already understood; in programs like Rhino, Autodesk's 3ds max and Revit. The classical architect is provided a virtual environment of an infinite spatial condition - where it is possible to simulate, manipulate, and build complex geometries in a virtual space (like a sandbox.)

The classical architect has in this very moment a tool that does exactly what he is capable of - simulating the imagination of an idea before it's replicated in a medium or reality - designers are already fixed with an ability to simulate, "there is no simulation of humans, because humans already have a modelling capacity."2 The classical architect imagines what the building looks like then begins to make it something tangible - and yet here is a tool that is doing exactly that. Catered to one perspective, your own - it is a new mode of making softwares - ones that deal with spatial relationships - the architect is walking in their own imaginations rendered visible for the rest of us. The hardware and software become architecture and produce a need to question

Soufflé

- at least as a normalized tool - the role of software for architects. Up until now, software is in more ways a service provided to the architect. Architects never question how to make through building software -as

206 - Appropriate Objects

Appropriate Objects - 207

Fig. 9.9 Appropriate Objects U.I. Design and Layout

- the player can spawn a number of objects, alter their It is very common to use Unity, an open source and free platform - the resource of information circulation (moral economy) for knowledge consumption that made Appropriate Objects (the software) possible and was created without any prior use or knowledge of code - which uses C++. Completed in 2-months for a beta to be played and tested by friends and for strangers to appropriate. The nature of open-source software also inspired the distribution of this software - it is open and free to dismantle, own and modify. behaviour and create randomness and chaos out of very specific functions and shapes. These parameters are the tools to design from and are inherently playful and basic. When the game is over, the layout changes to take the player into a second screen, where they can either save by exporting an .obj, applying a texture, restarting the game, or quitting. The system is closed, in that it allows the user a closed loop playability while
Option buttons can be toggled on Objects in this column will spawn Physics Based Objects while an object is selected. There are a total of 6 Objects to select from. Random Objects that spawn all 6 individually. The ability to Delete Objects. And the choice to edit. While selecting one out of each the others will be disabled. (Scenes change when the Edit button is on) Delete objects in the scene when this is toggled on. Hover over the Objects while holding down the control button and they will disappear (Ctrl + Mouse 1)
Object Object 1 Object 2 Object 3 Object 4 Object 5 Object 6 Random Delete Physics Object Object 1 Object 2 Object 3 Object 4 Object 5 Object 6 Random Delete Edit

Spawn objects at random while toggled on. (Ctrl + Mouse 1)

When toggled on, an object will spawn from the mouse while the control button is held and the mouse button is clicked (Ctrl + Mouse 1) Edit will change the scene, giving the user the ability to control the objects in the scene. The scene will freeze all physics and movements and will give the user the option to Edit the spawned objects.

Undo Snap
While in Edit mode, the option to undo, redo, snap, or move the spawned objects will be available. These will only appear while in edit mode.

Redo Move

Name Object

SOFTWARE VERSION #

Screenshot Restart

Export Apply Texture Option 1 Option 2

Options Option 3 Option 4 Option 5 Option 6

00:00 Time Left
0 objects

the application is open. Keeping controls limited, the player can either spawn the appropriate objects or edit

on they will appear black. Press restart to change the scene back to the original initial start incase something goes wrong. Texture that can applied at anypoint - it is a physics based cloth that spawns at random - the objects that are in the scene will be covered like a texture map material made physical through the cloth like behaviour. Export by naming the object created either while playing or once the game has ended. The object will save automatically as a .obj in a folder within the software application.

A Bar that while not in Edit Mode will provide the user a number of Options to choose from - these options will manipulate Physics Objects Only and will spawn objects with activated option components - they will not be deactivated until the object is either deleted or the Option

Timer that will countdown until the game is over - changing scenes once it reaches 00:00. The user will also have the number of objects spawned in the scene underneath the timer.

Take a screensgot of the scene while playing.

them in a sandbox style - it is also possible to insert
9.4 Interface3

alternative objects should the player have their own appropriate shapes they wish to appropriate.

Appropriate Objects has a very simple U.I. adapted from more traditional programs used by the architect to develop forms. It is primarily a game - and requires a less serious approach to generating objects - it is first and foremost a game. To start, the interface is constant
Name Object Screenshot Restart Quit Game Export Apply Texture

208 - Appropriate Objects

209

Fig. 9.10 Still from Appropriate Objects I

9.5 Edit Mode

Select Highlight Highlight  Multiple

Tranform

Rotate



Scale

9.6 Controls 

Object Mode
Rotate: Hold Right-Mouse Button Zoom: Scroll Wheel + or + Ctrl Spawn Objects: Click Mouse Left + Hold Ctrl Move Camera: Hold Mouse Right + Ctrl Destroy: Drag Mouse Left + Hold Ctrl

Edit Mode
+ Shift + Shift Pan Camer: Click Mouse Right+ Hold Shift Rotate Camera: Click Mouse Left+ Hold Shift Zoom: Scroll Wheel + or -

R

Rotate Gizmo Transform Gizmo Scale Gizmo

W E

9.7 Appropriate Objects

Edit Mode

210 - Appropriate Objects

Appropriate Objects - 211

Fig. 9.11 Functions: In-Game Demonstration

Spawning Choose Between Physics Based And Static Objects Option 1: Disable Gravity Turn off gravity and spawn objects that have no mass. Option 2: Magnet Turn on magnets to spawn objects with a magnet pull. (Future Version) Option 3: Bounce (Future Version) Option 4: Wind (Future Version) Option 4: Water (Future Version) Option 4: Souffle Material Applying Texture

WATCH

Functions

212

213

Fig. 9.12 Still from Appropriate Objects II: Gravity Off

Gravity Off

214 - Appropriate Objects

Appropriate Objects - 215

Fig. 9.13 Appropriate Objects: Tutorial Series 1 (Rules)

PLAY THE ARCHITECT - democratizing the autonomy, identity, and anonymity afforded to the  architect through role-playing.

To play the architect you have to... 1. create something in 8* minutes or less. 2. Spawn a selection of objects 3. Edit them to make anything you want 4. Export and distribute as an .obj while or after you're finished playing.

WATCH

Demo

216

217

Fig. 9.14 Appropriate Objects: Exports (By the Author)

Appropriate Objects

218 - Appropriate Objects

Appropriate Objects - 219

Fig. .15 Appropriate Architecture I

9.8 Appropriate Architecture (From the Authors Friends and Family)

Outcomes are the appropriate objects becoming appropriated - by friends, family and strangers. This software democratizes the agency of the architect to anyone willing to play the role, by form making and exporting - they own the shapes they generate and they become theirs - through a process of appropriate form creation. The manipulation, simulations and augmentations are the process of design making - and are choices on the part of the user playing the architect. Where they can either relinquish or take over control making spontaneity, randomness, chaos, and the expected autonomous.

220

221

Fig. 9.16 Appropriate Architecture II

222

223

Fig. 9.17 Appropriate Architecture III

Fig. 9.18 Appropriate Architecture IV

224 - Appropriate Objects

Appropriate Objects - 225

Fig. 9.19 Still from Appropriate Objects III: Applying Texture

Applying Texture

226

227

Fig. 9.20 Appropriate Architecture V

Fig. 9.21 SAppropriate Architecture VI

228

229

Fig. 9.22 Still from Appropriate Objects IV: Select Objects

Fig. 9.23 Still from Appropriate Objects V: Select Objects

Select Objects

Export

230 - Appropriate Objects

Appropriate Objects - 231

9.9 Device, Identity, Appropriation, Autonomy, Anonymity

I, someone who grew up dismantling everything negotiate an interest in identity and software - that there exists overlaps between architect and tool.

the code and creations that are produced out of these tools by the architect. The minority architect should make platforms not foundations - spaces to build with appropriate objects for anonymous occupants to own and consume in their own moral economies.

I began to wonder what I had obtained as I reached the end of this thesis - a sense of place in the room of twenty two. This work started with a particular interest in the intersection of technology and identity - but has since evolved into a deeper question of what it means to assume the role of an architect as a minority. To suddenly realize that the young black architect does not exist as a public image of the architect suggested a need to represent - not only what that means in this profession - but what it affords other minorities pursuing this career. For me, it required telling a story - a way to understand identities through narrative and domestic devices - towards my conclusion, they became the subject that I want others to appropriate. I hope to see more personal narratives - not ones about architecture, but about the architect - because they are valid and non-existent for many architects. That

Architects would rather avoid appropriation through anonymity - but here, appropriation sits at the very core of what gives the minority architect agency while reinforcing identities that are not anonymous (and are instead made present.) That this is a way to exist as an architect who navigates a multiplicity of identities while operating as the minority. Taking ownership through appropriation of the appropriate.

These tools will be open to public domain on a separate platform - like this thesis, it is here for others to take, learn, circulate and appropriate towards their own interest. Wrapped in this process will be the circulation of tools created during this research, such that they can be stolen and owned in a moral economy of individuals - where sharing, re-creating and modifying become the building up of an identity to be recognized within

232 - Appropriate Objects

Appropriate Territories: A Platform for Locating Appropriate Objects Platforms not Foundations Domains:

Appropriate Objects - 233

Fig. 9.24 Public Platform to Locate Appropriate Objects Fig. 9.25 QR Code to Appropriate Objects: Software to Take: https://drive.google.com/open?id=1hxkODnTvIx6NJe3PRl8bEWBu7PglMgOa

Appropriate Platform

Appropriate Objects Link

234 - Appropriate Objects

Appropriate Objects - 235

Fig. 9.26 Trinity Bellwoods Park - Locating Appropriate Objects.

236 - Appropriate Objects

Appropriate Objects - 237

9.10 Conclusions & Beginnings

the scope - the barrier to entry - into a profession that predicates itself largely on the recognition of the

their feedback and support - thank you John Cirka and Vince Hui. This work is important but very unorthodox in its nature and came without any known directions or variables - everything was instinctive - "impulses, wants, needs etc." (like the id). But just showing up was one of the key elements to keep going - to discuss and have a discourse even if it came at the very end. So, thank you, Arthur Wrigglesworth, my family, friends who appropriated objects and acted as beta testers, and those who are genuinely interested - thank you.

The room of twenty two is going to be a constant ratio throughout my entire effort to reinforce my place in an environment that is not build for me. So it will require recognizing this - for as long as I work in this profession - it may always be a 1:22. I am however still curious, and eager to learn.

ego and the white male figure (the Howard Roarks). It changes, depending on the culture you've grown into and out of - the media that you get exposed to - the identities that form through domesticity and media consumption. This however, has to change and comes as an opportunity for me - I am not ending this research but beginning to see where it can take me, as

To look around and still find the absence of myself in others - to hopefully generate a space that is comprised of indifference - to relate as architects not architecture. Collaboration through the process of cultures co-mingling with each other - through the circulation of media content and moral economies outside the domestic sphere. This is the only way to create. And to find - identity - at least for the young black male - that borrowing is a key component to a culture that exists through appropriation. It changes the meaning of the classical architect and broadens

it will always be a constant reminder that I am actively (inadvertently) reinforcing.

Thank you to everyone who has been apart of this, it has opened my understanding to what it means to work in a profession and industry - and to realize myself in relation to a larger picture. It is not without the help from my committee and supervisor - who constantly (blindly) believed in the directions I kept taking - to finally find a conclusion in the midst of uncertainty. But it could not have happened without

238 - Augmented Virtual Reality

Augmented Virtual Reality - 239

APPENDIX
Section Three
CHAPTER 6: Egos in Space "A Virtual Reality Baptism will Strengthen Oregon Man's Faith"



The process taken by a devout Christian seeking a deeper connection with his faith and something

higher than himself will be conducted in a virtual swimming pool. Strengthening connection with his own beliefs, Leophold will become born again, as a baptized Christian - abandoning past lives and sin. Traditionally speaking, a baptism would take place in a lake or body of water; Leopold is instead adamant to be within his own rural home in Amity, simulating in his house the virtual body of water within AltSpace. He will not leave his house physically; however his participation in virtual reality will produce an alternate sense of self and faith. VR and spirituality has provided Leopold an opportunity to virtualize the experience of attending church, where it is possible to question the extent and limits of reaching others. As Leopold reflects on his past, he makes clear of the difficulties he's had as a recovering addict, and goes on to explain his use of 3D modelling as an outlet used throughout his recovery. In 2015, he created an app on the google play store called VR church, where he would then go on to discover a small number of other Christian enthusiasts with a particular interest in creating virtualized religious territories. During the month of May 2017, Leohold and two other me; Alistair de B Clarkson, and D.J. Soto created VR church, where they gathered every week in VR to host their service publicly online. According to the author, half of the participants in attendance identify as atheist or agnostic. In order to communicate with attendees you must also wear an Oculus headset, making intimacy and anonymity highly juxtaposed. You are talking to people, hearing their voice and because "your identity is hidden, it's easier to open up and have candid conversations - be they about faith, spirituality, addiction ..." Opening up requires a tearing down of ones own personal walls, but in virtual reality the device can do this for you.

Virtual reality is very much about how we understand our identit[ies]y, be it racial, cultural, class based, or systemic. All elements comprising what it means to be yourself are a collection of internal and external components mixing and dissolving into a label or image that can be recalled or recognized by others - like a command system. We produce indexes of identities out of friends and family, or even strangers who recognize and generate your personal sense of self. Or concerning an Oregon man, otherness is generated through fictional representations of people, where individuality is emulated through virtual avatars. Represented on screen, to be seen as the creations they assume and occupy. The question however, is whether or not this sense of self can be transformed and reborn within a virtual domain. As one of the first people get ready to use virtual reality as a tool to be baptize in their digital counterpart (avatar), it will be a questionable leap in faith and communities conducting religious services in virtual reality. Like any other Sunday, Brian Leopold will get ready to participate in a VR Church he helped start. The service runs for an hour long in a proprietary social media landscape created by AltSpace. There is no physical church, attendees gather on this platform in communion and prayer, a Pastors avatar leads service. A floating, legless bot possessing hands and a head that appears unattached but connected. It is stylized and obvious in its representation of users, despite no obvious people (in the traditional sense of the word), VR church manages to seat 40 avatars in virtual pews. Each user is allowed to express themselves through emojis of devotion and appreciation.

240 - Appropriate Architects

Appropriate Architects - 241



On May 20th, 2018, Leophold was baptized in VR's altSpace with 40 attendees - a small news agency

"Behind the Scenes of Tori Black's Virtual Reality Porn Debut"

then published the story online covering the event. The story has since received 30 comments and 350 shares and has had no real impact in or around religious organizations outside virtual reality. However, church goers who attend in AltSpace see it as impactful and necessary. Since reading this article, I have began to wonder how the experience of religions and spiritual practices go? Considering the inherent structure embedded in practicing a faith - acts and rituals are done a certain way for specific reasons.

At the start of 2016 a small company by the name of Holodexxx gathered to work in a little abandoned building just North of Toronto. A small group of engineers collaborated with a few well known adult entertainer, all them working to digitally construct a copy of the models likeness in all its totality. Tori Black, 27, aimed to retain herself in a frozen artifice of data, to be seen and accessed to do anything one might expect from an adult entertainer. In the article, Black exposes parts of her vulva in addition to generating an assortment of indexed expressions and poses that can be used to properly animate her digital behavioural counterparts. All that existed between Black and



Church is on Sunday, we break bread and then drink the body of Christ (if you grew up in pentecostal church

eager engineers was a dainty white cloth - Black on the other hand felt comfortable naked in a room full of cameras; 113 to be exact, If you include the camera recording the process. The remaining had to be set up in a circular array, with all cameras pointed inward at varying angles. All cameras needed to be supported by a jig in the shape of a rectangular prism. Out of these 112 images would be the creation of a 360 degree image that could piece together a digital mesh of Black's body in its static positions. The mesh can be used to create her virtual avatar - used in Holodexxx's video game of lived out fantasies.

as I did), stand during prayer, close your eyes in respect. Virtual reality comes at the expense of respecting the faith you believe in, how do you negotiate the two? Does virtual reality take participants closer or further from their beliefs, does it even change anything? Perhaps not, however, steps are being taken towards an ability to transform oneself within a virtual domain. Where past and present forms of identities can shift between counterparts and extensions that retain both activities - whether they be virtual or physical. Depending on how Leophold see's his actions, who knows? The extension is fascinating nonetheless, and brings to light a quite polar article that opposes Christianity - one that deals with the theme of ethics while paralleling the recurring theme of identity. The context however is not sacred but salacious, and attends to adult entertainers seeking their own immortality in the scanning and digitization of their likeness.



Her avatar generates a new utility out of her ability to practice and participate in sexual acts of desire,

where Blacks body can take on a new income by monetizing on digital platforms that make it easy to interact with digital formats of 3D objects. The commodity is the physical representation of her likeness and does not require work after being scanned, as the value of likeness is used in exchanging and circulating digital representation as a tool for profit. Blacks likeness is sold such that her actions and behaviour can be consumed between anyone who desires them. How and when, is determined by the consumer and engineers hiding behind the curtain, as the rules have

242 - Appropriate Architects

Appropriate Architects - 243

yet to fully be established in addition to protecting and securing the data as a private object in the virtual realm. As it operates today, Blacks body is processed and programmed into a video game designed to let players use two controllers that allow her performance in game. The small team comprises three men, Morgan Young, Craig Alguire, and Chris Abell, quitting their job to make VR porn full time, financing themselves through an additional service of letting anyone produce their own scans of themselves for non-porn commercial projects.



Because it is their choice, it is similarly a liberty taken up by them in what is an industry driven by young

adult males. As for exploring sexuality, avatars can be a tool to assume the role of those scanned or the option to simply choose how you are represented. Identity is very fluid in this framework, gender, race, culture and self can be deconstructed and reconstructed into virtually anything, "you like lizards? and you're a big lizard, And I'm a big ice cream cone." It is not necessarily the case that entertainment received in the form of digital representations of adult actresses will be the sole source of consumption. It could be the animations, gestures and expressions of



The job mainly asks them to direct women on how they want their partner to climax, orienting the game

their bodies, displaced onto other less animate forms that appeal to those seeking intimate connections with each other. (see motion capture) Young goes on to argue how games can be a test bed for those who need a safe virtual environment before trying something for themselves. Or how those experiencing sexual blocks or long distance relationships, can take to games as a means of activating new dimensions of connection or quite simply trying out sexual taboos for themselves.

to what is already a predominately male industry of consumption. However, scans to this point are of straightsized women of varying racial backgrounds that don't stray away from the classic porn performer shape. This issue is mitigated by the ability to augment the scanned meshes - however this does create undesired artifacts and demonstrates how diversity is not seen as a priority. With only one man scanned, and future plans to include entertainment for those who desire plus sized, queer or transsexual people. If detail is important then representing all bodies goes hand in hand with selections of genders, orientations, races and cultural diversities. There is possible to select and choose the types of bodies and identities you wish to interact with.



On the topic of afterlife, these virtual avatars are pushing the life cycle of our existing limits, the

expectancy of knowing that your time is limited. Virtual avatars are not afforded these limits and can in essence be used for generations and generations to come, especially after their contract with Holodexxx is up. The utility either



For those who have been scanned, it may seem like a loss in identity, giving up representations of

becomes useless, and as virtual objects stored on computers they will most likely ensue a wasteland of avatars collecting in a folder. There are no real answers to this problem, however there is no afterlife for these artificial counterparts at this moment in time, and they will most likely be circulated endlessly like any other digital media, like a song or movie. Black sees no issue with what her avatar does or what people do with it, because she does not recognize them as herself, according to Black there is no connection. And boundaries or sexual acts that she would

themselves to be used as an asset for economical flows of digital consumption. However, one engineer sees this working to gain agency over their identity and argues that a digital counterpart can be used as a powerful tool in how we explore sexuality.

244 - Appropriate Architects

Appropriate Architects - 245

otherwise not do in person can happily happen in a virtual context of what a consumer desires, it's simply not happening to her. Raising questions of consent, if you're uncomfortable with the idea that you will be giving up the choice to say yes or no to what happens to your virtual counterpart then you simply shouldn't make one.

the intimacy, not detract from, intimacy between people ... He sees VR as an extension of social media." (Article) however, for those without a partner, and those longing for a sense of intimacy can resort to the alternative means of a virtual partner in that it is



On ethics of consent, there are none. And this is simply due to unimplemented rules that the engineers



nothing more than an option for people to now chose from. In many ways; this notion of a meta verse of

have chosen not to produce for scans of adult entertainers like Black. This is also supplanted by the fact that what they are doing in many ways already exists in pornographic magazines, photos or dolls. Adult entertainers treat toys as extensions of their brand, scanning themselves to replicate physical models of their genitalia. The policing aspects is ultimately left on the community of those eager to participate - a form of self-policing . Sonya Barnett, and feminist activists claims the "onus is put on the person who wants to prohibit the use of their image."(article) Arguing restrictions is similar to a public ban on your image which is simply not possible. However, there have been many strides made in the protection of individuals who are attacked through their image or likeness coupled with alternate representations of themselves; ones that are false. However, the article makes no recognition of this and understands that the answers remain unclear, failing to see how powerful the ethics of consent can get. I will try to talk more on this at a later point, the interviewee however states her nervousness surrounding human intimacy, and goes on to call herself a semi-luddite. Sarah Ratchford, the author, slowly beginning to realize how existing platforms of virtual communication technologies already contain within them the fears she hopes not to see in Western society. Applications like a Skype for example, enable the ability to see and hear others, whereas virtual reality lets someone step into their space. Forcing Ratchford to wonder, what other technologies have paved the way for this leap, Yonge explains how cell phones, the internet, and computers have all been put in place to "enhance

users engaging in secluded acts of sexual desire have occurred for decades already, and the reimagining of a multiplayer experience, with a persistent online universe has been paved by games like Ultima Online, Second Life 1 & 2, designed specifically for emergent sex. VR is an additional faucet in the stream of consumption for those seeking immediate desire within a virtual realm.



The article ends on the topic of VR breaking into public use, spaces outside of the home that allow you

to step in and out of virtual worlds on the fly. Before Ratchford can conclude her final thoughts she is put at ease once she is told that virtual reality is really nothing more than a tool to leverage human connectivity and that this is exactly what technology has done for a very long time. The company began in 2015 and has since writing this (2018) has made very little progress in their efforts to diversify their digitally modelled assets. There is however a small disclaimer on their front page website asserting their plans to "be back soon!"

"Phones for Urns"



246 - Appropriate Architects

Section Four
CHAPTER 8: Appropriate Objects How to Steel Familiar Objects

Panoramic photography and photogrammetry techniques utilize the raster image of a photograph as a means for building or stitching geometric forms, and was for me, the only process that allows for genuinely planar objects and geometry that can be replicated on a digital screen. In that sense, the raster images can replicate objects through multiple surfaces that are derived and digitally constructed through complex algorithms. By capturing images on
110

STEP 1: PICK A ROOM

STEP 2: EMPTY ROOM

STEP 3: CAMERA SET-UP

0

o

70 o
60 o

something as basic as a cell-phone (panoramas or single photographs) there, contains the ability to morph and
14 0o

100

90o

o

construct digital representations of space and geometry. To the degree of highly hyper-realistic accuracy, depending
160 o

13

0

o

12

80 o

o

50 o

40

o

on the quality of the image. What I find most interesting from this process, is the ability to digitize an immediate surrounding, the furniture, the mistakes, the details, things like the scratches and inconsistencies that are typically perceived by a subject. To then, capture and build out these inconsistencies through a flattened perception without depth, this process of constructing is inherently planar, and can generate ways for a subject to effectively occupy representation of the plane through an image (see fig. 4.5 - 4.8). The process of how this is done, is relatively simple, all you will need is a camera (preferably with a large depth of field), the camera I used had 63.65 degrees of visibility, a tri-pod, a memory card for storage and photo scanning software.

Normal maps can be used to determine proper lighting behaviours based on the nature of the diffuse map. Displacement maps can be used to determine height levels of the material and are used in conjunction with the 3d mesh to simulate parallaxes based on white, black and gradients of grey that register as 1 or 0. Diffuse maps are

Guide
STEP 1 & 2: To begin, I needed to empty the contents of the room, all the furniture and belongings were cleared and stored in a hallway not too far away. [Aside] i.e If you can control the amount of direct light entering the space (for instance, the bedroom is north facing) it is less of an issue. However it is better to have diffused or artificial lighting such that you can control levels of texture and materiality. STEP 3: Setting up a camera on the tri-pod (optional); the placement of both needs to be at the centre of the room, or within

22

0

o

15
33

0o
21 0
o

30

o

20

o

10o

* *

*

200

170 o
190
180o
o

0o/360o

o

350 o
340 o

*

0o

32

0o

23 0o
24 o 0
30
250 o
31 0
o

0

o

290

STEP 4: 360 PANORAMA

260 o

280

270o

o

o

STEP 5: HIDDEN DETAILS

STEP 6: FURNITURE CAPTURE

the limits of the camera's focal distance. STEP 4 & 5: Now, circulate the room in order to find and detail any scratches or anomalies that might not have been captured. Also taking references for textures that can later be digitally reconstructed. STEP 5: Placing objects and furniture back into their native position is the best way to reference true shadows and textures created by the interior context, except now they are isolated for accessing all angles..

248 - Appropriate Architects

Appropriate Architects - 249

outputs of colour and texture as captured by the raster image, all maps can be overlaid onto the mesh to produce a photo-realistic version of the object in question. These maps can also be edited and rearranged in ways that directly affect the outputted mesh, working with the raster image in ways that alter the 3-dimensional mesh counterparts.

250 - Augmented Virtual Reality

Augmented Virtual Reality - 251

Bibliography & Notes
Introduction
1. See Butler, Edwin et al. Arcade Fire: Modern Man. Sony Music CG, (2010). Spotify.  2. See McLean, William and Titus, Andres. Black Sheep: The Choice is Yours. Universal    Music Enterprises, (1991). Spotify.  3. Greaves, Peter. (2018) "Empowering End Users Through Visualization." CFM & D  (pp. 20-21) Print.  4.

Part One
CHAPTER 1: Identity Breeding Grounds
1. See Eric Hirsch, and Roger Silverstone, Routledge (1992). Consuming Technologies :   Media and Information in Domestic Spaces. (pp. 15)

 

(Greaves Peter, 2018)
Glossary

    

2. A household of transactional systems of economic and social relations based on ascribed  meaning and symbolic value that can be exchanged towards social reproduction within and  outside the household. (for example, music - a song, artist, or album - a child finds and buys  online, once bought, can be taken to school to be accepted by dominant (popular) or niche  social groups; in order to fit in or stand out) 3. (Eric Hirsch & Roger Silverstone, 1992)

1. Cheng, Ian et al. Ian Cheng. (2015) Live Simulations. Leipzig: Spector Books (pp.   129) Print. 2. Cheng, Ian et al. Ian Cheng. (2015) Live Simulations. Leipzig: Spector Books (pp.   117) Print.



4. See Eric Hirsch, and Roger Silverstone, Routledge (1992). Consuming Technologies :   Media and Information in Domestic Spaces "Teenagers will create "a wall   of sound" in their bedrooms with their stereos...(Morely 1986)." (pp. 22)    5.  6. 7. (Eric Hirsch & Roger Silverstone, 1992) (Eric Hirsch & Roger Silverstone, 1992) (Eric Hirsch & Roger Silverstone, 1992)



3. Cheng, Ian et al. Ian Cheng. (2015) Live Simulations. Leipzig: Spector Books (pp.  113) Print.  4. Cheng, Ian et al. Ian Cheng. (2015) Live Simulations. Leipzig: Spector Books (pp.   132) Print.   5. Cheng, Ian et al. Ian Cheng. (2015) Live Simulations. Leipzig: Spector Books (pp.   113) Print.




8. For example, headphones used during aviation flights during WW1, or see Patent 1 referring  to the popularized telephone.





6. Cheng, Ian et al. Ian Cheng. (2015) Live Simulations. Leipzig: Spector Books. Print.  7. Cheng, Ian et al. Ian Cheng. (2015) Live Simulations. Leipzig: Spector Books (pp.   132) Print. 8. Cheng, Ian et al. Ian Cheng. (2015) Live Simulations. Leipzig: Spector Books (pp.   111) Print.

9. Home owners and communities tired of communicating face to face, were suddenly given   the opportunity to alleviate the convention and cultural normality of uninvitedly walking to a   neighbours home, hoping someone would be there, and anxiously waiting to be let in to chat.   As the neighbour, you would be left hoping you've stocked your kitchen with snacks and a drink   for your unanticipated guest (Doing this today would be ludicrous without calling beforehand.)  10. It is easier to instead focus on the original electric colour television (RCA VICTOR CT-100),   as the context better reflects the standards more familiar today. This however does not change   mid century thinking generated by the original black & white television set. I will also add, that 

252 - Appropriate Architects

Appropriate Architects - 253

   

popularization is related to use patents, inventor related to the source technologies that made these devices work to begin with. The difficulty with finding one inventor are the preceding technologies in addition to other popular device. telephone led to the radio, the radio, the TV  (technology, device, manufacturer, market, network, content, support , demand, ecosystem.)



sharing of new ideas.

 22.  See Kuhn, Thomas S (2015). The Structure Of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago, Ill.:   The University of Chicago Press.

 11.  Allen, B (2012, February 26) 15 FPS vs. 30 FPS vs. 60 FPS. Retrieved from https:// boallen.com/fps-compare.html  12.  See Ule, G. Maxwell (1954). Recommended Standards For Radio And Television   Program Audience Size Measurements. New York, NY: Advertising Re search Foundation.  13.  See Eric Hirsch, and Roger Silverstone, Routledge (1992). Consuming Technologies :   Media and Information in Domestic Spaces. (pp. 35)  14.  Etal, Biard J.R (1966). Light-emitting diode. Retrieved from http://www.freepatent sonline.com/3293513.pdf  15.  (1972). Mag Review "Television: collected the world into a global village and locked   each of the villages in cells."  16.  See Newman, Michael Z. (2017) Atari Age: The Emergence Of Video. [S.l.]: MIT Press, Print. (pp. 62)   17. Predominately young male and hobbyist remained grounded within social life of peer groups  and could be carried over into both public and private home based rituals of game playing.




23. Meaning that we ascribe as the user interfacing the tool, text, images, and functions that are  essentially either 1 or 0.

 24.  See Eric Hirsch, and Roger Silverstone, Routledge (1992). Consuming Technologies :   Media and Information in Domestic Spaces. (pp. 112)




25. The location of the device echos the formality of first phones in entry hall, radio and then TV  in living room...

 26.  See Ichbiah, Daniel (2005). Robots: From Science Fiction to Technological   Revolution. Harry N. Abrams. (pp. 201)  27.  (Ichbiah Daniel, 2005)

 28.  See Ichbiah, Daniel (2005). Robots: From Science Fiction to Technological   Revolution. Harry N. Abrams. (pp. 159)


              

 18.  See Swaine, Michael, and Paul Freiberger (2014). Fire in the Valley: The Birth and   Death of the Personal Computer. The Pragmatic Bookshelf. (pp. 103)   19. They were all in the mainframe computer business but identified a market for "desktop" "personal" computers (PC)

29. Such as the segmentation and separation of rooms, as opposed to pre-industrial homes  with single rooms designed to service all programmatic functions at once. `open concept' came  with modernism... v.s. earlier eras when there was a greater social formality of activities in the  home. ie. the kitchen was a separate room from where finished food `appeared' into the dining  room. The modern architecture allowed the kitchen to be open to the informal living spaces  (family room, rec. room, etc. plus eating as part of the kitchen) food prep., clean up became a  social activity. 30. London's 1890s "Steam Age" required that relatively small amounts of power needed to  be delivered to conditions where a "steam prime mover" would be inappropriate - such as in  the case of powering domestic appliances like light switches or washing machines. They needed  instead a system to store power in a way that could be distribute to remote locations. Two  options were give, either use really large commercial applications for electric power or an  alternative technology; hydraulic power distribution - motion from the potential energy of  water under pressure. This required that beneath the city streets that vast hydrostatic energy  transmission systems be built out under main rods and many minor roads. Hydrostatic power  cost 30 percent less to produce than electricity, it was instant, and very silent. In London a 


 

20. This is only one of a whole bunch of small grass roots groups that experimented, explored,  and created machines, often with the potential outcome of commercialization...Texas was  another hotbed for this in the 70s all depended on Micro Processor. 21. By late 1970s and early 1980s the Home-brew Computer Club grew large enough to need  the auditorium at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Centre holding hundreds of members for the 




254 - Appropriate Architects

Appropriate Architects - 255

          

Hydraulic Power Company served 4,500 establishments by 1894, revolutionizing the future  of power transmission through a method other than electricity. No one knew electricity by  contrast has endless potential economies of scale, and can transmit at higher voltages through  AC power, by the 20th Century no one knew that over the course of seventy0five years, would  bring a dependency on mechanical devices that provide domestic services, or that people  would become largely dependent for leisure on television. In a 1976, "Times Diary" the same  London Hydrostatic Power Company survived and went into liquidation, the extensive  Hydrostatic pipework was sold to the Dayville's Ice Cream company for transporting product.  That company also disappeared and sold its assets in 1982 to Mercury Telecommunications,  including way leaves to all major streets of London into every major building." (Eric Hirsch &  Roger Silverstone, 1992)

Part Two
CHAPTER 3: Migrant Flows Across Augmented Borders
 1.  See Text on North America's Cultural Landscape Wei, Li (2009) Ethnoburb: The New  Ethnic Community in Urban America. Indianapolis: Indiana University  Press.  2.  "The Cabinet Papers | Commonwealth Immigration Control And Legislation."   (1962) Retrieved from http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/cabinetpapers/ themes/commonwealth-immigration-control-legislation.htm

 31.  See Eric Hirsch, and Roger Silverstone, Routledge (1992). Consuming Technologies :   Media and "Postcsript" Information in Domestic Spaces. (pp. 215-216) 32. 33. (Eric Hirsch & Roger Silverstone, 1992) (Eric Hirsch & Roger Silverstone, 1992)




3. Leading all the way up to the twenty-first century and beginning at the start of the twentieth  century - altering slightly in a way that is not easily recognizable or fixed.

CHAPTER 2: Another Domestic Revolution
 1.  See Eric Hirsch, and Roger Silverstone, Routledge (1992). Consuming Technologies :   Media and "Postcsript" Information in Domestic Spaces. (pp. 215-216) 2. (Eric Hirsch & Roger Silverstone, 1992)

 4.  Glennie, A. & Chappell, L.(16 June 2010) Jamaica: From Diverse Beginning   to Diaspora in the Developed World. Retrieved from https://www. migrationpolicy.org/article/jamaica-diverse-beginning-diaspora-developed- world 5. 6.  7. (Glennie A. & Chappell L, 2010) (Glennie A. & Chappell L, 2010) (Glennie A. & Chappell L, 2010)

3. 6 degrees of freedom allows for anyone to move in all directions - X,Y, and Z axis' with the  freedom of walking and anywhere  4.  See Nelson, George, and Henry Wright. Tomorrow's House. New York: Simon and   Schuster, 1945. chapter titled, "The Room Without A Name" when he   explains how"Privacy is made possible because there is an "extra room""  (pp. 76)

 8.  See Daily Observer (2004)b. The Jamaica Diaspora conference is just the beginning.   Editorial, June 18, Retrieved from http://www.jamaicaobserver.com/ editorial/html/20040618t000000-0500_%2061408_obs_the_jamaica_ diaspora_conference_is_just_the_beginning.asp  9.  See "Ministry of Justice | Management Information Systems Division." The   Jamaica Independence Act (1962) Retrieved from http://moj.gov.jm/sites/    default/files/laws/Jamaica%20Independence%20Act,%201962.pdf  10.  Ibid.

256 - Appropriate Architects

Appropriate Architects - 257

 11.  See Thomas, Deborah A.(2007) `BLACKNESS ACROSS BORDERS: JAMAICAN   DIASPORAS AND NEW POLITICS OF CITIZENSHIP',Identities,14:1,  (pp.112)   12.  13.  (Deborah A. Thomas, 2007) (Deborah A. Thomas, 2007)  1. 

CHAPTER 4: Markham's Songbird
4.1 On a Neck, On a Spit

(2005) "End of the Line." GTA Wiki. N.p.,http://gta.wikia.com/wiki/End_of_the_Line

 14.  See Thomas, Deborah A.(2007) `BLACKNESS ACROSS BORDERS: JAMAICAN   DIASPORAS AND NEW POLITICS OF CITIZENSHIP',Identities,14:1,   "The ongoing resentment, adoption and adaption by lower-class black  Jamaicans." (pp.122)  15.  See Thomas, Deborah A.(2007) `BLACKNESS ACROSS BORDERS: JAMAICAN   DIASPORAS AND NEW POLITICS OF CITIZENSHIP',Identities,14:1,  (pp.126)  16.  See Thomas, Deborah A.(2007) `BLACKNESS ACROSS BORDERS: JAMAICAN   DIASPORAS AND NEW POLITICS OF CITIZENSHIP',Identities,14:1,  (pp.112) 17.  see Mary Waters; in her study of first and second generation West Indian Migrants in  New York City. Waters, Mary C. (1999) Black Identities: West Indian   Immigrant Dreams and American Realities. Cambridge, MA: Harvard  University Press.  18.  See Daily Observer (2004)b. The Jamaica Diaspora conference is just the beginning.  Editorial, June 18, Retrieved from http://www.jamaicaobserver.com/ editorial/html/20040618t000000-0500_%2061408_obs_the_jamaica_ diaspora_conference_is_just_the_beginning.asp 

 2.  (2008) "Little Jacob." GTA Wiki. N.p., Retrieved from http://gta.wikia.com/wiki/ Little_Jacob


        

3. I would engage in acts of social engineering, hacking my way into password protected  desktops to break sitting our basement (perhaps as a way to challenge our skills as kids, rather  than our parents making attempts to protect us from the perils of online cyberspace).  To oust myself, I would first have to ask permission to use the computer - but would  only ask while my parent would be in the midst of washing dishes. Using the remains of soapy  dish water left on the surface of the keyboard, I would deduce the protected password using the  now soapy keyboard to make out the password. Generating my own sense of agency within a  home that sought to conserve the consumption of online media content. Of corse both parents  were well aware, and passwords would consequently be changed, reinforcing the cycle  of hacking.

 4.  See warnings against domestic consumption Kallis Danny (1998) "Strangers on the   Net" Season 2 Episode 1. Smart Guy Retrieved from http://www.tv.com/ shows/smart-guy/strangers-on-the-net-23434/  5.  see channel (2006) "Machinima." YouTube. N.p., 2018. Retrieved from https://www. youtube.com/user/machinima/about

CHAPTER 5: A Home For Markham's Songbird
1. See Houser, D. Lead Writer to understand racial context & backgrounds, Retrieved  From https://www.google.com/search?q=Dan+Houser 2. Federman, M. (July 23, 2004). What is the Meaning of the Medium is the Message?  Retrieved from http://individual.utoronto.ca/markfederman/article_ mediumisthemessage.htm


 

19. I've made sure to consult with my siblings and parents to ensure the authenticity and quality  of information in addition to having their approval and support towards making their private  lifestyles semi- public.

258 - Appropriate Architects

Appropriate Architects - 259

3. See McLuhan, Marshall. (1964) Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. New  York:McGraw Hill  4. (Marshall McLuhan, 1964)



from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NbT93SoFkrw

 CBS News. (July, 2017) "Digital Doubles: Bringing Actors Back To Life." Retrieved from  https://www.cbsnews.com/news/digital-doubles-bringing-actors-back-to-life/

5. (Marshall McLuhan, 1964) 6. See Thomas, Deborah A.(2007) `BLACKNESS ACROSS BORDERS: JAMAICAN   DIASPORAS AND NEW POLITICS OF CITIZENSHIP',Identities,14:1,  (pp.112)

 lilmiquela. (August 2018). Photo of Digital Personality Star "Drip Drip . Instagram Retrieved  from https://www.instagram.com/lilmiquela/  See Manaugh, Geoff. (2016) "Eminent Domain." HOLO2 2.2: (pp.212-224)


  

7. This is Deborah's biggest Argument in Blackness Across Borders, "lateral borrowing ...  among communities is completely imbricated within hegemonic social, economic and political  relations that make particular cultural and political practices originating" (Deborah 122)  essentially everyone using each other as a means to practice political and cultural production.

 Thies, Justus, et al. (2016) "Face2face: Real-time face capture and reenactment of rgb videos."   Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.   Received from http://niessnerlab.org/papers/2016/1facetoface/thies2016face.pdf --- Cadwalladr, Carole, and Emma Graham-Harrison. (2018) "Revealed: 50 Million Facebook   Profiles Harvested For Cambridge Analytica In Major Data Breach." The Guardian  .https://www.theguardian.com/news/2018/mar/17/cambridge-analytica-facebook-   influence-us-election  Kyle Olszewski, Joseph J. Lim, Shunsuke Saito, and Hao Li. (2016) High-fidelity facial and   speech animation for VR HMDs. ACM Trans. Graph. 35, 6, Article 221 (pp. 1-14)   Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1145/2980179.2980252  Mike Seymour, Chris Evans, and Kim Libreri. (2017) Meet Mike: epic avatars. In ACM   SIGGRAPH 2017 VR Village (SIGGRAPH `17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article   12, 2 pages. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3089269.3089276  Mukhopadhyay D., Shirvanian M., Saxena N. (2015) All Your Voices are Belong to Us: Stealing   Voices to Fool Humans and Machines. In: Pernul G., Y A Ryan P., Weippl E. (eds)   Computer Security -- ESORICS 2015. ESORICS 2015. Lecture Notes in Computer   Science, vol 9327. Springer, Cham Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319- 24177-7_30

Part Three
CHAPTER 6: Enough About Me, What About You?
 1.  (2018) "Consumer Virtual Reality Market Size Worldwide 2016-2021 | Statistic."   Statista. Received from https://www.statista.com/statistics/528779/virtual- reality-market-size- worldwide/  2.  See "Franchising Opportunities (2018) | Ctrl V - Virtual Reality Arcade." Ctrl V. N.p., Web.  3.  Edwards, Phil (2016). "The hippest internet cafe of 1995". Vox. Vox Media, Inc.  Retrieved from https://www.vox.com/2016/8/24/12593214/internet-cafe- history  4.  Brathwaite, Brenda. (2007) Sex In Video Games. Boston, Ma: Charles River Media, Print. (pp. 205)



Aiden (2017). Furious 7 VFX - Weta Digital Enabled Paul'S Legacy To Live On Retrieved 



Sato, Kazuki, Takashi Nose, and Akinori Ito. (2017) "HMM-Based Photo-Realistic Talking 

260 - Appropriate Architects

Appropriate Architects - 261

 Face Synthesis Using Facial Expression Parameter Mapping With Deep Neural   Networks." Journal of Computer and Communications 05.10 (pp. 50-65) Retrieved  from https://arxiv.org/pdf/1612.00523v1.pdf  Sun, Qi et al. "Towards Virtual Reality Infinite Walking." ACM Transactions on Graphics 37.4    (2018): 1-13. Web. Retrieved from http://research.nvidia.com/sites/default/files/ pubs/2018-08_Towards-Virtual-Reality/paper_0.pdf

CHAPTER 7: Afterlife
 1. Behind the Scenes of Tori Black's Virtual Reality. Retrieved from https://www.vice.com/  en_ca/article/3bjwpy/behind-the-scenes-of-tori-blacks-virtual-reality-porn-debut  2. iVeneration to Offer Virtual Headstones in VR to Honor Deceased Loved Ones Retrieved   from http://virtualrealitysummit.com/news/iveneration-to-offer-virtual-headstones-in-vr-to-  honor-deceased-lovedones/42962/  3. Home for the Virtual Afterlife Retrieved from http://www.commonaccounts.online  4. Home for the Virtual Afterlife Retrieved from http://www.commonaccounts.online  5. Psychedelics and Virtual Reality Make a Trendy but Illegal Therapy Retrieved from https://  www.inverse.com/article/33173-virtual-reality-psychedelic-drugs  6. iVeneration to Offer Virtual Headstones in VR to Honor Deceased Loved Ones Retrieved   from http://virtualrealitysummit.com/news/iveneration-to-offer-virtual-headstones-in-vr-to-  honor-deceased-lovedones/42962/  7. Franchising Opportunities (2018) | Ctrl V - Virtual Reality Arcade Retrieved from https://  www.ctrlv.ca/franchising/  8. Experience Virtual Reality (2018) | Ctrl V - Virtual Reality Arcade Retrieved from https://  www.ctrlv.ca/franchising/  9. Behind the Scenes of Tori Black's Virtual Reality. Retrieved from https://www.vice.com/  en_ca/article/3bjwpy/behind-the-scenes-of-tori-blacks-virtual-reality-porn-debut  10. We create the most realistic artificial voices in the world Retrieved from https://lyrebird.ai  11. Virtual Reality Porn. Retrieved from https://www.pornhub.com/insights/virtu al-reality  12. Behind the Scenes of Tori Black's Virtual Reality. Retrieved from https://www.vice.com/  en_ca/article/3bjwpy/behind-the-scenes-of-tori-blacks-virtual-reality-porn-debut  13. Behind the Scenes of Tori Black's Virtual Reality. Retrieved from https://www.vice.com/  en_ca/article/3bjwpy/behind-the-scenes-of-tori-blacks-virtual-reality-porn-debut  14. Virtual Reality Porn. Retrieved from https://www.pornhub.com/insights/virtual-reality

          

15. Behind the Scenes of Tori Black's Virtual Reality. Retrieved from https://www.vice.com/ en_ca/article/3bjwpy/behind-the-scenes-of-tori-blacks-virtual-reality-porn-debut 16. Behind the Scenes of Tori Black's Virtual Reality. Retrieved from https://www.vice.com/ en_ca/article/3bjwpy/behind-the-scenes-of-tori-blacks-virtual-reality-porn-debut 17. Oculus Overview, Retrieved from https://www.oculus.com/rift/#oui-csl-rift-games=mages- tale 18. Virtual Reality Porn. Retrieved from https://www.pornhub.com/insights/virtual-reality 19. Behind the Scenes of Tori Black's Virtual Reality. Retrieved from https://www.vice.com/ en_ca/article/3bjwpy/behind-the-scenes-of-tori-blacks-virtual-reality-porn-debut 20. iVeneration to Offer Virtual Headstones in VR to Honor Deceased Loved Ones Retrieved  from http://virtualrealitysummit.com/news/iveneration-to-offer-virtual-headstones-in-vr-to- honor-deceased-lovedones/42962/

CHAPTER 8: Avatar Clubs
                       1. Ctrl V - Virtual Reality Arcade Retrieved from https://www.ctrlv.ca/franchising/ 2. Behind the Scenes of Tori Black's Virtual Reality. Retrieved from https://www.vice.com/ en_ca/article/3bjwpy/behind-the-scenes-of-tori-blacks-virtual-reality-porn-debut 3. VRPLayin Pricing Experience VR starting at only $29, Retrieved from https://vrplayin.ca/ pricing 4. VRPLayin Rewards Program Play and Save, Retrieved from https://vrplayin.ca/rewards- program 5. VRPLayin Pricing Experience VR starting at only $29, Retrieved from https://vrplayin.ca/ pricing 6. Making a Killing in Virtual Real Estate. Retrieved from https://www.bloomberg.com/news/ articles/2018-06-12/making-a-killing-in-virtual-real-estate 7. @_ikeuchi Retrieved from https://www.instagram.com/p/Bl7dJkilRm7/?taken-by=_ikeuchi 8. Behind the Scenes of Tori Black's Virtual Reality. Retrieved from https://www.vice.com/ en_ca/article/3bjwpy/behind-the-scenes-of-tori-blacks-virtual-reality-porn-debut 9. This Porn Company Wants to Use Virtual Reality to Keep You Alive Forever. Retrieved from  https://www.esquire.com/lifestyle/sex/a19745403/virtual-reality-porn-camasutra-technology/ 10. This Porn Company Wants to Use Virtual Reality to Keep You Alive Forever. Retrieved  from https://www.esquire.com/lifestyle/sex/a19745403/virtual-reality-porn-camasutra- technology/ 11. A virtual reality baptism will strengthen Oregon man's faith. Retrieved from https://www. oregonlive.com/pacific-northwest-news/index.sf/2018/05/virtual_reality_church_co-foun.html 12. The vr experience `lube river' is undoing the stigma around sex toys. Retrieved from 

262 - Appropriate Architects

Appropriate Architects - 263

         

https://i-d.vice.com/en_us/article/mbk3vp/the-vr-experience-lube-river-is-undoing-the-stigma- around-sex-toys 13. A virtual reality baptism will strengthen Oregon man's faith. Retrieved from https://www. oregonlive.com/pacific-northwest-news/index.sf/2018/05/virtual_reality_church_co-foun.html 14. VRPLayin Experiences, Retrieved from https://vrplayin.ca/ 15. I tried a sex-themed virtual reality experience and here's what happened. Retrieved from  https://torontosun.com/life/sex-files/i-tried-a-sex-themed-virtual-reality-experience-and-heres- what-happened 16. A virtual reality baptism will strengthen Oregon man's faith. Retrieved from https://www. oregonlive.com/pacific-northwest-news/index.sf/2018/05/virtual_reality_church_co-foun.html

Part Four

CHAPTER 9: Appropriate Objects
 1.  dMA Hannover. (2018) Software Fictions - Damjan Jovanovic (English). Web   2.  Cheng, Ian et al. Ian Cheng. (2015) Live Simulations. Leipzig: Spector Books (pp.  132) Print.  3.  Jovanovic, Damjan. (2018) "Damjan Jovanovic." Dmjn.net. N.p. Web

