Mimi Cepic | Department of Architectural Science Terri Peters | Supervisor

Qualitative Assessment of Worker Productivity and Experience in Office Environments
Context
 This project is a study on the building impact of occupant's productivity and wellbeing in an office environment. Presented through an office case study, the work takes part of a larger pre- and post-move study carried out over the course of a year. The study collects, analyses, and compares numerous sources of data in a pre- and post-move study: 1) environmental data using desk sensors 2) online qualitative surveys of user comfort relative to location in the office 3) an architectural assessment of the spaces in the office. The collection of both pre- and post-move data is intended to allow findings to be compared to understand the impacts of environmental design on worker productivity and building performance and address the challenges in conducting successful pre- and post-move assessments.
a. b. Old Office New Office Communal Zone Collaborative Zone

N

a.

was on FLOOR 24 157 Desks | Area = 1660 m²

b.

FLOOR 8 144 Desks | Area = 1520 m²

FLOOR 9 66 Desks | Area = 1520 m²

FLOOR 10 124 Desks | Area = 1520 m²

a. Old Office b. New Office

N

Connection to Post-Occupancy Evaluations  Post Occupancy Evaluations (POEs) are important tools to understand various aspects of how a building performs including how it meets the functional requirements, social and psychological performance and visual quality and satisfaction1. The issue today, is that although POEs are being completed more frequently, very few are published. As each project varies in space, typology, etc., it creates challenges in formulating an overall standard for POEs. However, this enables the customization of criteria when developing an independent POE for a building.
1 Preiser W.F.E and Schramm, U. (1997) "Building Performance Evaluation" in Watson D et al (Eds) Time Saver Standards, 7th ed. McGraw-Will, New York, NY.

Architectural Assessment  Based on a pre-determined criteria, the architectural assessment consisted of a thorough 3-hour walkthrough and documentation of the old and new office. Factors being observed included: thermal comfort, natural and artificial light, noise, layout, privacy, individual and group workspaces, integration of departments, degree of personalization, plants, sizes of workspaces, clutter, storage, use of blinds and views to understand the occupants' office environment and how all these factors impact their production and mental health.

Rosedale Park

Harold Town Park

Asquith Park

a a. Old Office b

b. New Office

Methodology
Data Collection  When studying the relationship between occupant experience and building performance, it is imperative to collect both quantitative and qualitative data. Quantitative data is typically more measurable through the use of various building technologies. In this case,6 sensors were built to measure colour quality, light, temperature, humidity, pressure, CO2, air quality, sound and proximity. The sensors were placed throughout each office for months at a time while recording numbers on the SD cards. Collecting qualitative data can be more challenging. An online occupant survey was formulated to gain insights into how people working in the offices rate their comfort and productivity based on their location in the space.
a. Old Office b. New Office Venetian Blinds Solid Partitions Some desks have extra task lighting Typical Personalization Each employee is given a set of headphones Most desk had drinks and snacks Roller Shades Window desks tend to be more personalized Dark tinted glass partitions Office has a total of 65 plants on desks

a.

b.

Lockers for Storage

Window desks have more space of supplies

Office has a total of 18 sweaters left on chairs

Office has a total of 19 plants on desks

Hydraulic desks allow for employees to work standing if preferred

Cushioned lockers on wheels, enabling collaborative desk discussions

Office has a total of 42 sweaters left on chairs

Level of clutter of desks varies between departments

Colour Spectrum

Temp, Humidity, CO2, Pressure

Daylight

Sound

Air Quality

Discussion
 Various challenges arose from the comparison of the two spaces because very little between the offices was directly comparable. The new office expanded from one to three floors, more than doubling the number of departments. The new office moved to a new location, receiving different views and a new overall layout. The space features coloured themes on each floor, more social and communal spaces, increased mobility and individual desks that were on hydraulics to enable standing while working. The office provides a variety of collaborative zones, encouraging the occupants to move around.

Conclusion
 In doing this project, many challenges arose which provided a strong insight on how to better design these types of assessments. When collecting data, the placement of the sensors, along with their quality performance is imperative. Furthermore, developing as many comparable criteria as possible to ensure the pre- and post-move evaluations can be understood in parallel. The architectural assessment was a strong method for collecting qualitative data which normally is not considered. It helped fill the gaps between the data from the sensors and the results from the occupant survey.

SD Card

Proximity

Arduino

This summer research was supported by the Dean's Research Fund Undergraduate Research Experience (DRF-URE) Award. The results of this summer work have been submitted for peer-review to the Passive and Low Energy Architecture (PLEA) 2020 conference, a leading international conference in sustainable architecture.

