The University Medical Centre: A student's perspective
Gabrielle Hubert1, Cameron Pow2, Sandra Tullio-Pow1
1 School of Fashion, Ryerson University 2 Life Sciences, Queen's Univeristy Results
Content analysis The content analysis allowed us to identify communication points on the Medical Centre's website. We noted that directions to find the Medical Centre were insufficient. Other communication touch points including social media, student guides, and posters did not provide sufficient information about the Medical Centre, as illustrated in Figure 4. Finally, information provided during special events like orientation did not mention the Medical Centre.
Category Websites Medical Centre Information Directions Room number and building Address of the university Appointments Mission statement and staff Policies Health insurance Lab and test results Emergencies Links for other websites Operating hours and phone number University, Student Life Mention the Medical Centre and provide a link to the website Residence Mention the Medical Centre Student Union No mention of the Medical Centre Social Media Twitter, Facebook Information about the Medical Centre (how to book an appointment) and provide a link to the website Instagram No mention of the Medical Centre YouTube One video (out of 462) about the Medical Center (information about the medical services) Student Guides University (Resources Information about the Medical page) Centre (who it is for, services provided, appointments) and provide a link to the website One school (out of nine) Information about the Medical Centre (services, phone number) and provide a link to the website Two schools (out of Information about the Medical nine) Centre (services) and provide a link to the website Signage & Posters Informative posters Health promotion and resources Events University events No mention of the Medical website, Facebook Centre Figure 4. The main findings from the content analysis

Context
Over 515,000 students attended Ontario Universities in 2015/16, including 60,000 international students from abroad (https://ontario universityes.ca/resources/data/ numbers). First-year students who are away from home find themselves needing a new primary care physician. While a few researchers have examined student health care within the university setting in regard to mental health (Evans, 1999), sexual health (Habel et al., 2018)., and health promotion (Griebler et al., 2017), there has been little research focused on the first-year student experience in finding primary care. Our study examined communication pathways, wayfinding and misconceptions students have related to the university medical centre. Patient centered care involves a partnership between a healthcare provider and their patient. In this partnership healthcare professionals must consider the patient experience and be more informative, mindful, empathic and collaborative to provide the best possible care (Epstein & Street, 2011).

Interviews (n = 3)

No directions No directions No directions No directions

Figure 1. The recurrent themes in the literature about university medical centres

No directions Room number and building Easiest access by a specific entrance No directions

Figure 6. Participants' comments regarding misconceptions and wayfinding

Methods

Recommendations
Suggestions from the Medical Centre's staff 1. Put posters about the Medical Centre in residences to   target first-years 2. Continue stations for health promotion during orientation  week 3. Target first-years students as well as out-of-province and   international students 4. Link information emails from University Admissions to   include a link to the Medical Centre website 5. Emphasize the importance of arriving on time, providing   24h notice if unable to keep their appointment and the   serious implications of no-shows 6. Recommend that students call for an appointment rather   than email Authors' recommendations 1. Add more directions (map, easiest access) on the Medical   Centre Website 2. Encourage the university's other websites to include the   location of the Medical Centre and a link to the website 3. Create more informational content for social media 4. Create a template of information to send to all faculties   and schools to include in their student guides 5. Add more wayfinding signs in the building where the   Medical Centre is located 6. Paint the door to the medical centre with a coloured   boarder around the door for further emphasis.

Room number and building No directions

No directions No directions

Figure 2. The methods used in the study

We began our investigation using a qualitative approach to examine how information about the Medical Centre is communicated to students (See Figure 2). Our content analysis (Hanington & Martin, 2012, p. 40) included a review of websites, social media, student guides, signage and posters. Following this we created a stakeholder map (Hanington & Martin, 2012, p. 166) to identify people that interact directly with first-year students as they represent potential interview participants. The simulated journey map (Hanington & Martin, 2012, p. 196) created by the researchers determined the possible steps a first-year student might follow in order to see a physician to determine key issues and solutions. Semi-structured interviews (Creswell, 2009, p. 179) were conducted with three staff members of the Medical Centre. Typical student visits were described. Questions focused on determining common student misconceptions and suggestions to improve communication.

Stakeholder Map The stakeholder map confirms that there are many people involved in communicating information about the Medical Centre to students. This research took place during the summer, although we were able to interview administrative staff at the medical centre, we did not have access to students, and this is a limitation in this study.

Conclusion
From a patient centered perspective, analyzing a first-year student's path to primary care led to recommendations for improvement related to wayfinding and communication pathways. Pain points along the patient journey were found through a content analysis of communication touch points, a simulated journey map, and interviews with medical center staff. Limitations of this study included the non-inclusion of the opinion of students and of other stakeholder groups identified. Further research would benefit from the inclusion of multiple stakeholder groups, particularly interviews or focus groups with students and residence staff to gather more holistic viewpoints.
Figure 5. The stakeholder map

References

Figure 3. The five categories of communication points examined in the content analysis

Simulated Journey Map The journey map highlighted key issues in the process of booking an appointment at the Medical Centre. These included knowing about the Medical Centre when they are ill and finding the centre on campus. Signage and wayfinding were insufficient. Arriving without an appointment, their student card and health card was also problematic.

Council of Ontario Universities. (n. d.). By the numbers. Retrieved from https://ontario universityes.ca/ resources/data/numbers Creswell, J. W. (2009). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Epstein, R. M., MD, & Street, R. L., PhD. (2011). The values and value of patient-centered care. Annals of Family Medicine, 9(2), 100-103. doi:10.1370/afm.1239 Evans, S. (1999). Mental health services in schools: Utilization, effectiveness, and consent. Clinical Psychology Review, 19(2), 165-178. doi:10.1016/S0272-7358(98)00069-5 Griebler, U., Rojatz, D., Simovska, V., & Forster, R. (2017). Effects of student participation in school health promotion: A systematic review. Health Promotion International, 32(2), 195-206. doi:10.1093/heapro/ dat090 Habel, M. A., Coor, A., Beltran, O., Becasen, J., Pearson, W. S., & Dittus, P. (2018). The state of sexual health services at U.S. colleges and universities. Journal of American College Health, 66(4), 259-268. doi:10.1080/07 448481.2018.1431896 Hanington, B., & Martin, B. (2012). Universal methods of design: 100 ways to research complex problems, develop innovative ideas, and design effective solutions. Beverly, MA: Rockport.


