EXPERIMENTAL DATA ACQUISITION AND ANALYSIS OF AN UNDERGROUND THERMAL STORAGE MEDIUM
Research Assistant: Alejandro Gonzalez Ferras Supervisor: Dr. Seth Dworkin
Introduction to Ground Source Heat Pumps A ground source heat pump (GSHP) is a system that uses the ground as a heat source/sink to provide heating/cooling to a conditioned space. During the winter, a GSHP uses a heat pump cycle to move heat from the ground into a space in order to heat it. In the summer, the space is cooled as heat is pumped out of the space and back into the ground. GSHPs are a sustainable alternative to conventional HVAC systems because they do not rely on direct fossil fuel consumption, and they are highly efficient as they move heat rather than generate it. In addition, the temperature of the ground remains constant throughout the year, resulting in a greater thermal efficiency, and therefore less energy consumption. over time, this thermal imbalance causes the temperature My Contributions of the ground to change, resulting in decreased efficiency of My contributions to this research include: the GSHP and greater power consumption. · Performing hydrostatic pressure calculations to find a range 3. Boreholes must be spaced widely apart in order to properly of suitable depths at which the system can operate safely distribute heat in the ground, resulting in a need for a large under various conditions drilling space that many potential installations lack. · Assisting in the setup of a bench-scale experimental thermal caisson system Methodology · Producing an extremely detailed CAD model of the thermal The problems mentioned above can be solved by developing caisson including assembly drawings and assembly videos new thermal storage media for GSHP systems that incorporate · Writing and troubleshooting a LabVIEW data acquisition phase change material (PCM) and heat exchangers into a program to read and save experimental data for a benchstructural caisson. Structural caissons serve as necessary scale thermal caisson system foundation for buildings, so by installing heat exchanger loops · Creation of a miniature 3D-printed model of the thermal and PCM into pre-existing building foundation, the cost of caisson for demonstration purposes installing GSHPs is drastically reduced since there is no longer a need to pay for the drilling of separate boreholes. By using PCM as a thermal storage medium, the proposed system will perform better than current GSHP systems due to larger amounts of heat transfer as well as the maintenance of the ground temperature, even when the heating and cooling needs of the building are not balanced. According to numerical models, the monthly performance of the system is expected to be up to 35% greater than conventional systems. In addition, the proposed system will provide significant environmental benefits due to reduced usage of natural gas for space heating and therefore reduced CO2 emissions.
Figures 2-6: Pictures of thermal caisson CAD model, 3D printed A demonstration of the proposed system is currently being models, and me assisting in the setup of a bench-scale test installed in Caledon, Ontario in collaboration with an industry References partner, McClymont & Rak Engineers. The performance of this system will be experimentally monitored using thermocouples [1] reproduced from and flowmeters to measure inlet and exit water temperatures https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Concept-of-the-groundand flow rates, which will be used to calculate the energy source-heat-pump-GSHP-system-for-space-heating-andtransfer rates to and from the ground. These results will be used cooling_fig1_324242798 to validate numerical models and optimize the system.

Figure 1: Diagram of a basic GSHP system [1]

Research Problem There are three main problems surrounding the use of GSHPs: 1. GSHPs are complex and expensive systems that use heat exchangers that are placed inside a borehole drilled deep into the ground. Their installation requires specialized equipment and expertise which result in high costs. 2. Some buildings require greater amounts of heating than cooling, or vice versa. In these cases, there is a surplus of heat that is extracted from or pumped into the ground and


