Prevalence and characterization of plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance in various aquatic sources Farhan Yusuf farhan.yusuf@ryerson.ca Introduction
· Ciprofloxacin is a fully synthetic antibiotic developed in 1987 and remains among the most widely used antibiotics worldwide · Excessive usage has resulted in small quinolone concentrations found in aquatic sources1 · Environments with subinhibitory antibiotic concentrations and high microbial diversity and nutrient loads (e.g. wastewater) foster the development of antibiotic resistance genes2 · qnr genes conferring quinolone resistance were first found in 1998 and have since been observed on a global scale

Prospects of CRISPR/Cas cloning vectors to combat antibiotic resistance gene dissemination Royce Ing and Kimberley Gilbride royce.ing@ryerson.ca, gilbride@ryerson.ca

Purpose
Goal: To profile patterns of qnr gene prevalence in aquatic environments

Introduction
· CRISPR (Clustered Regularly Interspaced Small Palindromic Repeats) and Cas (CRISPRassociated) proteins comprise an adaptive immune system in prokaryotes · CRISPR-Cas systems digest invading nucleic acids and incorporate a ~30 bp snippet ("spacer") of the invader into the host genome · Spacers are transcribed into CRISPR RNAs (crRNAs) that recognize the same nucleic acid in the event of a repeat invasion and guide nucleases to the target for elimination

Objectives: · Determine the extent of ciprofloxacin resistance present in wastewater communities · Determine co-resistance patterns with other antibiotics · Profile genera diversity and its connection with ciprofloxacin resistance · Quantify the potency of qnr genes on the extent of ciprofloxacin resistance

Methodology
Sample Collection:
CipS isolates

Results
· The proportion of ciprofloxacin-resistant bacteria across all locations ranged from 0.12 ­ 1.62% of the culturable population
Table 1. Differences in multiple antibiotic resistance in isolates resistant or sensitive to ciprofloxacin
CipR isolates

R2A

R2A + ciprofloxacin

Collect samples from 5 aquatic sources

Spread plate samples onto media

Streak to obtain pure cultures

Figure 1. A schematic diagram outlining orthodox CRISPR-mediated interference of invading nucleic acids. Adapted from Rath et al.3 Bacteria with ciprofloxacin resistance had a greater tendency to be resistant to other antibiotics tested. Table 2. Diversity of species among the sampled ciprofloxacin-sensitive and resistant populations

Genera Identification and qnr Gene Detection:

· We hypothesize that a plasmid vector, when transformed into a host cell, could exogenously express a CRISPR/Cas system and prevent the host's participation in conjugative processes

Proposed Methodology
Transform CRISPR/Cas into Hosts:

Whole genomic DNA extraction

PCR amplification for 16S rRNA gene and qnr genes

Sanger sequencing
The ciprofloxacin-resistant population has moderately lower diversity, as measured by Shannon-Weaver Diversity Index and genera richness, compared to the ciprofloxacin-sensitive population. The overlap in genera is relatively low, as indicated by SC = 0.3.

Table 3. Minimum inhibitory concentrations of ciprofloxacin for isolates with and without qnr genes

Screen bacteria for CRISPR/Cas system

PCR to obtain sufficient CRISPR/Cas DNA

Digest DNA and vector plasmid with restriction enzymes

Visualize qnr presence by gel electrophoresis

Match sequences to species on BLAST database

Minimum Inhibitory Concentration Testing:
No significant differences in ciprofloxacin's minimum inhibitory concentrations of qnr+ and qnr- isolates were observed.

Transform recombinant DNA into host cell (heat shock, electroporation)

Ligate to create recombinant DNA

Compare Conjugant Quantity: Original recipient Recipient with CRISPR/Cas plasmid Recipient with dysfunctional CRISPR/Cas plasmid Allow donor and recipient to conjugate in liquid media Spread plate and count CFUs

Conclusions
Streak isolate onto media of incrementally increasing antibiotic concentration Observe lowest concentration with complete inhibition after 24 hours Antibiotic Susceptibility Testing: · Ciprofloxacin resistance genes were observed in all aquatic sources sampled · Ciprofloxacin resistant bacteria had a greater tendency for co-resistance to other antibiotics, suggesting that a single mobile genetic element may harbor multiple ARGs · Ciprofloxacin resistance is restricted to a relatively distinct and less diverse subset of the bacterial community · Minimum inhibitory concentration is not significantly enhanced in bacteria with qnr genes, indicating that a multitude of ciprofloxacin resistance genes may be relevant

Acknowledgements
Resuspend isolate to uniform turbidity Swab liquid evenly across R2A media Insert antibiotic test disks Record radius of inhibition after 24 hours
First and foremost, I would like to thank the Faculty of Science and OVPRI for financing this exclusive research opportunity. As well, I thank Dr. Gilbride for the guidance and support she has given throughout my URO work term, and continues to give during my undergraduate thesis. I also thank fellow members of the Gilbride Lab ­ Farhan Yusuf, Amir Tehrani, Saher Ahmed and Hooman Sarvi ­ for their assistance and critique all throughout my time with the Gilbride Lab.
1. 2. 3.

References
Batt, A. L., Bruce, I. B. & Aga, D. S. (2006). Evaluating the vulnerability of surface waters to antibiotic contamination from varying wastewater treatment plant discharges. Environ Pollut, 142, 295­302. Ventola, C. L. (2015). The antibiotic resistance crisis: part 1: causes and threats. P&T, 40, 277­83. Rath, D., Amlinger, L., Rath, A. & Lundgren, M. (2015). The CRISPR-Cas immune system: Biology, mechanisms and applications. Biochimie, 117, 119-128.

