Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2007

Implementation of meta search engine with different rank aggregation algorithms
Sharjeel Arshad
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Electrical and Computer Engineering Commons Recommended Citation
Arshad, Sharjeel, "Implementation of meta search engine with different rank aggregation algorithms" (2007). Theses and dissertations. Paper 161.

This Thesis Project is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

Implementation of Meta Search Engine With Different Rank Aggregation Algorithms

By

Sharjeel Arshad

A Project Presented to Ryerson University

In partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree Master of Engineering In the Program of Electrical and Computer Engineering

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2007

© Sharjeel Arshad 2007

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION

I hereby certify that I am the sole author of this thesis. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other

institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Sharjeel Arshad

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the research. purpose of scholarly

Sharjeel Arshad

ii

Instruction on Borrowers
Ryerson University requires the signatures of all persons using or photocopying this thesis. Please sign below, and give address and date.

111

Acknowledgement

I am deeply indebted to my supervisors Dr. Farah Mohammadi and Dr. Cherie Ding to have helped me complete this thesis and guided me through various stages of complexities and my tough time table.

I would also like to express my gratitude to all those who gave me the opportunity to complete this thesis even morally and not exactly technically.

And lastly all my thanks go to Ryerson University in providing a superb means to my educational goals.

iv

Abstract

The development of a Meta Search engine has been described and the ranking of the queries has been accomplished by implementing four rank aggregation algorithms.

Meta Search Engine is used to combine different lists for the same query by different search engines into a single list so as to return the most relevant results with a wider coverage in the quickest possible time.

The performance improvement is achieved by testing four rank aggregation algorithms namely:

1) Linear 2) Exponential 3) Borda Fuse 4) Condorcet Fuse

The efficiency of each algorithm in terms of accuracy and time has been compared.

v

