Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2008

Satellite attitude control using environmental forces based on variable structure control
Tarunkumar Patel
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Aerospace Engineering Commons Recommended Citation
Patel, Tarunkumar, "Satellite attitude control using environmental forces based on variable structure control" (2008). Theses and dissertations. Paper 154.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

SATELLITE ATTITUDE CONTROL USING ENVIRONMENTAL FORCES BASED ON VARIABLE STRUCTURE CONTROL

by

Tarunkumar Patel B.Eng., Aerospace Engineering Ryerson University, 2006

A thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Applied Science in the Program of Aerospace Engineering

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2008
© Tarun Patel 2008

PROPERTY OF RYERSON UNIVifMTY LIBRARY

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

11

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I would like to first thank my thesis supervisors, Dr. Krishna Dev Kumar and Dr. Kamran Behdinan, for their support and encouragement throughout this research work. I would like to express my deepest gratitude to Dr. Krishna Dev Kumar for providing guidance and advice on the topic of satellite attitude control using environmental forces as well as his personal help other than academic. I would also like to thank Dr. Kamran Behdinan for overseeing my thesis progress and giving very helpful suggestions during my research. I am very thankful to my external examiner members, Dr. Jeffrey Yokota, Dr. Jeff Xi, and Dr. Puren Ouyang, for reviewing my research work and providing useful comments for improving thesis report. I also want to thank for all the graduate students in our SSDC group, who gave me a lot help in academics and life. I would like to thank Godard for helping me to prepare final thesis presentation as well as his valuable suggestions and discussions during this thesis work, which were valuable and positive. I am also very thankful to Kamran Shahid for setting up our SSDC lab and providing complete computer facilities with all tools I needed for research. Finally, but most importantly, to my parents, Rasikbhai and Kailasben, and my wife, Roshni, without whose unconditional love, patience, support, understanding, guidance, and belief in my abilities, I would have never come this far in life.

v

