Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Librarian and Staff Presentations Library

8-1-2008

Is your library website enough?
Sonny Banerjee
Ryerson University, sbanerje@ryerson.ca

Graham McCarthy
Ryerson University, gmccarthy@ryerson.ca

Sally Wilson
Ryerson University, swilson@ryerson.ca

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/library_pres Part of the Information and Library Science Commons Recommended Citation
Banerjee, Sonny; McCarthy, Graham; and Wilson, Sally, "Is your library website enough?" (2008). Librarian and Staff Presentations. Paper 11. http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/library_pres/11

This Conference Presentation is brought to you for free and open access by the Library at Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Librarian and Staff Presentations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

Is your library website enough? ­ IFLA Poster Session Aug 1014th, 2008  
Sonny Banerjee sbanerje@ryerson.ca  Graham McCarthy gmccarthy@ryerson.ca  Sally Wilson swilson@ryerson.ca    Increasingly students and researchers are accessing and using  information in a wide variety of settings on an array of  different devices.  Libraries need to adapt and repurpose  their data and information so that it can be used by patrons  where, when and how they want to use it.  To meet this need  the Ryerson Library has initiated several projects to expand  access to its resources beyond the traditional confines of the  building and the website.       

Integrate Your Library with Facebook 
Library Facebook Application 
The Toronto Star recently reported that more than half of Canadian web users have a Facebook account.  You can  take advantage of this by making your Library and its resources available in Facebook.     Ryerson's Facebook Application    Ryerson's Facebook application is available for  installing in your Facebook account.  Go to:  http://apps.facebook.com/ryersonlibrary/     Develop Your Own Facebook Application    Instructions for developing your own Facebook  application can be found at:  http://www.ryerson.ca/library/iii/facebook.html          By providing a link in your catalogue, you can allow  users to post a title they have found in the catalogue  to their Facebook account.  This provides the user a  convenient way to record information from the  catalogue and to distribute it to their friends.   

 

Post to Facebook   

    Post as it appears in Facebook     Button in catalogue 

Add your Library to your Users Personalized Home Pages 
Many web users have their own personalized home pages.  By creating widgets you can let your users add catalogue  functionality to their frequently used pages.  Ryerson has created widgets for NetVibes and Google home pages, but  you could create these for many other personalized home page services.  This search widget may be inserted on iGoogle and  Netvibes home pages.    Instructions for adding the Ryerson Library search  widget to your Google or Netvibes home page are  available at: http://www.ryerson.ca/library/library20/    Instructions for Creating Search Widgets for Your Library:  Google Gadget   http://www.ryerson.ca/library/library20/googleGadget.html  NetVibes Gadget   http://www.ryerson.ca/library/library20/netvibes/netvibesGadget.html 

  Integrate your Catalogue Holdings with Amazon, Google Books and Indigo/Chapters 
With the installation of a couple of scripts, your Firefox users can instantly see the status of any book in your library  when they search Amazon, Google Books or Indigo.    Ryerson Library Holdings Displaying in  Indigo/Chapters    Ryerson's application and instructions for installing  are available at:  http://www.ryerson.ca/library/library20/    This script can be adapted for use in your library.       

Text Messaging from the Library Catalogue 
Many of our users don't bring a pen and a piece of paper when they come to the Library, but they do bring their cell  phones.  Users can text message the title, call number and location of a title to themselves, then retrieve the  information when they head into the stacks to find the book.  Instructions for Text Messaging from the Catalogue:    http://www.ryerson.ca/library/library20/tutorial_sms.html   

       

Library Statistics 
Service Point Statistics 
Tracking the usage of service points is vital to making sure  your library meets the needs of its patrons.  This software  package allows you to track various resources being used at  different service points through a simple and easy to use  interface.    On the back end, descriptive statistics are generated with an  emphasis on visual data showing ratios of service use and  tracking trends over time. 

 

  Bibliographic Instruction Statistics 
We have developed a software package which allows us to  record and track detailed bibliographic instruction statistics.   Once a librarian or staff member completes an instruction  session, they fill out a simple online webform.  This data is  stored on a server and can be queried to determine  information such as which departments are requesting  instruction sessions, numbers of students attending sessions  and what year they are in, session locations, length, etc.  Full colour graphs enable users to visualize the data and make  decisions about instructional programmes. 

 

Virtual Reference 
askON is a realtime chat information service that offers immediate interactive and  knowledgeable research and reference help online. Using chat, askON staff provide  research guidance and can help you navigate the Internet, your library's services, and  other online resources including full text magazine, newspaper resources and licensed  research databases.  

 
askON is a collaboration of 22 public and 14 postsecondary libraries that have offered  up some of their staff time to make the service possible. Using stateoftheart  software from LivePerson (liveperson.com) askON provides 40 hours a week of chat  reference service to public library visitors (up to 10 hours in French) and over 60 hours  a week to postsecondary students.     More info:  http://askon.ca 

 
 

