Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2010

Appraisal of self-reference, delusional ideation and memory in a normal sample
Madelaine Clair Burley
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Psychology Commons Recommended Citation
Burley, Madelaine Clair, "Appraisal of self-reference, delusional ideation and memory in a normal sample" (2010). Theses and dissertations. Paper 688.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

APPRAISAL OF SELF-REFERENCE, DELUSIONAL IDEATION AND MEMORY IN A NORMAL SAMPLE by Madelaine Clair Burley, B.A (Hons.), University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, 2008

A Thesis presented to Ryerson University

In partial fulfillment of the requirements of the degree of Master of Arts in the Program of Psychology

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2010 © Madelaine Clair Burley 2010

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis or dissertation.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis or dissertation to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis or dissertation by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

ii

Appraisal of Self-Reference, Delusional Ideation and Memory in a Normal Sample Master of Arts, 2010 Madelaine Clair Burley Psychology Ryerson University

I investigated whether self-referent appraisal bias (SRB) mediates the relation between delusional thinking and self-referent memory (SRM). Fourty normal adults participated. Participants rated how much 80 statements were about them on a five-point scale and the ratings were summed to operationalize SRB. Corrected hit rate (Pr) from an incidental recognition memory test for these statements was the dependent measure of SRM. Peters Delusion Inventory (PDI) scores correlated with Pr (r=-.34) and there was a trend toward correlation between SRB and Pr (r=-.25). SRB mediated the relation between PDI score and Pr with age, standardized memory and language achievement scores as covariates (Baron & Kenny, 1986). Bootstrapping analyses confirmed that the change in the model was significant with SRB as a mediator. These findings suggest that individual differences, such as SRB, mediate SRM performance. This suggests that such subtle biases could mediate cognitive impairment in psychosis, which has implications for treatment.

iii

Acknowledgements I could not have finished this thesis without the support of colleagues, friends and family. Thanks to my partner and friend, Brandon Slack, who has done everything he can to support me during this process. His confidence in me never failed, even when my own wavered. Thanks for helping me to enjoy this process, even during difficult moments. Thanks to my mother, Candace Burley for her long-time support of my goals. Without her support, I would not have been able to pursue this opportunity. I would like to acknowledge the support of my labmates, Meera, Leanne and Ronak, who have helped me during each stage of my project. Thanks for offering a sympathetic ear, sage advice and an objective perspective. Thanks to my committee members, Dr. Julia Spaniol and Dr. Mahesh Menon for their insightful comments and feedback during the initial stages of project design and development. Lastly, I would like to thank my advisor, Dr. Todd Girard, whose patient guidance during the past two years was not only crucial to this project, but also to my professional development. I am thankful for your advice and the countless number times that you helped me to overcome obstacles in my path.

iv

Table of Contents Introduction .................................................................................................... 1 Common Network Hypothesis ........................................................... 1 Delusions and Cognition .................................................................... 3 Self-Reference and Memory .............................................................. 7 Current Study ................................................................................... 13 Methods........................................................................................................ 14 Procedure ......................................................................................... 14 Clinical Assessment. ............................................................ 14 PDI ........................................................................ 14 SPQ-L ................................................................... 14 PAS ....................................................................... 15 DASS .................................................................... 16 Self-Referent Appraisal Bias Memory Task. ....................... 16 Stimuli ................................................................... 17 Encoding Phase ..................................................... 17 Delay Filler Tasks ................................................. 18 Recognition Phase ................................................. 18 Cognitive Assessment. ......................................................... 19 WMS-IV .............................................................. 19 WRAT-4 .............................................................. 19 Participants ....................................................................................... 18 Data Analysis ............................................................................................... 20 v

Preliminary Data Analysis ............................................................... 20 Task Validation. ................................................................... 20 Correlations. ......................................................................... 22 Regression. ........................................................................... 24 Mediation Analyses ......................................................................... 24 Regression. ........................................................................... 24 Bootstrapping. ...................................................................... 25 Discussion .................................................................................................... 27 SRE .................................................................................................. 28 Cognition and Delusional Ideation .................................................. 29 Cognitive and Neural Models of Delusion ...................................... 31 Limitations ....................................................................................... 33 Future Directions ............................................................................. 34 References .................................................................................................... 37

vi

List of Tables Table 1. Sample characteristics.................................................................... 47 Table 2. Cognitive assessment ..................................................................... 48 Table 3. Response pattern for Old items in SRM Task by self-reference rating ............................................................................................................ 49 Table 4. Mean response rates ....................................................................... 50

vii

List of Figures Figure 1. Mediation Model .......................................................................... 51

viii

List of Appendices Appendix A: Self-Referent Memory Task stimuli. Appendix B: Modified Psychology Assessment Screener. Appendix C: Correlation table for covariate selection.

ix

My thesis sheds light on recent findings linking self-referent processing to memory functioning in normal individuals. Recent review papers and meta-analyses predict that selfreferent processes and memory share common neural networks. In addition, there is a substantial history of cognitive research on the Self-Reference Effect (SRE; Rogers, 1977) in memory that links self-referent appraisal to a mnemonic advantage; however, this effect has been understudied in relation to the psychotic spectrum and has potential implications for cognitive models of delusions. The purpose of this thesis is to bridge the gap between these divergent areas of research by clarifying the role of self-referent appraisal in memory, explore cognitive functioning along the continuum of delusional thinking, and test predictions made by metaanalyses of brain-imaging research and cognitive models of delusions. Common Network Hypothesis Recently, reviews of the neuroimaging literature by Buckner and Carroll (2007), Hassabis and Maguire (2007), and a subsequent meta-analysis by Spreng, Mar and Kim (2009) reached similar conclusions: Many cognitive processes previously posited to be distinct from one another share common neurological underpinnings. This so-called "common network", which encompasses the medial temporal lobes, medial prefrontal region and the medial and lateral parietal regions, shows activation during a variety of tasks including memory tasks, prospective memory (future thinking) tasks, spatial navigation tasks, theory of mind tasks and also the "default mode" (Raichle et al., 2001), when subjects are at rest (Schulman et al., 1997; Mazoyer et al., 2001). Buckner and Carroll hypothesized that the common activation pattern could be due to a common element involved in each of these tasks and proposed that self-projection could be the uniting feature. Hassabis and Maguire contended that the common element underlying the tasks associated with the common network is scene construction. Although it is not yet clear why

1

these diverse tasks utilize the same brain regions, the common network hypothesis has multiple implications for clinical disorders. Previously, impairments in these tasks were examined in isolation, but the above framework suggests that there may be better ways to understand the scope of impairment, the mechanisms of impairment, or rehabilitation strategies for disorders with impairment in tasks relying on the common network. One such disorder, schizophrenia, demonstrates impairment in all the areas identified to be associated with the common network. Schizophrenia is a major cause of disability worldwide and ranks as one of the most costly disorders to afflict humans (Global Burden of Disease, WHO). This disorder is characterized by the presence of positive (e.g., hallucinations, delusions) and negative (e.g., affective flattening, avolition) symptoms of psychosis. Despite the general success of pharmacological advances in managing symptoms of psychosis, most persons with schizophrenia experience persistent impairments in daily and community functioning. Cognitive impairment is increasingly being recognized as a unique domain of impairment in schizophrenia (Heinrichs, 2005) and is a robust mediator of functional outcome among patients (Bowie & Harvey, 2006); these findings have recently motivated cognition as a specific therapeutic target (Gold, 2004). As previously mentioned, impairments in cognition in schizophrenia are broad. Memory impairments are prominent in schizophrenia (Lepage, 2007) with explicit memory (e.g. episodic, autobiographical) being the most impaired. In a meta-analysis of theory-of-mind tasks, Bora, Yucel and Pantelis (2009) reported large effect sizes for impairment in non-remitted schizophrenia samples and smaller, but still significant effect sizes in remitted schizophrenia samples, and suggested that theory-of-mind deficits form a trait impairment in schizophrenia. D'Argembeau, Raffard and Van der Linden (2008) reported that persons with schizophrenia

2

demonstrated impairments in generating mental images of past events and even greater impairment in generating images of future events, suggesting that schizophrenia disturbs one's prospective memory. Impairment in allocentric (environment-based) navigation has also been recently reported in schizophrenia (e.g. Weniger & Irle, 2008; Hanlon et al., 2006; Daniel, DiboCohen, Carité, Boyer & Denis, 2007). Finally, anomalous activity has been found during the brain's default mode during periods of rest or inactivity in the brains of patients with schizophrenia (Bluhm et al., 2007; Whitfield-Gabrieli et al., 2009). Given that schizophrenia has been associated with impairment in all of the domains proposed to rely on the common network, it is important both theoretically and practically to understand how this network functions and how dissociable these tasks are from one another. Furthermore, considering these processes to be interrelated produces areas of inquiry that have previously been under-studied in schizophrenia. One such area, and the focus of this study, is the intersection between appraisal of salience related to "self" and memory. In turn, understanding the relation between these processes may inform theories regarding the cognitive mechanisms underlying delusional thought. Delusions and Cognition Delusions are described by the American Psychiatric Association (2000) as "fixed beliefs" about external reality that are not endorsed by culture and are maintained despite strong disconfirmatory evidence. Content of delusions varies, but common themes include persecution, self-reference (belief that neutral material in the environment has special personal significance) and grandiosity (belief that one is special or has special abilities). Early definitions of delusions posited that these beliefs differ from normal beliefs in their certainty, steadfastness and bizarre or impossible content (Jaspers, 1913). Recently, it has been argued that the definition of delusion

3

should be adjusted to reflect a continuum of belief rather than a dichotomy because qualitative studies of delusions often report that these criteria are not strictly met. For instance, in a study of the delusions of 119 schizophrenia patients, Strauss (1969) reported that as many as half could be categorized as questionable due to the fact that patients were not fully convinced that their delusions were true. Further evidence for the legitimacy of a continuous conceptualization of delusions stems from the finding that belief in delusional thoughts varies over time (Garety, 1985) and there is a high prevalence rate (10-15%) of delusional beliefs in the general population (van Os, Hanssen, Bijl, & Ravelli, 2000; van Os, Hanssen, Bijl, & Vollebergh, 2001). Cognitive models of delusions purport that biases in cognition and reasoning underlie the development and maintenance of delusions. Several different cognitive biases have been reliably associated with delusional beliefs. These include the `jumping to conclusions' bias (JTC; Menon, Mizrahi, & Kapur, 2008; Garety, Hemsley, & Wessely, 1991), attribution of positive events to internal sources (Kaney & Bentall, 1996; Candido & Romney, 1990), and attribution of negative events to external sources (Lyon, Kaney & Bentall, 1994), bias against disconfirmatory evidence (BADE; Moritz & Woodward, 2004, 2006), belief inflexibility (Garety et al., 2005), and liberal acceptance (Moritz & Woodward, 2004). A principal components analysis of these biases yielded four independent factors, suggesting that these biases may each play a separate role in delusion development and maintenance (Moritz et al., 2010). In a review of proposed cognitive models of delusions, Garety and Freeman (1999) concluded that the literature supports models implicating probabilistic reasoning biases (Garety & Hemsely, 1994) and attributional style (Bentall, 1994). Blackwood, Howard, Bentall and Murray (2001) also cite evidence that attentional biases (threat stimuli) and theory-of-mind deficits may play a role in the inferential biases apparent in deluded patients with schizophrenia; these biases/deficits are not apparent in

4

non-deluded patients. Early evidence supports these existing models, but support is not unequivocal and future research is needed to refine them. Based on their review, Blackwood and colleagues (2001) proposed a unified cognitive model for the development of persecutory delusions that emphasizes the central role of abnormal social beliefs, including liberally biased appraisal of self-reference and threat. In a 2004 study, Blackwood et al. tested these predictions using eight male participants with acute persecutory delusions and age and gender-matched healthy controls. The study included two sessions, one in which the sentence stimuli were neutral and either ambiguously self-referent ("He is sleeping") or unambiguously other-referent ("Graeme is sleeping") and one in which the sentences were threatening and either ambiguously self-referent ("He is a pervert") or unambiguously otherreferent ("John is a pervert"). The task was for participants to indicate (`yes/no') whether the sentence stimuli were self-referent. They found as predicted that both the healthy and deluded samples identified more ambiguous than unambiguous sentences as self-referent, but did not find that the deluded sample rated more ambiguous sentences as self-referent than the healthy sample. Their second prediction, which was that the deluded sample would rate more threat statements as self-referent than the healthy sample, was also not supported. Blackwood and colleagues suggested that characteristics of their stimuli including high concreteness and threat stimuli content may have affected their results. Interestingly, however, the delusional sample endorsed more unambiguously other-referent statements as self-referent than the healthy sample. Although this evidence was indirect, it supports a self-referent bias, but not a threat bias, among the deluded sample. Nonetheless, these findings await replication with more appropriate stimuli, a larger sample and more sensitive measurements.

5

In 2003, Sass and Parnas proposed an alternative model implicating self-referent cognition to account for psychotic symptoms. Based on a narrative review of phenomenological literature on schizophrenia, they proposed that hyperreflexivity, or exaggerated self-awareness leads to a subjective experience of externalization of the self, which they propose underlies positive symptoms of psychosis, including delusions. Also central in this model is the hypothesis that diminished subjective self-experience, or self-affection, underlies psychotic symptomatology. Although this model is currently theoretical and does not make explicit predictions regarding self-referent cognition and appraisal, it highlights the need to explore the phenomenological aspects of schizophrenia, particularly concerning self-experience. The models of Blackwood et al. and Sass and Parnas both implicate self-referential processing in delusions. However, whereas the model proposed by Blackwood et al. presumes that persecutory delusions have unique etiology, the model by Sass and Parnas does not separate etiology of delusions by content and presumes that common processes underlie all delusions. Whether these models compliment or contradict one another is unclear, since the sample used by Blackwood only had active persecutory delusions. Menon and colleagues (2008) reported a similar pattern of appraisal bias among patients with delusions of reference, suggesting that this bias may not be specific to persecutory delusions, as proposed by Blackwood et al. (2004). In an imaging study designed to examine brain activity when experiencing subjective feelings of self-referentiality (Menon et al., 2008), patients with referential delusions and a healthy control sample were presented with neutral and emotional statements that were either objectively self-referent or ambiguous and asked to give a yes/no response to the question "Do you feel that this statement is about you?". Sentence stimuli included 20 neutral statements ("He likes coffee"), 20 emotional statements ("He is feeling very

6

happy today", "He is stupid") and 20 individually tailored statements about participants' personal history based on interviews conducted prior to the study ("His mother died recently"). The sentence stimuli were each tailored to the gender of participants and in the neutral and emotional conditions were designed to reflect generic abstract situations that should be equally applicable across groups. The goal was to compare brain activation patterns between the groups in the 3 conditions. The main findings of the study were that the deluded group showed hyperactivation in the striatum and limbic regions, but hypoactivation in the cortical midline structures (CMS) and the medial and dorso-lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC). Menon et al. (2008) also reported that participants in the referential delusion group endorsed more neutral and emotional statements as being about themselves than did participants in the control group. That is, participants with referential delusions showed a self-referent appraisal bias. The fact that biased self-referent appraisal has been found in this group suggests that it is not specific to persecutory delusions, but prevalence of persecutory delusions in the sample was not reported. The neutral and emotional stimuli were intended to be equally applicable across groups and this finding was unanticipated; therefore it needs to be replicated to ensure that it was not a product of the stimuli or sample. In summary, there is evidence of several cognitive biases associated with delusions. Two cognitive models, one by Blackwood and colleagues (2001) and one by Sass and Parnas (2003), predict an association between biases in self-referent cognition and delusions. Preliminary findings support this hypothesis (Blackwood et al., 2004; Menon et al., 2008), but it remains unclear whether this bias is specific to delusions with certain themes (i.e., persecution) or applies to delusions generally. Further research is needed to replicate these findings and test the predictions of these models.

7

Self-Reference and Memory The findings of Blackwood et al. (2004) and Menon et al. (2008) raise an interesting empirical question: why might delusions be related to a self-referential appraisal bias? Based on the common network hypothesis, this question has potential implications for memory function in schizophrenia, which is supported by the long-studied SRE (Rogers, 1977; Rogers, Kuiper, & Kirker, 1977). SRE refers to the finding that information processed in reference to the self (i.e. does this adjective describe you?) is better remembered than information processed in other ways such as semantically, phonemically or structurally. This effect has been replicated in different cultures and the conditions under which it can reliably be reproduced have been reported in several meta-analyses (Bellezza, 1993; Czienskowski, 1997; Czienskowski & Giljohann, 2002; Symons & Johnson, 1997). It has generally been found that self-referent encoding produces a medium effect size (d = .65) when compared to semantic processing and a small effect size (d = .35) when compared to processing in relation to an intimate other (e.g. your mother). SRE is purported to work by promoting elaboration and organization of information and is most beneficial for information that is abstract and cannot be easily visualized. It has also been found that information that is judged to be self-descriptive is more easily recalled than other information, a phenomenon called the `congruent information hypothesis' (Bellezza, 1992). Examination of the SRE using maximally sensitive assessment of self-reference and memory suggests that the relation between self-reference and memory performance may not be strictly linear and that self-referent memory is phenomenologically distinct from other forms of memory (Conway & Dewhurst, 1995; Conway, Dewhurst, Pearson & Sapute, 2001). Building on the more common SRE paradigms based on dichotomous decisions, Conway and Dewhurst (1995) used continuous appraisal of self-reference in three between-subjects experiments to

8

explore the relations between self-referent appraisal and recollective processes in recognition memory. In each experiment, participants were asked to make judgments about trait adjectives on a scale from one to five: One group of participants rated the self-reference of adjectives, one group rated how much the adjectives referred to the Prime Minister and one group rated the valence of the adjectives. Subsequently, they were given a recognition memory test using Tulving's (1985) Remember-Know paradigm. That is, participants were asked to indicate whether adjectives were old or new, and for old adjectives, whether their recognition was accompanied by a vivid recollective experience (constituting a `Remember' response) or not (constituting a `Know' response). A between-subjects design was used to prevent carry-over effects from contaminating Remember/Know responding. Recognition performance did not reliably differ between encoding conditions; however, self-referent encoding was associated with significantly more Remember responses relative to Know responses, suggesting that self-referent encoding elicits recollective memory encoding. Greater proportions of correct Know responses were reported in the low self-referent encoding groups, reinforcing the distinct processes used in self-referent memory. The finding that self-referent encoding produces a greater proportion of Remember responses than tasks low in self-reference was later replicated and termed the Self Reference Recollection Effect (SRRE; Conway et al., 2001). In the same study, Conway and Dewhurst (1995) also examined the effect of level of selfreference on recognition. Contrary to what was anticipated, greater proportions of correct recognitions were found for items given extreme high or low ratings of self-reference compared to items given moderate ratings. Formal statistical tests indicated that there was a significant difference in proportion remembered between moderately rated and highly rated items, but not items rated low in self-reference. Although the pattern is not as straightforward as would be

9

anticipated, SRE can be detected using continuous self-reference ratings, since higher recognition rates are seen for highly rated items than for moderately rated items. Conway, Dewhurst, Pearson and Sapute (2001) replicated this finding and argued that self-referent memory is controlled by a unique system, the self-memory system (Conway & Pleydell-Pearce, 2000). Conway and colleagues (2001) propose that items given moderate and low ratings of selfreference would both initially be maintained in memory to the same extent because they have not yet had the chance to be integrated into the self-knowledge schema whereas over an adequate period of time low self-reference items would fade and most moderate self-referent items would be integrated. Highly self-referent items, they argue, may be more quickly integrated into longterm memory due to high importance. To support this hypothesis, they note that studies using extremely brief retention periods fail to demonstrate SRRE, whereas studies using longer retention periods reliably produce it. Although this model adequately explains their pattern of results, it remains largely theoretical. The unique nature of self-referent memory has also been suggested by neuroimaging studies; the neurological underpinnings of the SRE have been examined on multiple occasions. A recent review of 27 imaging studies conducted by Northoff and colleagues (2006) suggested that across different functional domains (e.g., verbal, spatial, emotional, and facial) self-referential processing relies on the cortical midline structures (CMS). Northoff and colleagues proposed that the interaction between self-reference and retrieval may be a key component of autobiographical memory. McCrae et al. (2004) and Fossati et al. (2004) reported that successful encoding and retrieval of self-referential stimuli (trait adjectives) were associated with activation in the dorsalmedial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC; as cited by Northoff et al., 2004). Based on functionalconnectivity analyses, Lou et al. (2004) reported on a network comprising the DMPFC and

10

medial parietal cortex (MPC), posterior cingulate cortex and precuneus; the authors concluded that the MPC mediates between cortical midline structures during episodic retrieval of selfrelated adjectives and is essential for successful self-representation (as cited by Northoff et al., 2004). Recently, van der Meer, Costafreda, Aleman and David (2010) conducted a meta-analysis of studies of self-reflection and proposed that the ventral (V)MPFC tags information relevant for self, and DMPFC is involved in decisions regarding the self. Despite the many replications of the SRE, including neuroimaging studies, only one study has explored whether this memory advantage is maintained in schizophrenia. A PsycInfo search for "self reference effect" in the abstract and "schizophrenia" in the title yielded only one result. Jia, Zhu, Han and Zhang (2008) tested whether SRE is maintained in schizophrenia by comparing 16 patients with insight into their symptoms, 16 patients without insight into their symptoms and 16 healthy controls. They reported that insight was not correlated with SRE, but that significant differences were found between the control group and the schizophrenia group without insight on the SRE task, suggesting that SRE is impaired in at least some schizophrenia samples. The study by Jia et al. (2008) did not support insight as a moderator of SRE in schizophrenia; however, it is unclear whether or how the SRE relates to different subtypes of schizophrenia and what mechanisms underlie impairment. Cognitive models of delusions, as well as the common network hypothesis (Buckner & Carroll, 2007; Hassabis & Maguire, 2007; Spreng et al., 2009), predict that appraisal of self-relevant stimuli and memory are related to one another, but the relation between appraisal of self-relevance and subsequent memory for selfrelevant information has not been fully explored. The finding by Blackwood et al. (2004) and Menon et al. (2008) that self-referential appraisal is biased in delusional samples predicts that

11

people with schizophrenia should have a self-referent memory advantage; in contrast, Jia and colleagues (2008) report that SRE is impaired in schizophrenia. On the surface, these findings seem contradictory. That is, SRE impairment in the face of a bias towards self-referent appraisal in schizophrenia does not appear consistent with the relations predicted by both the SRE literature and the congruent information hypothesis (Bellezza, 1992). However, because research on self-referent bias is extremely limited, the strength and consequences of this bias are unknown. The studies by Blackwood et al. (2004) and Menon et al. (2008) were the first to demonstrate evidence of a self-referent appraisal bias. If self-referent bias is related to delusional thinking, as would be predicted by cognitive models of delusions, the continuum model of psychosis (van Os, Hanssen, Bijl, & Ravelli, 2000) predicts that it should also be present in normal individuals who report delusional thought. Studies of SRE have typically used group comparisons for analysis rather than a continuous approach. Thus, SRE has been evaluated as either present or absent and is marked by a group memory advantage when compared to control conditions. However, as demonstrated by Conway and Dewhurst (1995), continuous appraisals of self-reference can yield interpretable results and provide a means of studying individual differences in self-referent appraisal and their relations to constructs, such as self-referent memory and delusional ideation. Although at the item level SRE provides a memory advantage in that items rated as self-referent are better recalled, on a subject level, self-referent encoding may yield different results; specifically, the tendency to appraise items as self-referent may not provide a memory advantage. Since delusional ideation is a continuous construct, it is also possible that self-referent appraisal bias is a continuous construct, in which case it could be a mediator of self-referent memory in normal populations. To reconcile conflicting findings from the SRE and schizophrenia literatures and clarify the role of self-referent bias in self-referent

12

memory, it is necessary to study the relation between self-referent bias, delusional ideation and self-referent memory in a normal sample. Research on these constructs could one day help to refine existing treatment models for delusions and develop memory rehabilitation strategies for schizophrenia. In summary, there is theoretical as well as practical benefit to exploring the relation between self-referential appraisal bias and memory ­ this bias could help to explain self-referent memory impairment in schizophrenia, but will also inform our understanding of salience judgments and their relation to normal memory processes. Current Study The purpose of my thesis is to clarify the role of appraisal of self-reference in normal memory processes as well as the relation between appraisal of self-reference and subclinical delusional ideation. Individuals with schizophrenia often experience memory impairments; however, research on cognitive functioning in schizophrenia has rarely drawn a contrast between self versus other appraisal. Further, research on the SRE characterizes it as advantageous to memory, so it could have practical applications as a cognitive remediation technique. Based on Jia and colleagues (2008), Blackwood et al. (2004) and Menon et al. (2008), it was hypothesized that: 1) Delusional ideation and schizotypal personality traits would predict poor self-referent memory (SRM). 2) Delusional ideation and schizotypal personality traits would predict self-referent appraisal bias (SRB). 3) SRB would predict poorer performance on a SRM task above and beyond common factors know to affect memory and measures of delusional ideation and schizotypy.

13

Methods Procedure Study participation was individual and completed in a single two-hour session. After giving informed consent to participate in the study, a brief history and basic demographic information was obtained using a standard lab interview. Participants then completed four standardized clinical measures, a newly developed computerized SRM task, and two standardized cognitive measures, described below. Clinical Assessment. PDI. Delusional ideation was measured using the Peters Delusion Inventory (PDI; Peters, Joseph, & Garety, 1999). The PDI was developed specifically to investigate subclinical delusional thinking in non-clinical populations. Constructs measured by the PDI include distress, preoccupation and conviction associated with delusional-themed beliefs; for each of 40 statements on the PDI, participants indicate whether the statement is true of them or not and rate their distress, preoccupation and conviction according to five-point Likert scales. To gain a more general measure of delusional ideation, distress, preoccupation and conviction ratings for all items were added to produce a summary score. The range of possible summary scores is from 0 to 600. SPQ-L. Schizotypal personality characteristics were measured using a Likert version of the Schizotypal Personality Questionnaire (SPQ-L; Wuthrich & Bates, 2005). The SPQ-L is a 74item scale that measures diagnostic criteria for schizotypal personality disorder based on DSMIII criteria. The scale measures features of schizotypal personality disorder including odd speech,

14

odd behaviour, unusual perceptual experiences, paranoia, absence of close friends, constricted affect, magical thinking, social anxiety and ideas of reference. Because the SPQ-L uses a fivepoint Likert scale to measure responses, it is reported to have good sensitivity in non-clinical samples. This scale has excellent reliability (alphas for subscales ranged from .75 - .96). The SPQ-L and the PDI have been validated for use in normal populations and have demonstrated that they predict diagnoses of Schizotypal Personality Disorder (SPD; Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders : DSM-IV, 2000) as well as cognitive features that accompany SPD and schizophrenia (Raine, 2006). Although the foci of the SPQ-L and PDI are similar, the scales measure distinct constructs. Both scales were included to determine whether the distinction between delusional ideation and schizotypal traits is important. PAS. A modified version of the Personality Assessment Screener (PAS; Morey, 1991) was used to characterize likelihood of psychological disorders in the sample, as in previous work from our lab (e.g., Girard, Christensen, & Rizvi, 2010). The scale was designed to screen for current and previous psychological disorders and includes questions relating to symptoms of specific psychological disorders such as psychosis, anxiety, and depression. In addition, this modified version incorporates subscales from the Personality Assessment Inventory (PAI; Morey, 1990) regarding alcohol abuse, drug abuse, negative impression management (`faking bad') and positive impression management (`faking good'). The scale was further modified for the purpose of this thesis to exclude 2 items assessing suicidality, as this was considered to be inappropriate for normal participants (following discussions with the university research ethics board). The remaining 58 items were administered. Due to the exclusion of these items, PAS

15

scores may underestimate likelihood of psychological disorders in the sample. The modified version can be found in Appendix B. DASS. Participants completed the 21-item version of the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales (DASS; Antony, Bieling, Cox, Enns & Swinson, 1998) to account for the potential effects of state stress, depression and anxiety on memory performance. The DASS has been normed in both clinical and community samples and has good psychometric properties. Self-Referential Appraisal Bias Memory Task. The primary measure of interest in this study was performance on a newly developed Remember/Know/New incidental SRM task. For this purpose, the dependent variables were calculated from the hit rate minus false alarm rate for Remember and Know responses to New and Old items, or corrected hit rate (Pr; Snodgrass & Corwin, 1988). A Remember/Know/New task was used to enable examination of recollective processes, since unique relations have been reported between recollection and SRE (Conway et al., 1995) and recollection and schizophrenia (Danion, Rizzo & Bruant, 1999). One of the goals of the study was to replicate the findings of Conway and Dewhurst (1995), Blackwood et al. (2004) and Menon et al. (2008), so the task was designed to be as similar to those tasks as possible, with necessary adjustments to accommodate a memory component. Additional characteristics of the SRM task and stimuli were chosen with reference to the recommendations made by Symons and Johnson (1997) based on their metaanalysis for design of SRE memory tasks. An incidental task was chosen because incidental memory has been demonstrated to maximize performance in schizophrenia samples (Aleman, Hijman, de Haan, & Kahn, 1999; Lepage, 2007) and produces greater effect sizes in SRE studies (Symons and Johnson, 1997).

16

Stimuli. Stimuli for the SRM task consist of 160 brief, gender-tailored generic sentences that describe abstract personal characteristics and life events that were intended to be applicable to most people. Sentences varied in structure and content to increase ecological validity. The stimuli include 40 sentences developed by Menon et al. (2008; i.e., the neutral and emotional, but not personalized sentences) as well as 120 valence and structurally matched sentences. Since appraisal bias has successfully been demonstrated with these stimuli, the new sentences were developed to match those developed by Menon. Content of some stimuli was adjusted to be more suitable to a normal sample; full stimuli are included in appendix A. For each original sentence, 3 were developed to match: one with similar valence and structure, and two with opposite valence and similar structure, resulting in four lists of stimuli. For example, the sentence "He dreams of winning the lottery" was matched with "He imagines touring the world", "He fears catching the flu" and "He dreads paying the bills". The opposite valence lists were to balance the proportion of positive and negative stimuli. To ensure that any effect found was not the result of sentence-specific content, each list of 40 stimuli was paired with both opposite-valence lists, resulting in four lists of 80 valence-balanced stimuli. The lists were counterbalanced between participants such that each saw one of the four valence-balanced lists of 80 stimuli at encoding. The 80 unstudied sentences were used as lures at the recognition stage. Stimuli were presented in random order to prevent ordering effects. Encoding Phase. Stimuli were presented on a computer using E-prime (Psychology Software Tools). Stimulus presentation parameters were based on those used by Menon and colleagues (2009), but were adjusted following pilot testing to increase task sensitivity. During the encoding portion,

17

participants viewed one of the counterbalanced lists (80 sentence stimuli) at a rate of 2.5 seconds per sentence plus 3 seconds to rate how much each sentence was about them on a scale from 1 ("No, not at all.") to 5 ("Yes, definitely."). Participants were told that this was a decision-making task. Following the encoding phase, there was a 25 to 30 minute delay period before the recognition task. The delay period duration was based on examples in the literature (Symons & Johnson 1997) and pilot data. Delay Filler Tasks. During the delay period, participants completed filler tasks to ensure that they were not rehearsing items. Only tasks requiring skills independent of those associated with the common neural network were used in the delay period; these include the Response Switching Task (RST; Cheyne, Carriere, & Smilek, 2009), which measures everyday lapses in attention and memory, the Motor Praxis task, an assessment of sensorimotor skills (Gur et al., 2001), and Penn Continuous Performance Test-Number and Letter Version, a measure of continuous attention (Gur et al., 2001). Recognition Phase. Following the delay period, participants were presented with 80 old and 80 new sentences in random order using E-Prime and asked to judge whether each sentence was remembered, known or new. Recollection instructions were adapted from a previous version used in our lab (Patel, 2009) and were consistent with those used in the literature (e.g., Gardiner & Java, 1990). Responses were self-paced and participants were given unlimited time to respond, but were encouraged to respond as quickly and accurately as possible. To reduce impulsive or random responding, a 3-second delay was introduced between stimulus presentation and presentation of response options.

18

Cognitive Assessment. WMS-IV. To provide a brief estimate of memory function for non-self-referent information the Logical Memory subtest of the Wechsler Memory Scale ­ fourth edition was administered (WMS-IV; Wechsler, 2009). The Logical Memory subtest consists of two brief narrative passages presented aurally, which are followed by immediate and delayed recall and delayed recognition memory tests for the details of the passages. The WMS-IV was used to account for variability in performance on the SRM task due to general memory functioning. WRAT-4. The Wide Range Achievement Test ­ Reading Subtest (WRAT-4; Wilkinson & Robertson, 2006) is a standardized measure of achievement (based on experience) in language. The WRAT4 Reading test was used to account for variability in performance on the SRM task due to linguistic achievement. Participants Data were collected from 41 participants (28 female). One participant did not follow task instructions, resulting in missing or uninterpretable data on the PDI, SRM task, WMS-IV and WRAT-4. This participant was excluded from the remaining analyses. A summary of mean scores on psychological and neuropsychological measures can be found in Tables 1 and 2. Participants were recruited through university psychology courses (N = 5) and community advertisements (N = 35) and were compensated with either course credit or a small cash honorarium. The mean age of participants was 34.23 (SD = 14.27) with an age range of 18 to 69. Of the 6 participants who reported that English was not their first language, all reported having learnt English before age 5. All participants reported normal vision, and no participants reported

19

a history of serious traumatic brain injury or neurological disorders. Two participants reported having been diagnosed with learning disabilities. Five participants reported having been diagnosed with a psychological disorder and 7 participants reported current use of medication to treat a mental health issue. Participants were not excluded on the basis of learning disorders or other mental health issues to keep the diversity of the sample and avoid excluding any meaningful variance. This study was approved by Ryerson University's Research Ethics Board. Data Analysis Preliminary Data Analysis Task Validation. Prior to testing the main hypotheses, performance on the SRM task was examined to determine whether the task is a valid measure of self-referent memory. The SRM task is unique from many other SRM tasks in that it uses a continuous approach to rating self-reference, so it was important to determine whether the predictions made by research on dichotomous selfreference ratings would stand using more sensitive ratings of self-reference. Response patterns in recognition memory by levels of self-reference rating are summarized in Table 2. The mean Pr for the task was .71 (SD = .026) with a range of .037 - .914. Mean raw hit and false alarm rates are summarized in Table 4. Self-referent bias (SRB) was operationalized in this study as the sum of the participant's self-reference ratings. Raw SRB scores were adjusted to account for missing responses by dividing the raw score by the maximum total score possible (given missing data), then multiplying that by 400, the maximum possible score. The mean adjusted SRB score out of a possible 400 was 248.91 (SD = 22.58), or 3.11 out of 5 per item on average. The range of self-

20

reference rating scores was from 217 to 308. Table 3 summarizes the frequency of self-reference ratings from 1 to 5. There was a significant difference in SRB score between counterbalanced lists with list means ranging from 237.282 to 267.217 (ANOVA: [F (3, 36) = 3.96, p = .015, MSE = 415.33]). Therefore, list condition was included as a covariate in the meditational analyses to control for the differences between lists. Three repeated measures analyses of variance (ANOVAs) were conducted to test whether higher ratings of self-reference resulted in better overall memory performance, as is predicted by the SRE literature and previous studies (Conway & Dewhurst, 1995; Conway et al., 2001); Bellezza, 1992). Separate ANOVAs for Hit (Remember), Hit (Know) and Misses (New) responses compared the number of responses at each level of self-reference rating from 1 to 5. For each type of response (Remember, Know and New) at each level (1-5), the raw number of responses was divided by a sum score of the number of responses the participant made across response type for that level, resulting in proportion scores. Proportions were needed to meaningfully compare levels because the number of responses varied between levels of selfreference and type of response. Mean response proportions by response type and level of selfreference can be found in Table 3. Based on similar tasks (Conway & Dewhurst, 1995; Conway et al., 2001), it was hypothesized that higher Hit (Remember) but lower Hit (Know) rates would be seen when self-reference ratings were higher. Lower Misses (New) rates were also expected with higher self-reference ratings. For Hit (Remember) responses, an omnibus ANOVA revealed a significant effect of level of self-reference such that there were higher proportions of Remember responses in the higher self-reference rating levels [F (4, 156) = 5.25, p = .001, MSE = .029, p2 = .12]. A trend toward a

21

significant overall effect of self-reference rating was also found for Hit (Know) responses [F (4, 156) = 2.17, p = .075, MSE = .020, p2 = .053] such that higher proportions of Know responses accompanied lower self-reference rating levels. A significant effect was found for the Misses following the same pattern as Know responses [F (4, 156) = 3.67, p = .007, MSE = .014, p2 = .086]. These results are consistent with what was predicted by SRE literature and previous studies, suggesting that this SRM task is a valid measure of self-referent memory. Correlations. Correlational analyses were conducted to determine appropriate covariates to include in the regression analyses and to validate the SRM task and the construct of self-referent bias by ruling out potential confounding effects. All correlations were evaluated at an alpha level of .05, onetailed, based on a priori hypotheses; a full correlation table can be found in Appendix C. As a preliminary test of the main hypotheses, the correlations between Pr and the PDI summary score, PDI subscales scores, SPQ-L total score, and SPQ-L subscale scores were examined. Significant correlations in the predicted direction were found between Pr and the PDI summary score (r = .34, p = .016), the Conviction subscale (r = -.33, p = .018), the Distress subscale (r = -.32, p = .022) and the Frequency subscale (r = -.34, p = .015). Since scores on the PDI subscales were highly correlated (rs > -.85, p < .001) and all were found to be correlated to Pr, the PDI total score was used as a predictor in the regression analyses to reduce collinearity. There was a trend toward a significant negative correlation between the Odd Beliefs/Magical Thinking subscale of the SPQ-L and Pr (r = -.26, p = .054), however, there were no significant correlations between total SPQ-L score or other SPQ-L subscale scores and Pr (rs > |.13|, ps >.21). Since there was only a trend toward a significant correlation between one of the nine SPQ-L scores and Pr, SPQL scores were not retained as predictors for the regression analyses.

22

A trend toward a significant correlation was found between SRB score and Pr (r = -.25, p = .063) and a significant correlation was found between SRB score and PDI total score (r = .30, p = .03). Although the correlation between SRB score and Pr did not reach statistical significance, it was of a medium-sized effect. Given the core predictions pertaining to SRB and its relation to both PDI total score and Pr, SRB was retained as a predictor in the regression analyses. As predicted, a significant correlation was found between WRAT-4 reading score and Pr (r = .46, p = .002), so it was included as a covariate in the regression analyses. Significant correlations were found between the WMS-IV Logical Memory standardized Immediate recall score (r = .48, p = .001) and standardized Delayed recall score (r = .42, p = .003) and Pr. The WMS-IV Logical Memory Immediate and Delayed recall scores were highly correlated, so the Immediate recall score, which had a stronger correlation with Pr, was chosen as a covariate for the regression analyses. The DASS total score and Depression, Anxiety and Stress subscale scores were not correlated with Pr (rs < |.027|, ps > .87) and were therefore not included as covariates in the regression. There was a significant correlation between age and Pr (r = -.43, p = .005), so it was included as a covariate. There was no significant correlation between Pr and gender (r = -.19, p = .25). List counterbalance condition was included as a covariate based on preliminary analyses of the task (see above); there was a significant correlation between list counterbalance condition and SRB score (r = .44, p = .002), but no significant correlation between list condition and PDI total score (r = .05, p = .38) or list condition and Pr (r = -.12, p = .23). None of the other selected covariates correlated significantly with any of the predictors or mediators included in the regression analyses (rs < -.18, p > .26). A response bias index (Br; Snodgrass & Corwin, 1988), or the probability of saying yes to items in conditions of uncertainty, was calculated for each participant and correlational analyses

23

were conducted to determine whether SRB score was related to Br. No significant correlation was found between SRB score and Br (r = .12, p = .46), so Br was not included as a covariate in the regression analyses. These results also highlight that SRB scores do not reflect simple response biases. Regression. Prior to testing the main predictions using regression analyses, the data were screened for outliers. Visual inspection of the standardized residual versus standardized error plots, histograms and normal probability plots suggest that the assumptions of normality, linearity, homoscedasticity and independence were met. There were no studentized deleted residual values above |t/2(N ­ p -1)df|, suggesting that discrepancy levels were low (Cohen, Cohen, Aiken & West, 2002). There were 2 cases with centered leverage values greater than 3p/N, however, the influence of these points was low, as indicated by Cook's D values below 1 and they were retained in the analyses. Mediation Analyses Regression. Regression analyses were conducted to determine whether SRB score mediated the relation between PDI total score and Pr using a causal steps approach (Baron & Kenny, 1986). According to Baron and Kenny (1986), the following evidence is needed to infer mediation: 1) the relation between the predictor (independent variable) and dependent variable is significant (path c); 2) the relation between the predictor and mediator is significant (path a); 3) the relation between the mediator and dependent variable is significant, holding the effect of the independent variable constant (path c'); and 4) the Beta value of the direct effect of the independent variable on the dependent variable in step 3) must be lower than the correlation coefficient or not significantly

24

different from zero. For each of the following regressions, Age, WRAT-4 Reading score, WMSIV Immediate Logical memory score and list condition were included as covariates. A summary of the mediation analyses is depicted in Figure 1. In the first analysis, the dependent variable (Pr) was regressed on the independent variable (PDI total score) to obtain the regression coefficient for path c ( = -.24 p = .05 SE = .0003). In the second analysis, the mediator variable (SRB score) was regressed on the independent variable (PDI total score) to obtain the regression coefficient for path a ( = .31, p = .04 SE = .05). In the third analysis, the dependent variable (Pr) was regressed on the independent (PDI total score) and mediator (SRB score) variables to obtain regression coefficients for paths b ( = -.40, p = .004, SE = .001) and c' ( = .-.11, p = .31, SE = .0003). Using the causal steps approach, although the regression coefficient for path c is on the cusp of statistical significance, the change in significance between path c and path c' suggests a full mediation. Bootstrapping. Although the causal steps approach is still commonly used in social sciences research, it has recently been criticized for low statistical power resulting in increased Type II errors due to the number of formal tests required to infer mediation (Preacher & Hayes, 2004, 2008). If even one of the paths does not reach significance due to low power, Type II errors can occur. It has also been suggested that path c does not need to be significant for indirect effects to be present in the population since suppression effects can often mask significant relationships. Preacher and Hayes (2004) have recommended formal testing of the change in significance between path c and path c' using bootstrapping analyses as an alternative. Bootstrapping is also advantageous in that it is a nonparametric technique and hence makes no assumptions about the shape of the distributions of the variables or the sampling distribution of the statistic, and can yield reliable

25

results in small samples (Efron & Tibshirani, 1993). The technique consists of resampling a large number of new data sets from the original sample using sampling with replacement and computing a point estimate of the indirect effect (c ­ c', or equivalently ab) across samples; a confidence interval for the size of the indirect effect is computed based on the point estimate and if the confidence interval does not contain zero, the indirect effect can be inferred to be different from zero. Bootstrap analyses were conducted to formally test the significance of the indirect effect of SRB score on the relation between PDI total score and Pr using an SPSS macro developed by Preacher and Hayes (2008). The model consisted of Pr as the dependent variable, PDI total score are the independent variable, SRB score as a proposed mediator, and age, WRAT-4 reading score, WMS-IV Immediate Logical Memory score and list condition as covariates. Using a bias corrected and accelerated 95% confidence interval with 10,000 bootstrap samples, the true indirect effect is estimated to lie between -.0010 and -.000028. Because the 95% confidence interval does not contain zero, it can be concluded that the indirect effect is significantly different from zero (p < .05). Thus, these results support those of the above mediation analysis and indicate that there is at minimum an indirect effect. Shrout and Bolger (2002) suggest that factors including suppression and temporal or theoretical distance between the predictor and dependent variable can result in the c path not reaching significance and it is therefore worth evaluating the potential for mediation effects even if the relation between the proposed predictor and dependent variable does not reach significance. In this case, there is a significant bivariate correlation between PDI total score and Pr, a correlation with .05 significance between PDI total score and Pr, and significant bootstrap

26

results. At present, it can only be concluded that an indirect effect exists but that SRB score mediates the relation between PDI total score and Pr. Discussion The purpose of this study was to examine the relation between subclinical delusional thought, SRB and SRM in a normal sample. Previous studies have reported that delusional symptoms in schizophrenia may be associated with an SRB (Blackwood et al., 2004; Menon et al., 2008). These findings are in line with predictions made by cognitive models of delusions (Blackwood et al., 2001; Sass & Parnas, 2003). It has also been previously reported that items judged to be self-referent are remembered more readily than items not judged to be self-referent (Bellezza, 1992) and that the mere act of judging the self-reference of items increases memory for those items (Rogers, 1977; Rogers, Kuiper & Kirker, 1977). In combination, these findings predict that an SRB ought to result in a memory advantage. Conversely, SRE is impaired in schizophrenia (Jia et al., 2008); the reason for this discrepancy is unclear. The current study sought to reconcile these inconsistencies by extending the finding of a relation between delusional symptoms and SRB to a normal population and characterizing the effect of SRB on memory. It was hypothesized that 1) delusional ideation would predict poor memory performance, that 2) delusional ideation would predict SRB and that 3) SRB would predict memory performance above and beyond delusional ideation. Although SPQ-L was not predictive of Pr, PDI total score was significantly correlated with Pr and the regression coefficient bordered significance. Regression and bootstrapping analyses supported the remaining hypotheses, suggesting that SRB mediates an indirect effect between PDI total score and Pr. The findings of this study have implications for understanding SRE, cognitive impairment in schizophrenia and delusions; these implications are discussed below.

27

SRE Initial examination of my novel experimental task suggests that it is a valid and sensitive measure of SRM and SRB. As predicted, corrected hit rate (Pr), which reflects overall memory performance, significantly correlated with SRB scores. Although the purpose of this study was not to examine the dual process model of recognition (Tulving, 1985), a Remember-Know procedure was used to maximize task sensitivity to detect potential effects of SRB on memory and be amenable to follow-up studies in a clinical sample. As predicted, higher self-reference ratings corresponded with a higher proportion of Remember responses and there was a trend toward higher self-reference ratings corresponding with lower proportions of Know responses, suggesting that self-referent encoding is predictive of recollective, rather than familiarity, based recognition. Although the validity of multiple memory models in SRE is debated (for example, see Hirshman, Lanning, Master & Henzel, 2002), these results are generally in line with what has been reported in previous studies using similar methods (Conway & Dewhurst, 1995; Conway et al., 2001). Examination of the mean proportion of correct responses by level of self-reference rating (summarized in Table 3) reveals that although there is a significant overall effect of selfreference rating on memory, studied items given self-reference ratings of 4, not 5, had the lowest proportion of New responses (misses), highest proportion of Remember responses and lowest proportion of Know responses. These results partially replicate previous findings that suggest that there may not be a direct linear relation between item-level rating of self-reference and memory performance. Previous studies using continuous assessment of self-reference have clumped items given moderate ratings of self-reference together, potentially masking important variability (Conway & Dewhurst, 1995; Conway et al., 2001). If this finding is replicable,

28

behavioural and neural models of self-referent memory, including the self-memory system model (Conway & Pleydell-Pearce, 2000) will need to account for it. The finding that self-reference ratings are not necessarily linearly related to memory performance has been replicated using different stimuli and task parameters suggesting that it is not an artifact of task design and merits closer inspection. Conway et al. (2001) suggest that items rated high in self-reference are given special importance and may be integrated into long-term memory differently than moderately self-referent information. A potential explanation for the current pattern of results consistent with this model is that items rated high in self-reference are immediately integrated without elaboration, which is a proposed mechanism of memory enhancement in SRE (Symons & Johnson, 1997). A second possible explanation is that items given ratings of 4 were more complex, undesirable, uncommon or abstract, resulting in deeper processing, but lower selfreference ratings. Related to the second proposed explanation is the fact that extreme ratings were used more commonly than any of the moderate ratings levels; thus, it is possible that selfreference interacted with rating distinctiveness, resulting in memory enhancement. Closer inspection of items and response patterns could detect these causes, but is beyond the scope of this thesis. While this finding remains perplexing, it is clear that assessment of self-reference using dichotomous ratings may mask other processes, which could hinder proper understanding of self-referent cognition. Correct understanding of SRM is important because it could have implications for rehabilitation techniques for memory impairment in schizophrenia. Cognition and Delusional Ideation Correlations, regression and bootstrapping analyses indicate that in this sample delusional ideation predicted poor SRM, which was mediated by SRB. Although the variance in memory performance accounted for by delusional ideation was small (R2 = .055), this is nonetheless

29

impressive, given that this was a normal sample with relatively low levels of delusional ideation and a normal range of memory function. SRB accounted for an additional 9% of the variance when added to the model, which is a medium-sized effect and fully mediated the relation between delusional ideation and self-referent memory. The continuum model of psychosis predicts that cognitive differences found in samples with low levels of psychotic symptoms should be replicable in samples with clinically significant symptoms, but with greater magnitude. Therefore, in a clinical sample, greater memory impairment and SRB would be predicted. This prediction is consistent with what was reported by Jia et al. (2008), although they did not select their sample based on delusional symptoms. Thus, although the effect sizes in this study were modest, the findings may still have significant theoretical and practical implications for understanding cognitive impairment in schizophrenia. The finding that there was a correlation between Pr and PDI total, but not SPQ-L scores, suggests that it is delusional ideation rather than schizotypal personality traits per se that may be associated with impaired SRM. This finding is not consistent with the continuum model of psychosis, and in a review of the evidence supporting the continuum model, Johns and van Os (2001) noted that as is seen in clinical psychotic disorders, delusional symptoms are most often accompanied by other positive symptoms (such as hallucinations) in non-clinical samples. However, they also note from research on the factor structure of schizotypy that the relation between other symptoms in non-clinical samples is less clear. Whereas some authors have reported a three factor structure, akin to the positive, negative and disorganized symptom domains in schizophrenia, others propose a fourth factor unique to schizotypy relating to asocial tendencies (Vollema & van den Bosch, 1995; as cited in Johns & van Os, 2001). The hypothesis that impairment in SRM is uniquely related to delusional ideation is further supported in this

30

study by the fact that the only subscale on the SPQ-L to show a trend toward correlation with Pr was the Odd Beliefs/Magical thinking subscale, which is thematically linked to delusional ideation. The SPQ-L includes numerous subscales assessing heterogeneous symptoms and it is possible that items relating to delusion were too few to capture enough variance in delusional ideation to detect an effect. To confirm whether SRB is indeed uniquely related to delusions, follow-up studies in samples with schizotypal personality disorder and schizophrenia with and without delusional symptoms are needed. Based on the results of this study, it can be hypothesized that SRB will be seen in samples with schizotypal personality disorder or schizophrenia with delusions, but not without delusions. Similarly, clinical samples without delusion may not show impairment on SRM tasks. Cognitive and Neural Models of Delusions In this study, it was demonstrated that subclinical delusional ideation is associated with an SRB. This finding extends what has been reported by Blackwood et al. (2004) and Menon et al. (2008) to a normal sample. That this relation can be detected in a normal sample supports the notion that cognitive biases, like psychotic symptoms, can be thought of as continuous and may be involved in the development of psychosis. This finding is also consistent with predictions made by two cognitive models of schizophrenia: one proposed by Blackwood and colleagues (2001) to account for persecutory delusions and another proposed by Sass and Parnas (2003) theorizing that differences in self cognition can account for all symptoms of schizophrenia. Although the current study used similar stimuli and task parameters to Blackwood et al. (2004) and Menon et al. (2008), the sample was not restricted to those with persecutory or referential delusions and delusional ideation and SRB was measured continuously (as opposed to being compared between groups), allowing for more sensitive assessment. Using continuous

31

measurement and analysis methods without restriction to a group with specific delusional content, a self-referent bias was detected. Although a self-referent bias was predicted by Blackwood and colleagues, they theorized that it would only be present in those with persecutory delusions. The PDI was designed to assess delusional ideation as a unitary construct, so a possible interpretation of the findings is that it is delusional ideation generally, rather than persecutory delusions specifically, that are related to self-referent bias. In this way, this study more strongly supports the model proposed by Sass and Parnas than that proposed by Blackwood and colleagues. Van der Meer et al. (2010) proposed a neural model of self-reflection wherein the VMPFC tags information relevant for self, and DMPFC is involved in the decision-making process. van der Meer and colleagues note the relevance of this model for understanding patients' insight into their symptoms in schizophrenia. Given the finding of an SRB related to delusions in this thesis, this model may also have special relevance to deluded populations. Based on this study, differential activation would be predicted in the DMPFC in deluded samples. It is unclear whether hypo or hyperactivation would be expected, since past studies of self-reference in delusional samples have noted both in the MPFC, depending on the task used (Menon et al., 2008; Brüne et al., 2008). To date, no study has sought to isolate DMPFC

activation in a heterogeneous deluded sample. Clarifying the relevant roles of the DMPFC and VMPFC in delusions are important since it has gone unrecognized in past research and could inform treatment and theory surrounding the development and maintenance of delusions.

32

Limitations Because this study was exploratory in nature and the SRM task was newly developed, many assessments were included, so the analyses were limited to the main relations and hypotheses. Contrary to what was predicted, the SPQ did not relate to SRM or SRB. Predictions were not made regarding the subscales of SPQ, but there was evidence of a relation between SRM and the Odd Beliefs/Magical Thinking subscale, supporting the hypothesis that selfreferent memory is uniquely associated with delusional ideation. In spite of this evidence, it is unclear why the PDI, but not the SPQ was related to SRM and SRB since the two were highly correlated and both designed to measure related constructs. As previously mentioned, although the SRM task was newly developed for this study, it is similar to tasks used in previous studies (Conway & Dewhurst, 1995; Blackwood et al., 2004). The stimuli were similar to what has been used in previous studies and included equal numbers of positive, negative and neutral statements. Stimuli were intended to be abstract and ambiguous, however a current limitation is that no data were collected to characterize the valence and abstractness of the stimuli; this may be particularly challenging due to the sentence structure of the stimuli. Since the findings generally replicate what has been previously reported, it seems unlikely that either abstractness or valence affected the results, but this possibility cannot be evaluated with the current data. The cognitive model of persecutory delusions proposed by Blackwood and colleagues (2004) predicts that persecutory delusions should be associated with a bias to judge ambiguous threat stimuli as self-referent. The stimuli used in this study included negatively valenced statements that were similar to those characterized as threatening by Blackwood et al. (2004), but the effect of valence on self-referent bias and the relation between valence, self-reference ratings and delusional ideation was not explored. Because data regarding

33

valence was not collected, it is not possible to test whether there was any interaction between perceived valence by participants and self-referent bias. Similarly, although the PDI contains items assessing persecutory delusions, the content of reported delusional thoughts was not explored, therefore the possibility that the relations found were due wholly to persecutory delusions cannot be dismissed. Another limitation of this study was sample size. SRB is a relatively new construct, and its relation to memory had never been tested; it was not known during the study design stage what the size of the relation might be and how many covariates would be used, rendering estimation of the necessary sample size to detect effects difficult. Although the sample size was sufficient to reliably demonstrate most of the hypothesized associations, the significance of the relation between PDI total score and Pr only just reached significance. The raw correlation between SRB and Pr was also marginally significant, but became significant when covariates were included in the regression analyses. Significance between the predictor and dependent variable is not needed to test for mediation, however, because the significance of this relation was marginal, it remains unclear whether SRB mediates a direct effect or an indirect effect in normal participants. Future Directions This study is the first to demonstrate a relation between SRB and SRM. Future studies should seek to replicate this finding in a larger sample of healthy adults, but also extend this finding to clinical samples with schizophrenia and schizotypal personality disorder. To determine whether SRB is uniquely related to delusions, follow-up studies in samples with schizotypal personality disorder and schizophrenia with and without delusional symptoms are needed. Based on the results of this study, it can be hypothesized that SRB will predict memory impairment in

34

samples with schizotypal personality disorder or schizophrenia with delusions, but not without delusions. Although the main hypotheses were supported, closer inspection of the task parameters and stimuli could help to explain the unique pattern noted with self-reference ratings by ruling out confounds including complexity, abstractness, undesirability or uncommonness of traits. Although several moderators and mediators of SRM have been identified (e.g. Symons & Johnson, 1997), relatively few studies have examined SRM using purely continuous designs and doing so may help to identify additional confounds in the research. The results of the current study support proposed cognitive models of delusions, but several questions remain. The current study suggests, consistent with predictions of the model by Sass and Parnas (2003) that subtle differences in self-cognition may underlie symptoms of schizophrenia. Although these early results are promising, this model has been largely untested and future studies should seek to examine the hypothesized relations between other symptoms of psychosis and self-cognition. Regarding Blackwood et al.'s (2001) model, the evidence is less clear; it is uncertain whether there is an interaction between threat and SRB and also whether there is an interaction between delusional themes and SRB. This study was not designed to test these predictions, but the results indirectly suggest that SRB may not be specific to persecutory delusions; this remains an empirical question to be addressed in future studies. The SRM task included potentially threatening stimuli and has demonstrated sufficient sensitivity to detect selfreferent bias, so it could provide a means of testing the hypothesized interaction between threat and self-referent bias. Similarly, although this study was not designed to test the neural model of self-referent cognition proposed by van der Meer and colleagues (2010), the results have direct implications,

35

which should be tested. The finding of a relation between delusional symptoms and self-referent appraisal predicts that differential activation should be found in the DMPFC during tasks involving self-referent decisions in deluded samples. Specifically, SRB could account for the differential activation often noted in this region in delusional samples. Although it is still unclear whether this finding applies to all delusional thought or certain themes of delusional thought, previous studies examining delusional samples using brain imaging techniques (Menon et al., 2008; Brüne et al., 2008) have chosen their deluded sample based on specific delusional

themes and did not overtly seek to examine the association between activation in the DMPFC
and self-referent appraisal. Future studies should examine this relation using heterogeneous delusional samples to determine whether this bias accounts for differential activation in the DMPFC. Consistent with past research, the current study suggests that in normal populations, SRM is primarily based upon recollection rather than familiarity. Future studies are needed to test whether this is also true in clinical samples. Since recollective memory is often impaired in schizophrenia (Danion, Rizzo & Bruant, 1999), it is likely that psychotic samples may instead rely on familiarity-based memory systems. If, as predicted, psychotic samples have impaired SRM, understanding which memory systems support their memory will be essential to the development of effective cognitive remediation strategies. Finally, since this was a correlational design, empirical tests are needed to determine whether SRB merely mediates SRM or causes SRM impairment. The model of psychosis proposed by Sass and Parnas (2003) suggests that cognitive biases may cause or precede the development of symptoms. If so, SRB could be used as a marker for early identification of atrisk populations. Alternatively, SRB could help to explain the development of delusions, which

36

could yield more effective prevention and treatment strategies. The purpose of cognitive models is to help explain complex disorders to ultimately assist with the development effective treatment and prevention strategies. Unfortunately, the causes and maintenance mechanisms of schizophrenia are poorly understood. Until the causes and core features of schizophrenia are clear, development of effective treatments will be hindered. Thus, future research should seek to determine why psychosis develops and persists. In summary, in spite of the current limitations, there is much to be gained from the continued study of cognition in the continuum of psychosis. As demonstrated in the current study, there may exist links between basic cognitive processes, such as memory, and positive symptoms of psychosis. These links inform our understanding of memory processes in healthy individuals, but could also be important for understanding core impairments in schizophrenia. Continued study of the relation between basic cognitive processes and schizophrenia could ultimately lead to improved treatment of symptoms, cognitive impairments and prevention strategies.

37

References Aleman, A., Hijman, R., de Haan, E. H. F., & Kahn, R. S. (1999). Memory impairment in schizophrenia: A meta-analysis. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156(9), 1358-1366. Antony, M.M., Bieling, P.J., Cox, B.J., Enns, M.W. & Swinson, R.P. (1998). Psychometric properties of the 42-item and 21-item versions of the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales (DASS) in clinical groups and a community sample. Psychological Assessment, 10, 176181. Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator­mediator variable distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 51, 1173-1182. Bellezza, F. S. (1992). Recall of congruent information in the self-reference task. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 30(4), 275-278. Bellezza, F. S. (1993). Does "perplexing" describe the self-reference effect? yes!. Hillsdale, NJ, England: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. Bentall, R. P. (1994). Cognitive biases and abnormal beliefs: towards a model of persecutory delusions. In A. S. David & J. Cutting (Eds.) The Neuropsychology of schizophrenia (pp. 337-360). Hove, UK: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Blackwood, N. J., Bentall, R. P., Ffytche, D. H., Simmons A., Murray, R. M. & Howard, R. J. (2004). Persecutory delusions and the determination of self-relevance: An fMRI investigation. Psychological Medicine, 34, 591­596. Blackwood, N. J., Howard, R. J., Bentall, R. P. & Murray, R. M. (2001). Cognitive neuropsychiatric models of persecutory delusions. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158(4), 527-539.

38

Bluhm, R. L., Miller, J., Lanius, R. A., Osuch, E. A., Boksman, K., Neufeld, R. W. J., et al. (2007). Spontaneous low-frequency fluctuations in the BOLD signal in schizophrenic patients: Anomalies in the default network. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 33(4), 1004-1012. Bora, E., Yucel, M. & Pantelis, C. (2009). Theory of mind impairment in schizophrenia: Metaanalysis. Schizophrenia Research, 109(1-3), 1-9. Bowie, C. R. & Harvey, P. D. (2006). Cognitive deficits and functional outcome in schizophrenia. Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment, 2(4), 531-536. Brüne, M., Lissek, S., Fuchs, N., Witthaus, H., Peters, S., Nicolas , V. et al. (2008). An fMRI study of theory of mind in schizophrenic patients with "passivity" symptoms. Neuropsychologia, 46, 1992­2001. Buckner, R. L. & Carroll, D. C. (2007). Self-projection and the brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11(2), 49-57. Candido, C. L. & Romney, D. M. (1990). Attributional style in paranoid vs depressed patients. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 63, 355-363. Cheyne, J. A., Carriere, J. S. A., & Smilek, D. (2009). Absent minds and absent agents: Attention-lapse induced alienation of agency. Consciousness and Cognition, 18(2), 481-493. Cohen, J., Cohen, P., Aiken, L. S., & West, S. G. (2002). Applied multiple regression ­ correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences (3rd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Conway, M. A. & Dewhurst, S. A. (1995). The self and recollective experience. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 9, 1­19. Conway, M. A. & Dewhurst, S. A., Pearson, N. & Sapute, A. (2001). The self and recollection reconsidered: How `a failure to replicate' failed and why trace strength accounts of recollection are untenable. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 15, 673­686.

39

Conway, M. A. & Pleydell-Pearce C. W. (2000). The construction of autobiographical memories in the self memory system. Psychological Review, 107, 261-288. Czienskowski, U. (1997). Selbstbezug: Eine besonders wirksame enkodierungsstrategie? metaanalyse und experimentelle moderatorprüfung. / Self-referencing: A very effective encoding strategy? Meta-analysis and experimental validation of moderators. Zeitschrift Für Experimentelle Psychologie, 44(3), 361-393. Czienskowski, U., & Giljohann, S. (2002). Intimacy, concreteness, and the "self-reference effect". Experimental Psychology, 49(1), 73-79. D'Argembeau, A., Raffard, S. & Van der Linden, M. (2008). Remembering the past and imagining the future in schizophrenia. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 117(1), 247-251. Daniel, M., Dibo-Cohen, C. M., Carité, L., Boyer, P., Denis, M. (2007). Dysfunctions of spatial cognition in schizophrenic patients. Spatial Cognition and Computation, 7(3), 287-309. Danion, J. M., Rizzo, L. & Bruant, A. (1999). Functional mechanisms underlying impaired recognition memory and conscious awareness in patients with schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56(7), 639­644. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders : DSM-IV. (2000). In American Psychiatric Association Task Force on DSM-IV. (Ed.), (4th ed., text revision 2000. ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association. Efron, B., & Tibshirani, R. (1993). An introduction to the bootstrap. New York: Chapman & Hall/CRC. Gardiner, J. M., & Java, R. I. (1990). Recollective experience in word and non-word recognition. Memory & Cognition, 18(1), 23-30.

40

Garety, P. (1985). Delusions: Problems in definition and measurement. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 58(1), 25-34. Garety, P. A., Freeman, D., Jolley, S., Dunn, G., Bebbington, P. E., Fowler, D. G., et al. (2005). Reasoning, emotions, and delusional conviction in psychosis. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 114, 373384. Garety, P. A., Hemsley, D. R., & Wessely, S. (1991). Reasoning in deluded schizophrenic and paranoid patients: Biases in performance on a probabilistic inference task. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 179(4), 194-201. Girard, T.A., Christensen, B.K., & Rizvi, S. (2010). Visual-spatial episodic memory in Schizophrenia: A multiple systems framework. Neuropsychology, 24(3), 368-378. Gur, R. C., Ragland, J. D., Moberg, P. J., Turner, T. H., Bilker, W. B., Kohler, C., et al. (2001). Computerized Neurocognitive Scanning: I. Methodology and validation in healthy people. Neuropsychopharmacology, 25, 766-776. Hanlon, F. M., Weisend, M. P., Hamilton, D. A., Jones, A. P., Thoma, R. J., Huang, M., et al. (2006). Impairment on the hippocampal-dependent virtual Morris water task in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research. 87(1-3), 67-80. Hassabis, D. & Maguire, E. A. (2007). Deconstructing episodic memory with construction. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11(7), 299-306. Heinrichs, W. R. (2005). The primacy of cognition in schizophrenia. American Psychologist, 60(3), 229-242. Hirschman, E., Lanning, K., Master, S. & Henzler, A. (2002). Signal-detection Models as Tools for Interpreting Judgements of Recollections. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 16, 151­156. Jaspers, K. (1913). Allgemeine psychopathologie. Berlin: Springer.

41

Jia, H., Zhu, H., Han, S., & Zhang, j. (2008). Self-reference effect and insight in schizophrenia patients. Chinese Journal of Clinical Psychology, 16(5), 503-505. Johns, L. C. & van Os, J. (2001). The continuity of psychotic experiences in the general population. Clinical Psychology Review, 21(8), 1125­1141. Kaney, S. & Bentall, R. P. (1989). Persecutory delusions and attribution style. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 62, 191-198. Lepage, M. (2007). Memory and schizophrenia. The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry / La Revue canadienne de psychiatrie, 52(11), 691-692. Lyon, H. M., Kaney, S. & Bentall, R. P. (1994). The defensive function of persecutory delusions: evidence from attribution tasks. British journal of Psychiatry, 164, 637-646. Mazoyer, B., Zago, L., Mellet, E., Bricogne, S., Etard, O. & Houdé, O. (2001). Cortical networks for working memory and executive functions sustain the conscious resting state in man. Brain Research Bulletin, 54, 287-298. Menon, M., Anderson, A., Schmitz, T., Korostil, M., Addington, J. & Kapur, S. (2008). Exploring the neural correlates of delusions of reference: an fMRI study. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 102(s2), 90. Menon, M., Mizrahi, R., & Kapur, S. (2008). 'Jumping to conclusions' and delusions in psychosis: Relationship and response to treatment. Schizophrenia Research, 98(1-3), 225231. Morey, L. C. (1990). Personality Assessment Inventory. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources. Morey, L. C. (1991). Personality Assessment Screener. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.

42

Moritz, S., & Woodward, T. S. (2004). Plausibility judgment in schizophrenic patients: Evidence for a liberal acceptance bias. German Journal of Psychiatry, 7, 66-74. Moritz, S., Veckenstedt, R., Hottenrott, B., Woodward, T. S., Randjbar, S., & Lincoln, T. M. (2010). Different sides of the same coin? intercorrelations of cognitive biases in schizophrenia. Cognitive Neuropsychiatry, 15(4), 406-421. Moritz, S., & Woodward, T. S. (2006b). A generalized bias against disconfirmatory evidence in schizophrenia. Psychiatry Research, 142, 157-165. Northoff, G., Heinzel, A., de Greck, M., Bermpohl, F., Dobrowolny, H., & Panksepp, J. (2006). Self-referential processing in our brain ­ A meta-analysis of imaging studies on the self. NeuroImage, 31, 440-457. Patel, R. (2009). The Fear Factor: Effects of Implicit and Explicit Processing on the Emotional Enhancement of Memory. Unpublished Master's Thesis, Ryerson University, Toronto, Ontario. Peters, E. R., Joseph, S. A., & Garety, P. A. (1999). Measurement of delusional ideation in the normal population: Introducing the PDI (Peters Delusions Inventory). Schizophrenia Bulletin, 25(3), 553-576. Preacher, K. J., & Hayes, A. F. (2004). SPSS and SAS procedures for estimating indirect effects in simple mediation models. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 36, 717­731. Preacher, K. J., & Hayes, A. F. (2008). Asymptotic and resampling strategies for assessing and comparing indirect effects in multiple mediator models. Behavior Research Methods, 40, 879-891. Psychology Software Tools, Inc. E-Prime 1.0.

43

Raichle, M. E., MacLeod, A. M., Snyder, A. Z., Powers, W. J., Gusnard, D. A. & Shulman, G. L. (2001). A default mode of brain function. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A, 98, 676-682. Raine, A. (2006). Schizotypal personality: Neurodevelopmental and psychosocial trajectories. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 2, 291­326. Rogers, T. B. (1977). Self-reference in memory: Recognition of personality items. Journal of Research in Personality, 11(3), 295-305. Rogers, T. B., Kuiper, N. A., & Kirker, W. S. (1977). Self-reference and the encoding of personal information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35(9), 677-688. Sass, L. A. & Parnas, J. (2003). Schizophrenia, consciousness and the self. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 29(3), 427-444. Sharp, H. M., Fear, C. F. & Healy, D. (1997). Attribution style and delusions: an investigation based on delusional content. European Psychiatry, 12, 1-7. Spreng, N. R., Mar, R. A. & Kim, A. S. N. (2009). The common neural basis of autobiographical memory, prospection, navigation, theory of mind, and the default mode: A quantitative meta-analysis. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21(3), 489-510. Suhr, J. A. & Spitznagel, M. B. (2001). Factor versus cluster models of schizotypal traits II: Relation to neuropsychological impairment. Schizophrenia Research, 52, 231­239. Symons, C., & Johnson, B. T. (1997). The self-reference effect in memory: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 121(3), 371-394. The Psychological Corporation. (1999). Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI) Manual. San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation. Tulving, E. (1985). Memory and consciousness. Canadian Psychologist, 26, 1-12.

44

van der Meer, L., Costafreda, S., Aleman, A., & David, A. S. (2010). Self-reflection and the brain: A theoretical review and meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies with implications for schizophrenia. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 34(6), 935-946. van Os, J., Hanssen, M., Bijl, R. V., & Ravelli, A. (2000). Straus (1969) revisited: A psychosis continuum in the general population? Schizophrenia Research, 45(1-2), 11-20. van Os, J., Hanssen, M., Bijl, R. V., & Vollebergh, W. (2001). Prevalence of psychotic disorder and community level of psychotic symptoms: An urban-rural comparison. Archives of General Psychiatry, 58(7), 663-668. Wechsler, D. (2009). Wechsler Memory Scale­fourth edition. San Antonio, TX: Pearson Assessment. Weniger, G. & Irle, E. (2008). Allocentric memory impaired and egocentric memory intact as assessed by virtual reality in recent-onset schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 101(1-3), 201-209. Whitfield-Gabrieli, S., Thermenos, H. W., Milanovic, S., Tsuang, M. T., Faraone, S. V., McCarley, R. W., et al. (2009). Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 106(4), 1279-1284. Wilkinson, G. S., & Robertson, G. J. (2006). Wide Range Achievement Test--Fourth Edition. Lutz, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources. World Health Organization (2004). Global burden of disease. Retrieved from World Health Organization website: http://www.who.int/healthinfo/global_burden_disease/GBD_report_2004update_full.pdf . Wuthrich, V., & Bates, T. C. (2005). Reliability and validity of two likert versions of the

45

schizotypal personality questionnaire (SPQ). Personality and Individual Differences, 38(7), 1543-1548.

46

Table 1 Sample Characteristics

Age in years 34.23 (14.27) Range 18-69 Gender (Male) 13 (32.5%) DASS Total Score 25.05 (17.01) Depression 8.25 (6.47) Anxiety 5.56 (7.05) Stress 11.25 (6.45) PAS Total Score Probability of Problems (Frequency in sample) Low (P < 15) 5 Normal (15 < P > 29) 9 Mild (30 < P > 47) 6 Moderate (48 < P > 74) 8 Marked (75 < P > 99) 6 Extreme (P >99) 0 PDI Total Score 82.73 (64.31) Conviction 31.30 (22.15) Distress 25.23 (23.27) Frequency 26.20 (20.44) SPQ-L 96.38 (41.48) Ideas of Reference 12.00 (6.41) Excessive Social Anxiety 14.45 (7.64) Odd Beliefs/Magical Thinking 5.93 (5.33) Unusual Perceptual Experiences 7.42 (5.46) Odd or Eccentric Behaviour 9.83 (6.30) No Close Friends 11.98 (7.32) Odd Speech 13.95 (6.47) Constricted Affect 9.02 (5.69) Suspiciousness 11.12 (6.41) Notes: unless otherwise specified, mean standardized scores are reported with standard deviations in parentheses (N=40). DASS = Depression Anxiety Stress Scale; PAS = Personality Assessment Screener; PDI = Peters Delusion Inventory; SPQ-L = Schiotypal Personality Questionnaire ­ Likert Version.

47

Table 2. Cognitive Assessment Measure WRAT-4 Reading Test 104.53 (12.03) Range 79-126 WMS-IV Logical Memory Immediate Recall 10.88 (2.88) Delayed Recall 10.58 (2.99) Delayed Recognition (frequency by percentile range) <2 1 3-9 2 10-16 2 17-25 1 26-50 10 51-75 7 >75 17 Notes: unless otherwise specified, mean standardized scores are reported with standard deviations in parentheses (N=40). WRAT-4 = Wide Range Achievement Test, 4th edition; WMSIV = Wechsler Memory Scale, 4th edition.

48

Table 3. Response pattern for Old items in SRM Task by self-reference rating
Self-Reference Rating N Mean SelfReference Rating Frequency Mean Response Frequency Correct response proportion 4.27 0.22 1 R 19.95 10.15 0.52 5.53 0.26 1.62 0.15 2 R 10.53 6.18 0.57 2.72 0.23 2.22 0.16 3 R 12.2 7.25 0.59 2.72 0.23 1.85 0.13 4 R 13.78 9.65 0.68 2.28 0.17 3.4 0.14 5 R 23.18 14.8 0.64 4.97 0.22

K

N

K

N

K

N

K

N

K

Notes: N = response of New to old item (misses), R = response of Remember to old item, K = response of Know to old item.

49

Table 4. Mean response rates Stimulus type

Response New Remember Know New 70.6 (7.85) 3.8 (3.96) 5.75 (6.10) Old 13.27 (11.55) 48.25 (18.13) 18.22 (16.10) Note: mean response presented, standard deviation in parentheses (N=40).

50

Figure 1. Mediation Model

PDI Total Score Path c (=-.238 p=.050)

Pr

SRB

Path a (=.313, p=.035) PDI Total Score Path c' (=-.114, p=.314)

Path b (=-.395, p=.004) Pr

51

Appendix A: SRM Task Stimuli Female Stimuli Original She is stupid She attacked the girl She almost choked to death She was in a horrible accident She hates her job She cheats on her partner She is ugly She lost her job She has been impaired She saw a body She might have cancer She is miserable She is lonely She dreams of winning the lottery She is feeling very happy today Everybody likes her She is opinionated She is a pervert She is hated by everyone She is a liar She is tall She is sleepy She likes walking the dog She goes to school She enjoys cereal for breakfast She used to be in a choir

Matched Structure, Matched Valence She is annoying She kicked the child She nearly crashed her car She was in a hospital ward She hates her bedroom She disobeys her parents She is nasty She failed her test She has seen tragedy She hid the truth She could get sick She is incompetent She is boring She imagines touring the world She is feeling very alert today Everybody pleases her She is different She is an outcast She is ignored by many She is a sinner She is shapely She is groggy She enjoys watering the garden She goes to class She enjoys chocolate for dessert She used to be in a sports league

Matched Structure, Opposite Valence She is lucky She loved the kid She always gives her all She was in a fun class She loves her wardrobe She respects her family She is gentle She found her phone She has found strength She got a present She could be helpful She is considerate She is patient She fears catching the flu She is feeling very low today Everybody avoids her She is accepted She is a trend-setter She is adored by friends She is a charmer She is small She is attentive She avoids cleaning the stove She goes to parties She dislikes cola for breakfast She used to be in a study group 52

Matched Structure, Opposite Valence She is wise She saved the boy She often calls her friends She was in an awesome city She loves her hairstyle She honours her elders She is grateful She earned her money She has earned trust She found a coin She might be fit She is perceptive She is educated She dreads paying the bills She is feeling very doubtful today Everybody distrusts her She is moderate She is an advocate She is recognized by classmates She is an inventor She is lean She is motivated She dislikes making the bed She goes to dinner She dislikes oatmeal for dessert She used to be in a fitness class

She scratched a CD She wants to be a school teacher She wants two kids She likes collecting music She has brown hair She is right handed She has a drivers licence She loses her keys often She likes going to the cinema She enjoys drinking coffee She knows to ride a bike She is around 20 years old She can speak two languages She is tired

She broke a dish She wants to be a scientist She wants two pets She likes collecting cards She has short nails She is light skinned She has a health card She loses her phone often She likes going to the park She enjoys eating cake She knows how to sew a button She is about average height She can use word processors She is uneasy

She fixed a computer She wants to be a manager She wants two cars She likes collecting posters She has pink lips She is rosy cheeked She has a phone number She clears her desk often She dislikes going to the dentist She dislikes drinking tonic She doesn't know how to cure a disease She is of medium build She can't jump five feet She is eager

She finished a paper She wants to be a supervisor She wants two chairs She likes collecting movies She has large eyes She is bright eyed She has a report card She brushes her teeth often She dislikes going to the hospital She dislikes eating mold She doesn't know how to build a house She is from Canada She can't make the NBA She is serious

Male Stimuli Original He is stupid He attacked the girl He almost choked to death He was in a horrible accident He hates his job He cheats on his partner He is ugly He lost his job He has been impaired He saw a body He might have cancer He is miserable He is lonely

Matched Structure, Matched Valence He is annoying He kicked the child He nearly crashed his car He was in a hospital ward He hates his bedroom He disobeys his parents He is nasty He failed his test He has seen tragedy He hid the truth He could get sick He is incompetent He is boring

Matched Structure, Opposite Valence He is lucky He loved the kid He always gives his all He was in a fun class He loves his wardrobe He respects his family He is gentle He found his phone He has found strength He got a present He could be helpful He is considerate He is patient 53

Matched Structure, Opposite Valence He is wise He saved the boy He often calls his friends He was in an awesome city He loves his hairstyle He honours his elders He is grateful He earned his money He has earned trust He found a coin He might be fit He is perceptive He is educated

He dreams of winning the lottery He is feeling very happy today Everybody likes him He is opinionated He is a pervert He is hated by everyone He is a liar He is tall He is sleepy He likes walking the dog He goes to school He enjoys cereal for breakfast He used to be in a choir He scratched a CD He wants to be a school teacher He wants two kids He likes collecting music He has brown hair He is right handed He has a drivers licence He loses his keys often He likes going to the cinema He enjoys drinking coffee He knows how to ride a bike He is around 20 years old He can speak two languages He is tired

He imagines touring the world He is feeling very alert today Everybody pleases him He is different He is an outcast He is ignored by many He is a sinner He is shapely He is groggy He enjoys watering the garden He goes to class He enjoys chocolate for dessert He used to be in a sports league He broke a dish He wants to be a scientist He wants two pets He likes collecting cards He has short nails He is light skinned He has a health card He loses his phone often He likes going to the park He enjoys eating cake He knows how to sew a button He is about average height He can use word processors He is uneasy

He dreads paying the bills He is feeling very doubtful today Everybody distrusts him He is accepted He is moderate He is a trend-setter He is an advocate He is adored by He is recognized by friends classmates He is a charmer He is an inventor He is small He is lean He is attentive He is motivated He avoids cleaning the He dislikes making stove the bed He goes to parties He goes to dinner He dislikes cola for He dislikes oatmeal breakfast for dessert He used to be in a He used to be in a study group fitness class He fixed a computer He finished a paper He wants to be a He wants to be a manager supervisor He wants two cars He wants two chairs He likes collecting He likes collecting posters movies He has pink lips He has large eyes He is rosy cheeked He is bright eyed He has a phone He has a report card number He clears his desk He brushes his teeth often often He dislikes going to He dislikes going to the dentist the hospital He dislikes drinking He dislikes eating tonic mold He doesn't know how He doesn't know how to cure a disease to build a house He is of medium build He is from Canada He can't jump five feet He can't make the NBA He is eager He is serious

He fears catching the flu He is feeling very low today Everybody avoids him

54

Appendix B: Modified Psychology Assessment Screener (PAS)
Read each statement and decide if it is an accurate statement about you. Give your own opinion of yourself. Be sure to answer every statement. Mark your answer by circling the correct letter(s) that correspond to the following: F = False, not true at all ST = Slightly True MT = Mainly True VT = Very True

If you need to change an answer, mark an "X" through the incorrect answer and then circle the appropriate letter(s).

1. There have been times when I could have been more thoughtful 2. My best friends are those I use drugs with. 3. Sometimes I cannot remember who I am. 5. I don't take criticism very well. 6. Sometimes I use drugs to feel better. 9. I'm a very sociable person.
than I was.

F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F

ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST

MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT

VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT

4. Sometimes I feel guilty about how much I drink. 7. My friends are available if I need them.

8. I have trouble controlling my use of alcohol.
drinking. 11. Sometimes I'm too impatient.

10. There have been times when I've had to cut down on my 12. Since the day I was born, I was destined to be unhappy 13. I'm a "take charge" type of person. 14. I've tried just about every type of drug. 15. Sometimes I'll avoid someone I really don't like. 18. Sometimes I put things off until the last minute. 20. People don't understand how much I suffer.
about things. 23. I rarely get in a bad mood.

16. My drinking seems to cause problems in my relationships with
others. 17. I have visions in which I see myself forced to commit crimes.

19. People have told me that I have a drug problem. 21. Drinking helps me get along in social situations.

22. It's often hard for me to enjoy myself because I am worrying

55

24. Some people around me think I drink too much alcohol. 26. Sometimes I let little things bother me too much. 29. Some people do things to make me look bad. 27. I never use drugs to help me cope with the world. 30. I've done some things that weren't exactly legal. 31. Every once in a while I totally lose my memory. 32. My drinking has caused me problems at home. 33. I sometimes make promises I can't keep. 34. My drug use has caused me financial strain. 37. I never drive when I've been drinking. 39. I sometimes complain too much. 41. I hardly ever drink alcohol. 42. I am in good health. 40. People around me are faithful to me. 43. People think I'm aggressive.
inside of me.

25. I think I have three or four completely different personalities 28. Sometimes I have an alcoholic drink first thing in the morning.

F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F

ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST ST

MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT

VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT VT

35. It's a struggle for me to get things done with the medical
problems I have. 36. Sometimes my vision is only in black and white.

38. I have severe psychological problems that began very suddenly.

44. I've never had problems at work because of drugs. 45. My drinking has never gotten me into trouble. 48. I never use illegal drugs. 50. I have a bad temper. 46. My drinking has caused problems with my work. 47. Some people try to keep me from getting ahead. 49. I've used prescription drugs to get high. 51. I spend money too easily. 53. I make friends easily. 52. My drug use is out of control.

54. I've had health problems because of my drug use. 56

55. I don't have any good memories from my childhood.

56. It takes a lot to make me angry.
family/friends.

57. My drug use has never caused me problems with my 58. I'm almost always a happy and positive person.

F F F

ST ST ST

MT MT MT

VT VT VT

57

Appendix C: Correlation table for covariate selection

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73


