THE INTERACTION BETWEEN PHOTOVOLTAIC MATERIALS AND
BUILDING FORMS

By
Liming Qiu Bachelor of Engineering, Zhengzhou University, 1998

A thesis project

presented to Ryerson University
in partial fulfillment of the

requirements for the degree of
Master of Architecture

In the Program of Master of Architecture

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009
© Liming Qiu 2009

RYERSON UltfVmSITY LIBRARY

PROPSSFYOF

The interaction between photovoltaic materials and building forms

By Liming Qiu, M. Arch., Master of Architecture, Ryerson University, 2009
I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the
purpose of scholarly research.
Abstract

There is an intrinsic relationship between photovoltaic materials and building forms; although there are numerous imaginations and concepts about buildings integrated photovoltaic

materials. The relationship between these two components needed to be identified and
examined in the process of architectural decision making.
Liming Qiu

This thesis explores the relationship between photovoltaic materials and building forms
in particular geographical and climatic environments through case studies and then proposes an

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose
of scholarly research.

architectural design project. Based on the research suggestion, the design illustrates how a recreational facility adopts an approximate building form for photovoltaic integration and how the concept is developed. Some implications and principle for solar design are summarized in the
final chapter.

Liming Qiu

in

Acknowledgements

Table of Contents Abstract iii

I would like to thank my thesis supervisor Dr. Mark Gorgolewski for his guidance and
encouragement throughout the semester. I also thank Professor Colin Ripley and Dr. Alan Fung

Acknowledgements iv 1. Introduction 1

for their valuable suggestions. I am especially grateful to Sheena Sharp for her invaluable time
and remarks on my thesis and Mila Aleksic who contributed her raw data for solar panel

1.1 Problem statement

2

calculation. Finally I thank my parents and friends who have always supported my work. You
have all inspired me and encouraged me to learn.

1.2 Research methodology 1.3 Literature review 4

3

2. Interactions between photovoltaic materials and building forms 2.1 Why study photovoltaic materials and building forms 6
7

6

2.2 The architectural interpretation of photovoltaic materiality
2.2.1 Form, size and pattern 7

2.2.2
2.2.3

Transparency and color

8
10

Manufacturing process, efficiency and cost

2.3 The evolution of photovoltaic building forms
2.3.1

12
12

Form making towards efficiency and optimization

2.3.2
2.3.3

Form making towards aesthetic and cultural expression
Three approaches to creative design 24

15

2.4 Aesthetic and cultural expression in photovoltaic buildings

30

2.4.1
2.4.2

Envelop of the future: Smart WrapTM
Zero Energy Media( The Green Pix)

31
33

2.4.3 2.4.4

Expression of Particular Cultures (The Japanese Sanyo Solar Ark) General social beliefs ( The Canadian Museum for Human Right)

35 38

iv

2.5 Implications for architects 2.5.1

40 40

List of Tables

Implications about electrical performance

Table 1 Table 2

Dimensions and architectural properties of selected solar panels Photovoltaic Applications of Different Building Types

2.5.2
2.5.3

Technical and architectonic implications
Outlook for the solar technologies
50

45

48

Table 3
Table 4
53

Technical and Architectural Implications for Photovoltaic Materials
Sunrise and Sunset Times for Toronto Eastern Time Zone
List of Figures

2.6 Conclusion

3. A recreational facility integrated with photovoltaic technologies 3.1
3.2

Overview

53
58

Figure 1

The Greenpix, facade integrated with photovoltaic cells and an LED lighting system. Retrieved September 10, 2008, from PHOTON International, p.146.

Solar shading analysis

3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6

Site analysis

62 62

Figure 2

Pattern illustrating how transparency can be achieved through a matrix of
photovoltaic cells (Drawn by the author)

Design objectives Form exploration

Figure 3
66 70 95
95

Austin Convention Center: thin film photovoltaic modules installed on the facade
of south entrance. Retrieved November 10, 2008, from http://www.concierge.
com/images/destinations/destinationguide/usa+canada/usa/texas/austin/austin_0

Architectural intervention

02p.jpg 4. Principles and conclusions

4.1
4.2

Principles for the building forms integrated with photovoltaic materials
Summary of the research 99

Figure 4

A vacation house in Ferienhaus Bartholoma-Park, the roof is a completely integrated photovoltaic system. Retrieved November 10, 2008, from PVdatabase
website, http://www.pvdatabase.org/projects_view_details.php?ID=261

4.3

Limitations of the study
vii vii
101

99

Figure 5

Down 2000 Zero emission houses with photovoltaic awnings on roofs. The space

List of Tables List of Figures
Appendices

underneath the roof is not impacted by the photovoltaic installation. Retrieved
November 10, 2008, from BEAR Architecten, www.bear.nl

Figure 6

Solar Fabrik, Freiburg, Germany. The east view of this Europe's first zero-

References

108

emissions solar module factory. Retrieved November 10, 2008, from http://
www. solar-fabrik. com/fileadmin/user_ upload/pressebilder/fabrik/ A ussen 1.JPG

Figure 7

Transformation of building forms to satisfy technical requirements (Drawn by the
author)

VI

VII

/imageuploads/1204815897_62.49.27.213.jpg

Figure 8

Mont - Cenis - Academy in Herne Sodingen, Germany. Retrieved November 14,

2008, from International Energy Agency ( IEA ) Photovoltaic Power Systems Programme: http://www.iea-pvps.org/cases/deu_01.htm

Figure 18

Three approaches to form-making in building integration of photovoltaic materials
(Drawn by the author)

Figure 19
Figure 9 Solarcafe "Sonnenzeit" in Kirchzarten,Germany. Retrieved November 10, 2008,
from PVdatabase, http://www.pvdatabase.org/

Turbulence house, designed by Steven Holl. The tilted roof is mounted with
photovoltaic panels to optimize solar gain. The second floor houses a bedroom and a study area. Retrieved December 10, 2008, from http://www.stevenholl.com
/project-detail.php?type=houses&id=53&page=0

Figure 10

Canoga Park Branch Library in Los Angles. Retrieved November 12, 2008, from http://archrecord. construction. com/projects/bts/archives/libraries/06_ CanogaPark
/overview, asp

Figure 20

The tilted roof of Turbulence House covered by thin snow. Retrieved in Nov
ember 20, 2008, from http://www.stevenholl.com/project- detail.php?type=
houses&id=53&page=0

Figure 11

Solarsiedlung in German, designed by Rolf Disch. Retrieved November 8, 2008,

from http://greenlineblog. com/wp-content/uploads/2008/01/solarsiedlung-image07.jpg Figure 12 San Diego Children's Museum, photos showing multiple pitched roofs integrated
with photovoltaic and interior space (Photography by the author)

Figure 21

Heliotrop and its perspective, designed by Rolf Disch. Retrieved November 20,
2008, from http://www. rolfdisch. de/project. asp ?id=45&sid=-633635510

Figure 22

Steinhude Sea Recreation Facility. Retrieved November 20, 2008, from http://
www. volume5. com/rstout/html/architect_randall_stout_interv1 .html

Figure 13

ShenZhen Floral Exhibition 2007 office building, perspective showing saw tooth roof integrated with oval shaped building form (Credit the photographer). The diagram below illustrates the controversy of optimum orientation for passive
solar design and active solar design (Drawn by the author)

Figure 23

Exterior views of SmartWrapTM. Retrieved November 10, 2008, from Kieran
Timberlake Associates, http://www.kierantimberlake.com/research/smartwrap_
research_1.html

Figure 24

The Greenpix, facade integrated with photovoltaic cells and LED lighting system.

Retrieved September 20, 2008, from PHOTON International, p. 146.
Figure 14 Tobias Grau KG Office, designed by BRT Architeckten. Retrieved October 10,
2008, from http://www.brt.de/start.html

Figure 25

Vlatko Ceric is working on his art (left), the algometric works entitled "Agglomeration" by Vlatko Ceric (right). Retrieved November 24, 2008, from his
personal website http://www.vceric.net/

Figure 15

Coney Island's Stillwell Avenue Terminal in New York, designed by Kiss + Cathcart Architects. Retrieved December 10, 2008, from http://www.kisscathcar
t. com/stillwell. html

Figure 26

A diagram illustrating how the Greenpix's photovoltaic facade is integrated LED
lighting system (Drawn by the Author)

Figure 16

Oldenburg stadium EWE-Arena, cylinder shaped facade integrated with movable photovoltaic panels. Retrieved October 5, 2008, from Colt Group, http://www.colt group.com/projects/sports-stadia-leisure/ewe-arena/

Figure 27

The Japanese Sanyo Solar Ark. Retrieved November 24, 2008, from Sanyo
Electric Co. Ltd., http://www.sanyo.com/solar/solarark/index.html

Figure 17

London City hall, roof integrated with photovoltaic panels. Designed by Foster +

Figure 28

Form analysis of the Sanyo Solar Ark (Drawn by the author). Photos retrieved
November 10, 2008 from http://www.genjimono.cn/bbs/showthread.php?

Partners. Retrieved December 10, 2008, from http://www.london-se1.co.uk/news
viii

IX

threadid=8680, http://lh4.ggpht.com/_g2ogMZBczdw/R78pKg6Ownl/AAAAAAAA

Figure 38

Site views showing the proposed site is surrounding by low rise buildings

CrA/5RS4-toNAGk/DSC05372.JPG, and http://www.sanyo.com/solar/solarark
/index.html. Credit the photographer.

Figure 39

The simulation diagram of solar shadow showing the site has long hours of solar
radiation without permanent shadow

Figure 29 Figure 30

Morphological analysis of the Solar Ark (Drawn by the author)

Figure 40
The Canadian Museum for Human Rights (schematic design). Retrieved

The diagram and bar graph showing sunrise and sunset times (top left) and daily
solar radiation (bottom left) for the proposed site and the area appropriate for

November 10, 2008, from http://canada.archiseek.com/news/2005/000115/
Lhtml Figure 31 Form study of Canadian Museum for Human Rights( CMHR) (Drawn by the
author)

photovoltaic materials (right). Data retrieved June, 2008 from RETScreen data
base and Sunrise and Sunset calculator of Time and Data AS

Figure 41

The diagram of circulation showing the site is surrounded by industrial and
commercial buildings

Figure 32

A diagram illustrating the relationship between photovoltaic annual electricity and
geographical location (Drawn by the author)

Figure 42 Figure 43

Community centers in the neighbourhood Demographic data and the map of community facilities

Figure 33

This diagram illustrates the relationship between annual electricity generated by a specified photovoltaic panel and its spatial locations, defined by azimuth angles and slopes. The spectrum, divided into ten equal intervals, indicates the amounts of electricity from maximum to minimum, represented by blue and red squares respectively. The deeper blue the square is, the less electricity the photovoltaic
panel generates (Drawn by the author).

Figure 44

Comparison between different forms for photovoltaic materials

Figure 45

A diagram showing PV canopy, light wells, and the cubic form are integrated into
one building

Figure 46

Diagrams showing a photovoltaic canopy accommodating a service block and
flexible space for community use.

Figure 34

Lux Nova or (true north), designed by Canadian stained glass artist Sarah Hall. Retrieved November 20, 2008, from http://www.sarahhallstudio.com/photo glass Figure 47 Diagrams showing the building accommodates different events

Figure 35

Spinnereistrasse in Austria: fagade integrated with thin film photovoltaic panels. Retrieved November 20, 2008, from http://www.stromaufwaerts.at/en/content/
popup_referenz.php ?rslD=94

Figure 48

Conceptual diagrams showing the integration of the photovoltaic technologies, the cubic form and the structural columns functioning as light wells and a natural
ventilation system

Figure 36

Efficiency-cost trade off for the three generations of solar technology: wafers, thin
films, and advanced thin films (year 2003; cost in US$). Redrawn and revised by

Figure 49

Master plan showing the integration of cubic form of the building and outdoor
multifunctional green space

the author. Source: Green, Martin A. (2006). Third Generation Photovoltaic
materials. P3. Figure 1.2

Figure 50

Space configurations showing that the building provides a large event space for
flexible programs and the service block providing electrical room for photovoltaic
technologies

Figure 37

The proposed site: Lamport Stadium recreational park located in west region of Toronto, Ontario Canada. Latitude of the site is 43° 38' 20.20 "N, longitude is 79°
25' 22.87" W

Figure 51

Floor plans of the service block

Figure 52

Long section AA looking north; the rooftop of service block on the left hand
xi

provides occupants with a cafeteria space and retractable seats are located
against the walls of service block

1.

Introduction

Through performing both technical and aesthetic functions photovoltaic technology is Figure 53
Figure 54

The proposed steel truss structure, steel column system and their geometries
Various photovoltaic materials such as thin film panels and photovoltaic cells can

stirring the imagination of architects with its potential. How to achieve unity, harmony and
creativity in architecture has become a major concern. A successful photovoltaic building

be integrated onto the flat roof Figure 55 Various photovoltaic materials such as flexible thin film sheets and tubular collectors can be integrated onto the flat roof Figure 56 Elevations showing that the south and west facades are integrated with
photovoltaic cells Figure 57 Figure 58 North elevation along King Street Facade integrated with solar cells

design relies not only on synthesizing various building materials and space, but also on determining an appropriate building form on a larger scale. Through exploring the interaction between photovoltaic materials and building forms, this thesis aims at proving creative
designs exist in photovoltaic integration.

Section Two reviews the history of photovoltaic technologies in contemporary
i

architecture by identifying the primary aspects of photovoltaic materiality, technologies and
the connection between building forms and photovoltaic modules. An analysis of the

relationship between energy performance, building forms and space is examined with case
Figure 59 Roof details showing the facade and the roof are connected by a mechanical
system northern hemisphere.

studies that range from a cafeteria to a children's museum in various countries throughout the

Figure 60

A night view of the building seen from King Street West, a spiral stair on the right is designed for photovoltaic roof maintenance

Section Three proposes a design project that illustrates how photovoltaic technologies

can be integrated into a recreational facility in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. The relationship
Figure 61
Figure 62

The building seen through the outdoor green space from Liberty Street
Parts of the building facade can be opened up to connect indoor and outdoor community activities, photovoltaic cells laminated on the tilted facade will be more efficient

between building functions, the geographical location, and photovoltaic technologies will be explored to demonstrate how design opportunities still exist for creating a distinctive
photovoltaic building in spite of constraints.

Figure 63

A close view of the building facade opened up for community activities; photovoltaic cells laminated on the tilted facade will be more efficient

The final chapter summarizes some principles of photovoltaic design derived from
thesis research.

Figure 64

A view into the cafe area close to the facade- the shade of photovoltaic cells

provides a dynamic visual effect Figure 65 An aerial view of the building and the photovoltaic roof seen from the Liberty Street

XII

1.1 Problem Statement

1.2 Research methodology

The research addresses practical problems and common questions for solar

The primary aim is to establish principles and strategies for creative architectural design

professionals. What is the fundamental concern in the design process of photovoltaic
integration? Why and how should a creative photovoltaic building be designed? Where

in photovoltaic buildings with simple functions and energy demands. To meet these ends, the
paper explores the interaction between relevant building forms and photovoltaic materials by

should a creative photovoltaic building be located?

analyzing the relationship between the energy output, building form and photovoltaic integration. The method followed is to analyze projects through case study before exploring their implications for architects in the process of design and decision making. Information collected is both quantitative and qualitative. Quantitative items are factors such as annual electricity generation, temperature and building areas. The qualitative items do not have

These problems reflect a prevalent state of synthesizing and promoting photovoltaic
materials as building materials in current architectural design. The answer to these questions

is the inception of photovoltaic architecture.

The research explores the interaction between photovoltaic materials and building

precise measurement illustrated by difficulties in assembly, the ease of collaboration and geometric aesthetics. Case studies were chosen from various forms of literature including,
but not limited to, journals, magazines, reliable websites and books.

forms as the researcher argues there is an intrinsic relationship between them. A successful
solution of photovoltaic integration relies on a thorough understanding and experience of both photovoltaic technologies and their relationship to building forms.

The design project is used as a way of investigating practical issues of photovoltaic
In the design project the thesis integrates, explores and tests the implications

integration in a realistic context. In the design project, the procedure is presented in the following sections: Overview, Solar Shading Analysis, Site Analysis, Design Objectives, Form Exploration and Architectural Intervention. The first three sections provide this design project with concrete evidences while design objectives are achieved through form exploration and
architectural intervention.

summarized in the first section. Based on the exploration, the thesis claims that the

recreational facility, as one type of public building, can be integrated with photovoltaic
technologies and materials creatively to promote solar energy. It goes on to show that discussing interaction associated with photovoltaic materials and building forms is one essential step in the process of decision making. The thesis builds a basis for building integration of photovoltaic materials through not only analysis, but practice.

1.3 Literature review

Many books have studied the micro features of photovoltaic materials. However, few documents contribute to material studies on a macro-scale. Most of them refer to the field only in an engineering manner therefore missing ample opportunities for creative form-making in photovoltaic integration, and for conveying architectural meaning through

Can photovoltaic technologies present opportunities for creative architectural design?
Hermannsdorfer and Rub (2005) state: ...they [solar facilities] can enhance the architecture, accentuate it and distinguish it

from the mass; they can express adaptation and transformation or modernity while at the same time preserving the traditional features" (p. 9).To demonstrate this, a German-Italian team conducted a research project, PVACCEPT, to improve the aesthetic design of photovoltaic materials, focusing on new applications of
photovoltaic materials in existing or historic buildings. Photovoltaic modules are generally used as surface materials. Thus both the materiality and technology of photovoltaic materials are critical aspects of creative architectural design.

building forms.

Research into photovoltaic materials on a macro-scale uncovers opportunities for

creative architectural design. Moreover, the paper intends to explore principles of creative photovoltaic integration by analyzing building form-making and relevant tradeoffs.

Johan Bettum (2002) stated "the focus on surface articulation is fundamentally linked to, even
uniquely expressed as, a corresponding interest in materials and material technology" (p. 72). This perspective will assist architects discovering the aesthetic values of photovoltaic technologies on a two-dimensional level.

Besides the technology and materiality of photovoltaic materials, I believe the interaction between building forms and photovoltaic materials is one of the major aspects of creative

architectural design. A discussion of the relationship between surface and architecture can be found in Bettum's article (2002): In contrast to approaches based on types of topology or topography, current concerns with surface articulation are subject to the possibilities and resistances of the surface
as a three-dimensional material entity. The surface must therefore be conceptualized and designed with respect to its depth, (p. 25)

Bettum also suggests architects have to think of surface materials in both micro-scale
and macro-scale. Material studies in micro-scale are limited to the individual characteristics of

selective surface materials. Material studies in macro-scale investigate the optical, physical

and scientific phenomena of materials in applications by observing and analyzing the
connection between selected materials and other materials. Through macro and micro

studies architects can better comprehend building materials by integrating architecturally
innovative ideas with them.
4

2. Interactions between photovoltaic materials and building forms
2.1 Why study photovoltaic materials and building forms

2.2 The architectural interpretation of photovoltaic materiality

Without knowledge of photovoltaic materiality, practical solutions for this dilemma cannot be achieved. To explore the transparency of photovoltaic materials, for instance,

Photovoltaic technologies and contemporary architecture have been interacting since the 1980s. Before that, photovoltaic technologies had come a long way since their first discovery

Architects need to understand photovoltaic mechanisms and physics of photovoltaic cells. Therefore, a brief review of photovoltaic materiality is presented before discussing this
dilemma.

in 1839 by French physicist Alexandre-Edmond Becquerel.

From 1900 to 1970, scientists

have explored the photovoltaic effect and its application in spacecraft. After the first application of photovoltaic technologies on earth in the 1970s, scientists and engineers
started to experiment with integrating photovoltaic systems into buildings. Early applications

Photovoltaic materials are evolving. Recently, crystalline silicon and thin-film have become two major technologies of the photovoltaic industry. The major difference in

of Building Integration of Photovoltaic (BIPV) systems dated back to the 1980s, when large
photovoltaic plants were established in many advanced industrial countries, such as Germany, Japan, and the United States. Some European architectural firms, such as Kiss + Cathcart Architects, and Bear Architecten in Germany, engaged in BIPV research and design
in the same period (Lugue & Hegedus, 2003).

physical properties between these two photovoltaic technologies is their base materials. Unlike crystalline silicon cells that are produced from silicon wafer, thin film cells are printed
on the film.

Their physical characteristics of both mainly refer to five aspects: transparency, colour,

form, size and pattern. In addition, efficiency, cost, and manufacturing process are helpful to
Photovoltaic technologies were "born" in a period when contemporary architecture was involved in complicated discourse and practice. On the one hand, the development of the post-modern architecture movement inspired many young architects. Material assemblage,
construction detail and interior space in their practices were subversive. As Roth (2007)

understand these features. There is no room in this thesis to discuss these aspects comprehensively; this brief introduction is intended to explain opportunities for creative

architectural design in microscale before the following discussion on building forms and
photovoltaic materials.

describes this period," the pioneers of modern architecture in the 1920s and 1930s tried to create a wholly new idiom generated solely by functional use and structural systems. Their 2.2.1 Form, size and pattern

ascetic architecture was to make no statement other than to reveal itself "(p. 539). On the
other hand, theoretical thinking on the preservation of classical tradition spread through Europe, America, and Asia (Fazio, Moffett, & Woodhouse, 2008).

Typical crystalline photovoltaic modules consist of crystalline cells. Usually, the

crystalline cell size is approximately 150 x 150 mm; these cells are "glued" in transparent

"sandwich" glass sheets. These panel types vary from 200 x 200 mm to 2000 x 3000 mm.
Some solar panel sizes and their relevant properties in selected manufacturing can be

The diversity, however, left a dilemma for architects who were engaging with photovoltaic integration in buildings. The dilemma was whether photovoltaic integration conforms to rigid

referenced in Table 1.

Recently, a cut-to-size module prototype based on thin film

technical requirements or to artistic expression? Could photovoltaic buildings use the legacy

technology was developed by PVACCEPT to meet architectural needs. These modules can

from post-modernism, liberating building forms from technical restrictions? Could photovoltaic
materials, integrated with architectural motifs, convey social and cultural meaning?

be customized to specified design dimensions through trim and cutting (Hermannsdorfer &
Rub, 2005).

6

Patterns of crystalline silicon can render semi-transparent effects. This phenomenon, integrated by the artistic imagination, can create an expressive design. In a hotel complex in

surface with a given area is, the fewer its photovoltaic cells, and so the smaller amount of
electricity these photovoltaic cells generate.

Beijing, Simone Giostra & Partners used this method, combining it with LED technology to

generate a striking fagade (see Figure 1). Unlike crystalline silicon photovoltaic materials, the
size of thin film photovoltaic materials depends on the base materials they use. There is no

r.

common industrial standard for this type of material, so architects have to contact
manufacturers for detailed product information.

 aa



r

>



^^^^fe^tJs^^
U n m

Figure 2. Pattern illustrating how transparency can be achieved through a matrix of photovoltaic cells.

The concept of translucency has been widely used in architecture in the last decades

because of its social, technical, and psychological functions. Using transparent or translucent
Figure 1. The Greenpix, facade integrated with photovoltaic cells and LED lighting system.

materials, architects can create exciting spaces, bringing light and view into a building's
interior. As a result, architects give serious consideration to the transparent characteristics

of building materials. Even in buildings integrated with photovoltaic materials, architects also
2.2.2 Transparency and colour

consider this notion instinctively. Austin Convention Center is an example (see Figure 3). The
central exhibition hall is surrounded by other spaces: lobbies, registration areas and

Manufacturers provide both opaque and semi-transparent photovoltaic products. Individual crystalline silicon cells are opaque, while thin film cells based on cadmium-telluride (CdTe) or copper-indium-diselenide (CIS) are semi-transparent. By arranging the pattern of
crystalline silicon cells or changing the cells' shape, photovoltaic panels can have relative

circulation areas. Along the Trinity Street facade, the architects integrated thin-film panels
into the building's curtain wall in order to reduce the stress that the building's volume brings to

the street (Lawrence, 2007). One major disadvantage of making photovoltaic materials transparent is losing conversion efficiency of photovoltaic panels. However, these deep blue thin film panels can reduce overheating from their western orientation, producing energy from the sun's radiation. Its transparent facades also encourage people to explore dynamic
activities happening in this building.

"transparency" in appearance. This optical phenomenon assists architects to apply opaque
materials like photovoltaic cells to create translucent screens. Visual effects are determined by the distance and density of crystalline silicon cells (see Figure 2). However; creating

semi-transparent effects interferes with the solar panels' area. The more transparent a

8

cost but also reduces efficiency indirectly (Luque & Hegedus, 2003, p.27). Though crystalline silicon technology is well established, thin film technology is more competitive because of its thinner base materials and faster manufacturing process.

The efficiency of photovoltaic systems influences the performance of photovoltaic cells, indirectly impacting on the market acceptance of photovoltaic systems. Generally speaking,

whether a building is suitable for photovoltaic installation and what types of photovoltaic cells
can meet energy goals depend on the efficiency and cost of photovoltaic products.

The ideal solar cell efficiency limit of photovoltaic cells has a maximum value of 95%
Figure 3. Austin Convention Center: thin film photovoltaic modules installed on the facade of south

(Tom, 2003). However, due to material limits and technical barriers, the best solar cell
entrance.

efficiency reported currently is from 3% to 30%, depending on the technologies and materials (Tom, 2003). In addition, crystalline silicon and crystalline thin film modules are different in
Besides transparency, architects can also play with photovoltaic colours. However,

conversion efficiency; present crystalline silicon cells have 8-15% and thin film cells (CIGS)
have approximately 3-20% (Hindrichs, 2007).

the colour options of photovoltaic cells are limited because of their technical features (Hindrichs, 2007). Crystalline silicon cells range from deep blue to green, while " Thin film
[cells] consisting of amorphous silicon or CIS are black in colour, CdTe cells have a greenish

Many factors can limit the efficiency of photovoltaic systems. For instance, silicon cells
generate large amounts of heat as they convert sunlight to electricity, which lowers

shimmer" ( Hermannsdorfer & Rub, 2005, p.41). An approach to modifying solar cells' colour
is to alternate an anti-reflection layer of cells, but this will slightly reduce conversion efficiency.

conversion efficiency. That is one reason why architects need to consider ventilation in
integrating silicon photovoltaic panels into buildings. Another limitation on photovoltaic

In addition, this method increases the cost of the solar cells because of the additional manufacturing process. (Hermannsdorfer & Rub, 2005)

efficiency is the band gap of the semiconductor, because "the simplest semiconductor cannot

absorb below band gap photons" (Tom, 2003). Some researchers attempt to achieve high efficiencies by coating multilayer materials on crystals, but this method results in complex problems such as strain damage to the crystals. Recently, fortunately, there seems to have

2.2.3 Manufacturing process, efficiency and cost

The manufacturing process for photovoltaic cells is associated with the cost and
technical characteristics of solar cells, presenting opportunities for creative architectural design. The manufacturing process for crystalline silicon cells is based on wafer technology in which cells are produced from ingots by trimming, sawing, diffusion, and screen-printing of

been a breakthrough in higher efficiency photovoltaic cells. Scientists at the Ohio State Institute for Materials Research announced that they have created a new electrically

conductive plastic which is able to absorb all spectrums of visible light. This new research into
improving efficiency is extending photovoltaic systems' use and markets.

contacts. Thin film technology is based on screen-printing.

To achieve higher efficiency,

one practical way in crystalline silicon technology is to increase the thickness of base

materials. However, a disadvantage of this method is that thicker material not only increases
10 11

2.3

Evolution of photovoltaic building forms

Photovoltaic building forms are also evolving. Similar to organisms' evolution, building forms develop from simplicity to complexity, from monotone to variety. One economic reason for this is that capital costs of photovoltaic material keep falling due to economy of scale. Meanwhile, conversion efficiency, affecting photovoltaic materials for use as building
components, keeps increasing over time.

Some scientific facts explain why prototypes of photovoltaic buildings have been relatively simple in details. First, fragile photovoltaic materials such as silicon cells need

Figure 4. A vacation house in Ferienhaus Bartholoma-Park, the roof is a completely integrated
photovoltaic system.

transparent materials, usually highly transparent glass, with reliable hardness for support. Second, different angles of the photovoltaic material towards the sun will generate different voltages, which can result in the failure or bad performance of the photovoltaic system. In addition to this, products those are easy and cheaper to manufacture dominated architects'
design of photovoltaic buildings. These factors influenced the architects' early explorations of form-making. However, architects are now attempting to break through this barrier against architectural design, as shown in the projects discussed in the following sections.

Because of functional and material limitations, a single mono-pitched roof doesn't satisfy as an architectural composition to arrange space and building materials. Besides, size, shape, and aesthetic quality will direct an architect to find other means to deal with photovoltaic panels. In this situation, multi-louver techniques as visual or semi-visual elements can be considered. This strategy is suitable for individual multi-storey buildings, such as hospitals, hotels, museums, and city halls. The photovoltaic louver can be a major or

2.3.1 Form making towards efficiency and optimization

minor component of a building. Balance and equilibrium can be achieved through delicate architectural composition. In this case, surface consciousness is raised when photovoltaic
louvers are mounted on a building facade (see Figure 5).

Rather than being translated into buildings gracefully, photovoltaic technologies

radically changed buildings' forms at an early stage of Building Integration of Photovoltaic systems (BIPV). In this early period, building forms were not made particularly for this technology. On the one hand, the low efficiencies of photovoltaic technology required a relatively large surface area on buildings, which usually for other building components. On
the other hand, the high cost forced architects to consider technical function first. As a result,

prototypes of photovoltaic integrated buildings were designed in a more engineering way. To maximize energy generation from these expensive but low efficiency materials, architects

had to sacrifice most of the roof areas, tilting them into optimizing angles. So the building space had to become the secondary consideration in a photovoltaic building. As a result, these prototypes were not attractive to ordinary people. This posed the question of functional
conflict (see Figure 4).
12

Figure 5. Down 2000 Zero emission houses with photovoltaic awnings on roofs. The space underneath
the roof is not impacted by the photovoltaic installation.

13

A factory in Germany (see Figure 6) is an example of a whole facade installed with

photovoltaic awnings. Mounted on the facade are 575 m2 photovoltaic modules generating one fifth of the electricity needs of the factory; 210 m2 modules are in front of the south facing
wall. The angle is assigned to optimize summer sun radiation, and to allow the winter sun to

penetrate into the building. The interior space under the tilted facade is a circulation area.
M

Hi Hi Pli ]

<=

Figure 6. Solar Fabrik, Freiburg, Germany, the east view of this Europe's first zero- emissions solar module factory.

Figure 7. Transformation of building forms to satisfy technical requirements.

This example, based on engineering thinking, aims to maximize efficiency. Building forms can be lengthened to house more rooms or functional areas. By separating one roof
into louvers, photovoltaic panels can harvest equal solar radiation. The drawback to this solution is that the distance between louvers has to be carefully calculated in order to avoid possible shadow on them. To satisfy this technical requirement, the building's appearance,
layout, and space have to be transformed to suit the changes (see Figure7). These

2.3.2 Form making towards aesthetic and cultural expression

Synthesis of materials and form making towards artistic and cultural expression are architects' challenges. When a new building material is invented, architects will seek ways to integrate it into buildings through form-making, space design, structure, and other

architectural factors. During this process, the new material's artistic expression in building integration will be discovered gradually. This process of design is also happening with the
architectural integration of photovoltaic materials.

challenges are beyond engineers' capacity to solve.

Photovoltaic materials can be integrated into various building forms. First, cubic thinking

is a given for most architects. Mont-Cenis Academy is an example (see Figure 8). This public institution consists of many different functions: college, library, office, hotel, restaurant,
15

14

recreation, sport and public centre. The construction consists of a wooden frame covered by

Using pitched roofs seems at first to be an easy approach for photovoltaic integration.

glass that is inserted into an aluminum frame. The glass envelope has an area of 20.000 m2 and produces a climatic buffer zone so that the inside always enjoys a Mediterranean climate.

The summer house in Figure 4 is one example. The facade of this building is completely tilted,
but this leaves many interior spaces hard to use. The gable roof or facade is a traditional

Another successful facade, achieving harmony with other building materials, is shown in Figure 35. Photovoltaic modules are regarded as wall elements like other wood panels, creating harmony in this building. This notion of photovoltaic architecture can become possible if the efficiency and cost are acceptable to clients. When a photovoltaic system is integrated into a building envelope, the price to performance ratio can also be reasonable
(Dehra, 2004).

notion for an architect; the advantage to it is the aesthetic quality of symmetry. However, the
shaded side of the gable roof is usually made with other materials, which gives a sense of

imbalance to the building. To use the interior space better and create an independent effect, another technique is to raise the mono-pitched roof up, leaving more interior spaces for use.
This technique is demonstrated in the Solar Cafeteria built in Germany (see Figure 9). Its

mono-pitched roof holds a recreational space for a cafeteria. This is a prototype of a typical photovoltaic building. The building form is simple. The function of the cafe, demanding little of space or form, can be easily satisfied.

Figure 9. Solarcafe "Sonnenzeit" in Kirchzarten,Germany.

What if the space need is changed or the area needs to be increased? Can this

simple form be used in this situation? Canoga Park Branch Library in Los Angeles provides a good solution, (see Figure 10). This library's space needs are more complex than those of
Figure 8. Mont-Cenis-Academy in Herne Sodingen, Germany, Germany,From International Energy Agency( IEA ) Photovoltaic Power Systems Programme.

small residential and service buildings. To house the major function areas, the architects designed a tilted roof supported by a steel grid system. The lecture room, separated from the

major reading area, is a massive cylinder.

This one storey building does not show the

conflict between space arrangement and roof forms.
16
17

One of the aesthetic challenges for a single-pitched roof is the monotony of a large area of deep blue photovoltaic panels. To solve this problem, some tectonic techniques are

applicable.

For instance, a single photovoltaic roof can be transformed into saw tooth roofs.

By doing this, the architect has extended the whole span north-south, providing opportunities
for housing many functional areas. Interior space can be flexible due to the structural system. The side curtain wall offers great daylight (see Figure 12).
Figure 10. Canoga Park Branch Library in Los Angles.

'

Can mono-pitched photovoltaic roofs be used in multifamily buildings and

communities? A possible approach to relieving the dull sense that mono-pitched roofs bring is to employ the principle of rhythm, for instance, designing even multi-unit communities in which the tilted roofs can be arranged in rows. In the case of the Solarsiedlung project (see
Figure 11), maximizing solar gain was the primary goal, but by separating solar roofs into

several similar forms in the principle of rhythm, architect Rolf Disch also created a successful
harmony.

Figure 12. San Diego Children's Museum, photos showing multiple pitched roofs integrated with
photovoltaic and interior space.

Saw tooth roofs can also be integrated into other irregular forms, such as oval

shapes. The office building of Flora Exhibition International in Shenzhen China (see Figure

13) is oval shaped with a photovoltaic roof. This is an example of how creative design of
multiply pitched roofs becomes possible. However, a new problem presented by this building is that the oval shape cannot satisfy both optimum solar radiation and other architectural issues such as interior space and natural ventilation. In this case, the long axis of oval is

useful for arranging photovoltaic panels, but not for conducting the south east wind in the
summer.

Figure 11. Solarsiedlung in German, designed by Rolf Disch.

18

19

silk screen, providing certain privacy for the interior workshops. From a technical point of view, this vertical surface is less efficient than a horizontal one. In the Hamburg region, the daily

solar radiation on a vertical south surface is only 64% of that on a horizontal surface based on
my calculation using RETScreen Version 4 Beta.

The proper orientation for photovoltaic integration as well as in harmony with the building form

\

\ The proper orientation for
passive design

""A

Figure 14. Tobias Grau KG Office, designed by BRT Architeckten.

North
Summer Sun

In fact, cylindrical forms can provide higher energy efficiency than the Tobias Grau KG
office building if their curved surfaces are carefully orientated. In the example of Coney

Figure 13. ShenZhen Floral Exhibition 2007 office building, perspective showing saw tooth roof integrated with oval shaped building form. The diagram below illustrates the controversy of optimum
orientation for passive solar design and active solar design.

Island's Stillwell Avenue Terminal in New York, Kiss + Cathcart, Architects demonstrated this
possibility (see Figure 15). They designed a slightly curved photovoltaic canopy for the

subway station. This photovoltaic canopy can reach up to 88% of a horizontal envelope in the
The office building of Flora Exhibition International is also an example of integrating
photovoltaic materials into one of cylindrical building. Another similar application is Tobias

same locality based on my calculation using RETScreen Version 4 Beta. This

semi-transparent structure, reminding people of an image of bird's wing, is also expressive
even at night.

Grau KG Office, near Hamburg, Germany (see Figure 14). These two squeezed "tubes,"

connected by a two storey office space, have photovoltaic modules mounted on their south
facade. From an architectural perspective, these thin film photovoltaic modules provide different optical effects over time. They are deep blue in the daytime, preventing the sun from

overheating the interior. At night, the semi-transparent photovoltaic modules function like a
20
21

stadium. Every half hour the moveable photovoltaic panels can rotate 7.5 degrees along a
160 metre track like a sunflower (Colt Group, 2008).

',,;,.'i

Figure 16. Oldenburg stadium EWE-Arena, cylinder shaped facade integrated with movable
photovoltaic panels.
... 


:: -manm mow -,

.

a4"

^-~

One aspect that clients and architects for the Oldenburg stadium had to consider is the conflict between constant electricity generation and dynamic energy use in stadium buildings. However, this would not be a problem in a country where the government promotes
green energy subsidies.

Figure 15. Coney Island's Stillwell Avenue Terminal in New York, designed by Kiss + Cathcart
Architects.

One extreme case is to integrate photovoltaic materials into ovoid form. Foster +

Partners, Architects, designed an additional photovoltaic roof for the London City Hall,
These two examples illustrate how to integrate photovoltaic materials into cylindrical forms statically. One example of integrating a photovoltaic wall dynamically into a cylindrical
form is Oldenburg Stadium EWE-Arena (see Figure 16). Architects Arat Siegel Schust integrated a movable grey photovoltaic wall 6.5 m in height and 40 m in length, providing shade and solar gain for this building. The 18 separate segments contain 72 separate grey

making it egg-shaped (see Figure 17).

The geometric profile of photovoltaic modules is

perfectly in harmony with this ovoid form. However efficiency is not optimized due to the

roofs orientation, nor are the slope angles optimized. In addition, the public have argued that the expensive photovoltaic system, £540,000, is not worth its 1.5% saving on conventional
energy (London SE1 website team, 2008).

monocrystalline PV panels laminated into toughened-laminate glazing panels and connected

in modules. The 72 monocrystalline photovoltaic panels can generate 14.76 kWp for the

22

23

Turbulence house

Penpheric variations
modified and building forms can vary in space

Space variations

Given a fixed slope and an azimuth angle, both the periphery of photovoltaic roof can be

Figure 17. London City Hall, roof integrated with photovoltaic panels. Designed by Foster + Partners.

2.3.3 Three approaches to creative design

From the discussion above, the diversity in architectural thinking also can be defined as taking three directions: the fixed azimuth angles system, the tracing system, and mixed
space variation

form variation

Independent photovoltaic panels bear little relation with building forms
Heliotrop and interior space in rotating buildings

azimuth angles. Turbulence house is one example of fixed azimuth angles for a photovoltaic
system integrated with roofs. Heliotrop is a typical tracing system integrated with roofs; and

Steinhude Sea Recreation Facility is a good example of mixed azimuth angles for a photovoltaic system integrated with roofs, (see Figure 18)

Steinhude Sea Recreation Facility

The shift of photovoltaixc panels' slopes can generate flowing forms and
dynamic interior space

Figure 18. Three approaches to form-making in building integration of photovoltaic materials.

24

25

Approach one: Fixed angles (Turbulence House)

An opportunity for creative design lies in geometrical transformation. As shown on the top diagram of Figure 18, an XY plane representing the photovoltaic roof can conform to any
shape and form underneath without altering the slope angles. This demonstrates that building forms, roof perimeters, and space can be complex.

Turbulence House, designed by Steven Holl's studio for an artist couple Richard Tuttle and Mei-Mei Berssenbrugge, is an example of the approach to photovoltaic integration.
The Berssenbrugges hoped to construct "a 'green' self-sustaining building," (Giovannini,2003, 138-144). To response this, Steven Holl proposed a two-storey house, 900 square foot house with prefabricated aluminum cladding. This house, inspired by an iceberg, has a guest room

and study area situated on the second floor. Steven Holl convinced his client that integrating
photovoltaic technology with an organic form need not lose the function of the building; more than that, the building he designed generated a style with an unforgettable sense of space (see Figure 19, Figure 20).

Figure 20. The tilted roof of Turbulence House covered by thin snow.

Figure 19. Turbulence house, designed by Steven Holl. The tilted roof is mounted with photovoltaic
panels to optimize solar gain. The second floor houses a bedroom and a study area.

There are long hours of solar radiation annually in New Mexico where this house situates. " The average number of hours of annual sunshine ranges from near 3,700 in the southwest

to 2,800 in the north-central portions " (Western Regional Climate Center, 2008, p.1 ). Due to this, the initial photovoltaic roof panels can generate enough electricity to power the whole guest house. Additional PV panels can produce up to 3.3 kw-hr/ day for this couple's own adobe house that not far from this house. The radiant floor heating system is also powered by
26 27

the roof PV cells (Nakata, 2006, pp. 45-53). The wind is moderate and there is little precipitation in that area. However, the snow, from 3 to 100 inches, might be a problem for this photovoltaic roof in winter (Western Regional Climate Center, 2008). This building form has a strong relation to technology, context, and the architect's intent.
For instance, the roof slope is suitable for optimizing electricity generation. The desire to produce a sustainable building merges appropriately with its geographical context. In addition, Turbulence House demonstrates that complex building forms and space can be realized by using elastic materials such as aluminum, steel, and polymer.

Approach two: tracing system (Heliotrop)
Figure 21. Heliotrop and its perspective, designed by Rolf Disch.

By rotating cylinder- formed buildings, the photovoltaic roofs potential for energy generation will be maximized. Rolf Disch, a German architect, has promoted the idea of rotating houses with Heliotrop (see Figure 21). Photovoltaic and thermal collectors are
mounted on the roof and perimeter of its cylindrical form. This house can rotate along its central vertical axis to maximize solar gain.

Approach three: flowing forms (Steinhude Sea Recreation Facility)

Flowing forms, containing surfaces with various angles, are one of the approaches to

achieve this kind of satisfaction in architectural design. Geometrically, by shifting the XY

This idea is inspiring, but rotating buildings challenge the balance between energy

plane to another spatial position with a changing slope angle, architects can generate flowing forms for photovoltaic roofs. Flowing forms both attract and challenge. On the one hand,
pleasure can be achieved through imitating the proportion, structure, or space of natural things (Steadman, 2008); on the other hand, synthesizing flowing forms with photovoltaic
panels needs solid technical knowledge and practices. There have been many vigorous explorations of flowing forms since industrialization.

consumption and energy generation. One aspect for concern is that the extra electricity gained through this approach is only about 10% in a two direction tracking system and less than 20% in a three direction tracking system. On the other hand, the investment in the mechanical system could be several times higher than the extra electricity gained from the tracking system. Another aspect for concern is that these revolving buildings are not suitable for large scale building for mechanical reasons. The larger a building is, the more energy and the larger mechanism for rotating the building will be needed.

Architect Randall Stout brought this idea to photovoltaic technology. In the small Steinhude Sea Recreation Facility in Germany, he challenged the nature of photovoltaic cells against

the nature of contemporary architecture (see Figure 22). This building's flowing form, derived from his schematic idea of eels, could provide opportunities for creative architectural design
with photovoltaic technologies.

28

29

The technical performance of this facility is satisfying. Twenty-six thousand square

2.4.1 Envelop of the future: Smart WrapTM

feet of photovoltaic panels can generate 180 kilowatts of electricity, powering all of the
building's non-HVAC electrical equipment. Even during off-peak hours it can export to grids in

Smart WrapTM is an experimental project of photovoltaic integration, which attempts to

San Mateo County (Daniel, 2007).

break a rigid image in people's minds (see Figure 23). Kieran Timberlake Associates,

founded in Philadelphia by Stephen Kieran and James Timberlake in 1984, conducted this
One of problems that Architect Randall Stout had to face lay in building's orientation.

research. Their initial idea was to get rid of the stereotyped thought of photovoltaic design, to create a new colourful, impressive, demonstrative photovoltaic structure. There were obstacles that the architects had to face when they integrated their notions in the

The optimum orientation for interior view conflicts with photovoltaic needs. The final building
form is the result of how he balances these two demands.

SmartWrapTM project.
1. Weather-proof

2.

Manufacturing time and material costs

3.

Occupied or non-occupied buildings

Figure 22. Steinhude Sea Recreation Facility.

4.

Conflict of transparent photovoltaic layer and other opaque layers of building
components

To achieve their objectives, Kieran and Timberlake treated elastic photovoltaic
2.4 Aesthetic and cultural expression in photovoltaic buildings

materials as a transparent wall which can be printed, rolled, and installed. They chose a clear film material called polyethylene terephthalate (P.E.T), a cheap, colourless polymer with low moisture absorption. The whole building skin consists of this material, laminated with other

Any new material experiences a long process of being adapted into buildings and structures. Plastic, for example, has been adopted into buildings for decades. In the early stages of using plaster or plastic in buildings, these flexible materials were used mostly for temporary building components such as side walls. However, contemporary architects have been exploring other design opportunities in architectural integration of plastic. What they have done proves that plastic forms, from folded-plate to dome structures, from shells to

compositions such as "organic light emitting diodes (O.L.E.D.s), organic photovoltaic

materials (O.P.V.s), phase change materials (PCMs), thin film batteries, and printed circuitry"
(Tanzer, 2007, p. 224).

The power generated by thin film photovoltaic materials is stored in thin film batteries
embedded in the same building skin. Kieran and Timberlake used aerogel, a transparent

membranes, can produce sensual and provocative effects, expressing artistic and cultural meanings (Jeska, 2007).

material, for insulation. Aerogel is fragile and needs to be kept within certain thicknesses to

Photovoltaic materials are also experiencing the similar pattern of development. In some experimental architectural studies, major aspects of photovoltaic materials as building

achieve its insulating function. The dilemma that Kieran and Timberlake faced was satisfying
insulating needs by adding a supplemental layer when this could reduce the building envelope's transparency. To enhance the transparent effects, they finally sacrificed the
31

materials are being explored. Smart WrapTM is one of these examples.
30

weather-proofing function of SmartWrapTM .
Kieran and Timberlake claim that "SmartWrapTM is the building envelope of the future: a composite that integrates the currently segregated functions of a conventional wall and
combines them into one advanced composite" (KieranTimberlake, 2008).The structural system is relatively simple. The whole structure of this pavilion is supported by aluminum frames. All the frames were premade and labelled before being delivered to the

2.4.2 Zero Energy Media (The Green Pix)

Smart WrapTM provides an imaginative idea for photovoltaic building and structure. Zero Energy Media (The Green Pix), a self-sufficient LED display designed by Simone Giostra & Partners and ARUP, push this idea forward. The fundamental motif is that the LEDs,

controlled by an intelligent computer system, perform as a spectacular media screen at night.

The whole wall can respond to data put into the computer, creating a variable building "skin".
Solar cells are embedded randomly, creating an impressive effect in daytime. Simone

construction site.

Both its elaborate details and transparent appearance impress people. The light and its self-sufficient function stimulate the public's interest in sustainable design and creativity in

Giostra & Partners and ARUP also built a website to illustrate how the Green Pix functions.
Figure 28 shows the different architectural effects of this entertainment building in the

sustainable design. On this limited level, it is successful. However, from an engineer's
perspective, it is not. Vertical installation weakens the potential energy generation of the

daytime and at night. The image on the bottom is the interface of the software they built for
the Green Pix.

photovoltaic materials. Different slopes and azimuth angles of photovoltaic cells make other
parts of photovoltaic system (for instance, inverters) more complicated and increase the system cost and possibility of system breakdown. This experimental project questions
photovoltaic integration: how best to appropriately balance the rigid technical requirements of

This algorithmic theme in architecture can be found in fine art. A computer-based cycle of

art entitled "Agglomeration" by Vlatko Ceric, a Professor of Computing at the University of
Zagreb, uses a similar concept. One or two simple mathematical elements are arranged randomly through a computer program to render complex and startling images (see Figure 25, Figure 26). Like the photovoltaic hotel, Vlatko Ceric's algometric works use a similar

photovoltaic materials and aesthetic quality?

simplicity-to-complexity approach that takes one simple shape element to create a complex
image in one given area. In Beijing's Rejing Hotel, architects use this approach to demonstrate that rectangular photovoltaic cells can be organized to create an attractive

building facade (see Figure 24). The Green Pix raises a question: can architects integrate photovoltaic materials with their ideas in social and cultural dimensions?

Figure 23. Exterior views of SmartWrap

.

32

33



Photovoltaic matrix

 DDDD DDDDD   D D nnnQD DDDD
Matrixeswith different transpar ency, embedded in glass panels Photovoltaic panels, generating electricity for a LED light ing system, create visual phenomenon In the daytime

A single cell

Figure 24. The Greenpix, facade integrated with photovoltaic cells and LED lighting system.

Social beliefs and

Computer programs convert social beliefs into visual images and videos

LED lighting system show these images controlled by computer programs.

Ideas

Figure 26. A diagram illustrating how the Greenpix's photovoltaic facade is integrated LED lighting
system. Drawn by the Author.

HNHM
Figure 25. Vlatko Ceric is working on his art(left), the algometric works entitled "Agglomeration" by Vlatko Ceric (right).

2.4.3 Expression of Particular Cultures (The Japanese Sanyo Solar Ark)

To express particular cultures, architects can turn to study connections among themes in this culture and society. For example, different accessories might be culturally linked to different levels of social status. The Sanyo Solar Ark is an example of such a way of expressing the rich Japanese culture and spirit (see Figure 27). The form of the Japanese Solar Ark building imitates the form of the Japanese traditional sword or archway. Japanese

swords have a long history in which their shapes have changed many times. However, many

styles of antique Japanese sword have an arc shaped scabbard and handle (see Figure 28).
Different forms of sword also identified the owners. Hoso tachi, one style of Japanese sword,

could be worn only by the highest ranking royal officers in ancient Japan. Thus this shape of
sword can evoke cultural memories of nobility and elegance. By integrating this unique shape

into the building, the architects successfully expressed a cultural meaning through this solar
34
35

building (see Figure 29). The purity of the whole building's coloured envelope, in harmony
with the unique colour of the solar panels, also conveys the Japanese spirit through the
colour of the Japanese traditional archway and Zen Garden.
Solar Ark ( Solar Energy Museum )

Curved JapanesG sword "Katana".

EZZ

Japanese traditional Archway

Figure 28. Form Analysis of the Sanyo Solar Ark.
Solar Energy Museum "Solar Lab"
Locatec r :h~ ce-:~r o1 Solar Ar*. · Overall length:

 '.V dth:

Prototype

Curve embedded cultural meanings

Figure 27. The Japanese Sanyo Solar Ark.

Final building form integrated
with photovoltaic technology,
aesthetics, and cultural ex
pression

Photovoltaic technology requires

Architectural symmetry completes

inclined surface to maximize electncity generation

the used space and building forms

Figure 29. Morphological analysis of the Solar Ark.

36

37

2.4.4 General Social Beliefs (The Canadian Museum for Human Rights)

More general social beliefs can also be expressed in photovoltaic buildings. The Canadian Museum for Human Rights, planned to be completed in 2012, is an example. This museum designed by Antoine Predock proposes to " feature, explore and promote discussion on human rights legislation such as the U.N. Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, Canada's Charter of Rights and Freedoms, and other human rights legislation " (CMHR Commission, 2008).

Conveying the notion of human rights in architecture challenged Predock who has

responded by using " shingled glass to wrap several stone galleries (see Figure 30).

The

glass panels, embedded with photovoltaic cells, represent "cloud" which is one of three
symbolic elements in his design" ( Pearson, 2006, p. 194). These clouds, as Predock

explains, are curved surfaces in architectural geometries. This building's forms evoke the
sense of faith, embrace, and protection (see Figure 31).

Figure 31. Form study of Canadian Museum for Human Rights ( CMHR).

Figure 30. The Canadian Museum for Human Rights (schematic design).

38

39

2.5 Implications for Architects

degrees (facing south), based on calculations which can be seen in the centre of the Electricity hemisphere. A diagram like this can help architects understand how to take

Some architects intent to achieve aesthetic pleasures in architectural design rather than concerning issues like building performance, maintenance and daily operation. However, these issues largely influence people's satisfaction towards buildings. The main problems architects will face in the process of integrating photovoltaic buildings can be categorized into three groups: electrical performance, technical, and architectonic aspects.

advantage of solar potential power output before they start a conceptual design.
If maximizing electricity output is not the priority, integrating photovoltaic systems into

the facade provides more opportunities for architectural design. Take Lux Nova, designed by Canadian stained glass artist Sarah Hall, for example. This wind tower delivers a dream-like beauty from every photovoltaic cell laminated in its transparent facade (see Figure 34).

2.5.1 Implications about electrical performance

However, the technical reality behind this is that more than 25% of potential electricity will be
Electricity output of photovoltaic materials has an evident connection to the spatial

lost in facade integration of photovoltaic technologies.

surfaces. First, different geographical locations influence the annual electricity output of
photovoltaic panels in buildings. Figure 32 shows the relationship between geographical

location and electricity output of photovoltaic materials. The closer to the equator, the lower
the photovoltaic panels' slope angles are.

Second, electricity generated by photovoltaic panels in a given geographical location

is determined mainly by two factors: slope and azimuth angle. To illustrate the major factors influencing the architectural integration of photovoltaic panels, a diagram (see Figure 33) is
drawn to show how much annual electricity a given type of solar panel can generate in different spatial positions at a specified site in Toronto. This diagram is based on the data of Mila Aleksic, an undergraduate student working for Solar Decathlon 2009. This module type

for reference is Sharp NT-185u1 (1575 x 826 x 46 mm) with14.22% efficiency.

The PV

energy absorption rate is 100%, and a 72KW inverter with 100% efficiency is used. Assume that 0% miscellaneous losses happen in the photovoltaic system. All the data is calculated by
the software RETScreen Version 4.

Every square represents a unique spatial location with a different slope and azimuth angle (no scale). The spectrum from deep red to deep blue represents the power the solar panel generates annually. The deeper red the square, the more power the solar panel in that position will generate. The deeper blue the square, the smaller the amount of electricity the solar panel in that position will generate. The optimized slope is 33 degrees with azimuth 90 40
41

Slope, unit degree

Azimuth Angle unite degree

East

Low
0.1930.203
0.204-

High
02X6
0.227

0.215

fU37

Energy collected from I'V panel annuallv (MWh)
Slope
Azimuth Angle 0

0 267

0 270 0 270

0 269 0 268

0 262 0.261

0 235
0 234
0 234 i?m 0226

0215 I

Each unit represents a panel with a different
slope and azimuth angle
o,;

0 266

0 215 I

0191 0191

0266
0263 0 260

0268
0265 0 262

2660
0263

0.260

0215_l 0 ?1? f _O190

0 208 [
0 204 I

o in
0184

0 246

1221

High

Low
0239 0 230 (East/West! 9D
0.221

0 239 0.230
0 221

Electricity generated by photovoltaic panels depends on the geographical location, photovoltaic panel slope and azimuth angles

0.221

Figure 33. This diagram illustrates the relationship between annual electricity generated by a specified
Figure 32. A diagram illustrating the relationship between photovoltaic annual electricity and

photovoltaic panel and its spatial locations, defined by azimuth angles and slopes. The spectrum, divided into ten equal intervals, indicates the amounts of electricity from maximum to minimum,
represented by blue and red squares respectively. The deeper blue the square is, the less electricity
the photovoltaic panel generates.

geographical location.

42

43

PROFWYW

2.5.2 Technical and architectonic implications

If architects manage to integrate cultural meaning into photovoltaic buildings, then

what other issues besides electrical performance can affect the form making of photovoltaic

buildings? What potential risks will architects face in creative architectural design? The
questions at hand provoke detailed discussions on technical and architectonic aspects in
creative design and practice.

First, the clients' expectations are the priority in architectural integration of
photovoltaic technologies. For instance, the clients' expectations for Turbulence House were

not colour and transparency, but conversion efficiency of photovoltaic panels. In this case photovoltaic panels are a minor part of the building visually. Furthermore, the tiled roof of the Turbulence House provides an effective solution for the clients by achieving uniformity in both
form-making and photovoltaic performance.

Second, clients' expectations imply that architects need to concern availability, accessibility and perceptibility of building surfaces for photovoltaic material. When architects seek suitable parts of building envelopes for photovoltaic materials in conceptual design; availability of building surfaces including the size, consistence and orientation should be

systematically considered. For instance, rigid, opaque and dull crystalline silicon materials
Figure 34. Lux Nova or (true north), designed by Canadian stained glass artist Sarah Hall.

are suitable for metal roofing systems. Comparably, flexible, semi-transparent and colourful
thin film materials have the potential to be integrated with skylight, facade, and windows.

One primary challenge in the rooftop renovation at London City Hall is to seek enough area for photovoltaic modules (see Figure 17). The building was designed as a passive solar

building as architects didn't expect to add new components to the rooftop. Consequently, the
photovoltaic rooftop of the oval building tiling facing north brings difficulty for the optimization
of electrical performance.

Accessibility of building surfaces for photovoltaic material refers to the idea that

photovoltaic panels integrated into buildings should be easily accessible for cleaning and maintenance. Lack of proper consideration for accessibility degrades photovoltaic
44
45

performance. For example, the large tiled photovoltaic roofs in Solarsiedlung community
(Figure 9) post a problem of accessibility. The affordable design, due to its standardized photovoltaic arrays, expose fragile, slippery and inaccessible glass roofs presenting considerable difficulties for cleaning and maintenance. The major implication for accessible
photovoltaic roofs is that structural supports for photovoltaic modules need to be simple, durable and sturdy.

German solar company stromaufwarts, do not perform major insulating functions so the
facade still requires insulating layers. Roof integrated photovoltaic modules also raise
questions about seeking additional layers for insulation and moisture protection. For instance,

the idea of a photovoltaic roof challenges various architectural performances such as thermal comfort, lighting and insulation in Mont-Cenis-Academy. The academy's envelope was
designed as a transparent "shell" resistant to solar radiation, rain, and wind. On the rooftop photovoltaic panels perform only few functions of a conventional roof. Architects had to

Perceptibility of building surfaces for photovoltaic material refers to the manner that

photovoltaic materials are publicly visible. For facade integrated photovoltaic buildings,
dialogue between other building components and photovoltaic materials in colour, pattern

provide feasible solutions for interior thermal comfort by either constructing "buildings in
building" or attaching other insulation layers to photovoltaic roofs in a conceptual design. In
addition, an interior pool was designed to collect rainwater through a specified system or by leaking from the canopy.

and texture should be carefully considered in a rational manner. Spinnereistrasse in
Vorarlberg, Austria is an example of inspiring architectural composition in photovoltaic buildings (see Figure 35). Visible dark blue photovoltaic modules are regarded as facade panels that seek equilibrium and harmony with other building components. In addition, the

Fourthly, complex photovoltaic systems may generate difficulties in construction, maintenance and electric performance therefore increasing initial costs. The inconsistent arrangement of photovoltaic panels generates difficulties in technical integration. For architectural form-making different convex slopes occurring along a short length can cause difficulties in photovoltaic integration. Responding to these technical limitations, Steinhude Sea Recreation Facility has relatively gentle slopes when integrating convex surfaces with rigid photovoltaic modules. In addition, using standard photovoltaic modules will reduce
complexity and installation costs.

notion of photovoltaic architecture is feasible because the price to performance ratio is satisfying (Himanshu, 2004).

Finally, the awareness about building surfaces triggers a further discussion on suitable building types for photovoltaic materials (see Table 2). Table 2 analyzes the potential for photovoltaic materials integrated into various building types. Different building types
supply possible building surfaces with various spatial positions while at the same time providing architects with the potential to express cultural and artistic motifs. For instance, a

residential building in an urban environment has relatively less potential than a museum at
Figure 35. Spinnereistrasse in Austria: facade integrated with thin film photovoltaic panels.

the same urban context to express cultural meaning. Therefore the potential building types
may provide for photovoltaic materials needs be exploited.

Thirdly, alternative functions of photovoltaic materials should be taken into
consideration. In the Spinnereistrasse project, the photovoltaic modules, produced by

46

47

Successful integration of cultural and artistic ideas with photovoltaic materials relies
on a comprehensive understanding of these implications. A diagram assisting architects in decision-making on photovoltaic building designs is shown in Table 3. However, architects

materials will inspire and encourage architects in the building integration of photovoltaic
materials.

S0.20/W

S0.50/W

Currency Unit: US

must realize that these technical and architectonic implications cannot constrain creative

100
r
t ~
/

architectural thinking. Otherwise, architects will easily shift to functionalism.
80 2.5.3 Outlook for the solar technologies 60 e
LLJ
1
1

t

s

'
i

r--
s

f

/
i

ThermcxJynannic limit
s

Photovoltaic materials are becoming cheaper, thinner, and more flexible. In 1985, the University of New South Wales in Australia developed a solar cell with 20% efficiency. Now

s

S1.00/W

this number has doubled. The current record for conversion efficiency of solar cells is 40.7%,
held by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), which means 1 square metre of photovoltaic panel in a 1000 Kw/m2 region can generate a 407 watt electricity maximum (IEA, 2007). Martin A. Green, one of the best known researchers into photovoltaic systems, classifies the development of this fast growing technology for electricity generation into three

40
/
/

t--A

! /

1

s s

20 -

/ /

A

£

Present limit

^

--

S3.50/W

^eneration_ _ _

I
200 300

1
400 500

100

stages. In his book, Third Generation Photovoltaic materials : Advanced Solar Energy
Conversion (2006), he argues that the first generation of photovoltaic systems used silicon

Cost US $/mJ
Figure 36. Efficiency-cost trade off for the three generations of solar technology: wafers, thin films.and
advanced thin films (year 2003; cost in US$). Redrawn and revised by the author. Source: Green, Martin A. (2006). Third Generation Photovoltaic materials. P3. Figure 1.2.

wafer as its base material, reaching its limit on cost and production. Thin film technology, the
second generation, uses fewer materials than its predecessor, offering advantages in low cost and mass production. The third generation, which Green deems will rely on tandem cells,
will lower overall costs and raise the conversion efficiency. Figure 36 illustrates the

Average architects usually are adaptors rather than inventors (Reyer, 1980). They
have been and are trained to arrange available technologies and materials to create a

performance-price ratio of the three generations. This trend provides architects with insight into how active solar building design will evolve.

material world for societies with cultural, aesthetic, and emotional expression.

The trends in

photovoltaic systems tell architects that the integration of photovoltaic systems into buildings
The colours of photovoltaic materials are also a challenge today. Besides photovoltaic

has considerable future potential. The forms of photovoltaic building will not be rigid, following only the technology-driven approach; on the contrary, they will vary in spatial dimension. Any shape of building surface can be produced with the second or third generation of photovoltaic

cells, some engineers have begun to explore other characteristics of photovoltaic material, bringing a new perspective on photovoltaic systems. For instance, researchers in Covalent
Solar have suggested the novel idea of using simple glass or plastic panels laminated with

systems because of their low costs or high efficiency or both. Just like the evolution of
aluminum use today, new developments of photovoltaic systems will have a promising future
with economy of scale. The building types integrated with photovoltaic collectors will be

common outdoor dyes. Photovoltaic cells wrapping the edges of glass or plastic panels can reach conversion efficiencies of up to 6.8%. This system also can absorb diffuse light, working without a tracking or cooling system. (Currie, 2008,) Innovative photovoltaic
48

49

diverse, from institutional to residential. Even small buildings, such as vendor stands, bus stops, and tents, will have photovoltaic systems mounted on them.

more installation areas. A large scale public building can reach the electricity capacity of 100
KWp, the threshold between a large scale power plant and a small scale one (Goetzberger, 2005, p. 126), and is more meaningful economically. Besides the larger electricity capacity, a

centralized photovoltaic system integrated with a public building can reduce electricity loss
2.6 Conclusion

caused by dispensable wires and invertors, maintenance cost, and installation cost because

Theoretically, photovoltaic systems, as decentralized power generators for the grid,

of economies of scale. A public building integrated with photovoltaic technologies also offers
an opportunity to educate the public about this green technology.

can be integrated into any building form, in any geographical location. However, research
implies that different building types require specified applications of photovoltaic integration

Other building types such as commercial buildings, industrial buildings and

based on their functions and forms, ownership and available government subsidies.
Research also implies that photovoltaic technologies have an inherent relationship with the

institutional buildings also have potentials to integrate photovoltaic materials. Generally, some owners of commercial buildings in urban area are selective about their exterior because they worry that shoppers dwindle due to the dark frontage integrated with photovoltaic panels. However, an imaginative design will challenge negative views about solar materials. The roofs or canopies of commercial buildings are potential surface areas for
photovoltaic integration. Compared to commercial buildings, industrial buildings provide

choice of locations in a particular urban context.

Residential buildings are a major market for photovoltaic technologies. Due to their large number, the economic and environmental impact of photovoltaic integration of

residential buildings would be significant. This energy strategy would stimulate the
development of solar energy technologies. Currently, the main market for photovoltaic technologies is small scale residential buildings such as houses, townhouses and mid-rise apartments. Architecturally, the traditional prototype of a house with tilted roofs benefits photovoltaic technologies, and the facade of residential buildings also offers areas for photovoltaic integration. However, maximizing daylight in residential buildings limits the

designers with more exterior surface for photovoltaic integration. High efficiency and good performance are the two priorities in photovoltaic integration of industrial buildings. As a result, the panels should be installed on the roof, which reduces the design opportunities to
showcase photovoltaic technologies to the public.

The basic requirement for photovoltaic integration is that there is no shading in the site. Based on this principle, agricultural areas are a natural fit for photovoltaic technologies,
except that this would consume valuable land areas. Urban areas without shading are also appropriate for photovoltaic integration. Urban

possible installation areas for photovoltaic panels because the window areas dominate the facade. This tradeoff increases both the difficulties of architectural integration and the solar
electricity cost because photovoltaic integration of residential buildings needs more electronic invertors and longer wires connecting invertors with dispersed solar panels than large scale

areas that dominated by high rise buildings could also be potential locations for photovoltaic integration with careful shade analysis of surrounding buildings. Admittedly, the limited shading-free surface areas are a major barrier to integrating solar technologies in urban environments. However, the significance of photovoltaic integration in urban areas, compared
to suburban areas, is the educational purpose it serves.

integration to generate the same amount of electricity; in addition, the power output will drop
slightly due to longer wires.

In addition to low rise residential buildings, large scale public buildings are also potential areas for photovoltaic technologies. A large scale public building integrated with photovoltaic technologies, compared to a house, can generate more power because it offers
50

51

The landscape of a city transforms over time. Building structures remain the same but
their function changes over the years. In many post-industrial cities, old industrial low-rise buildings that have been changing their functions would be appropriate sites for photovoltaic integration.

3. A recreational facility integrated with photovoltaic technologies

3.1 Overview

The research implies that urban areas in post-industrial cities should be explored as

The following section is a proposed architectural design developed by the author

possible sites for photovoltaic integration. With government subsidies, photovoltaic buildings
in cities or even a solar city could be possible.

based on the research presented in this thesis. The project, titled a Recreational Facility

Integrated with Photovoltaic Technologies, presents form exploration and architectural
intervention. The application of the research is understood through the process of this design. The intention is to present: First, the importance of interaction between building forms and photovoltaic materials in conceptual design. Second, how the architectural theme is conveyed. Thirdly, how relevant details of the building can be sophistically developed to
achieve an efficient solution.

To find a meaningful project for photovoltaic technologies three major aspects must be considered including topographical, economic and social feasibility. Topographical feasibility emphasizes the solar analysis of the site which helps to determine the appropriate

area for the proposed building during a year. Economic feasibility refers to the comparison of
energy generation and consumption of the proposed building while questions like whether the

energy generation is significant compared with the energy consumption of the building have
to be framed to judge the proposed project. Social feasibility is assessed and determined through investigating demographics of local communities and public demands on building space. This step-by-step logic and reasoning is the basis and criteria for the design project.

Based on the three aspects, the author selected Lamport Stadium Recreational Park - one of numerous green spaces in Toronto - as the proposed site. This site contains an aged stadium, a green space and various municipal parking lots. The major topographical

character of the neighbourhood is the flatness of urban fabric consisting of low rise office
buildings and industrial parks (see Figure 37, 38). There are around 20 conifers and other

deciduous trees five to 12 metres tall mainly distributed along the west and east edges of the
site. An historic house is located on the northwest corner on the King Street W. The economic
52

53

and architectural significance of this area for photovoltaic technologies is based on the idea that public facilities can be transformed into electrical generators in an urban context. For a
city, a network of this installation will promote solar energy as a sustainable resource in an
urban environment.

rain collection, patio and expressive structure into a cubic form. The architectural theme is to express the shape of energy flow, the weightlessness of a photovoltaic roof and the dynamic
photovoltaic facade.

Information of the proposed site was obtained and gathered following several site trips

Historically this area was used for prisons followed by a major industrial centre (Wieditz, 2007). After urbanization in recent decades, the neighbourhoods were gradually transformed into an art centre accommodating various industries related to arts such as furniture design (Green design studio), radio (Sirius), and 3D film (Geneva Film Co). Rising

from March to April, 2009, Maps and Data at Ryerson University, statistics data from the City
of Toronto, Google Earth and the Bing Maps system. The key findings in this design are summarized in Section Four.

employment and distinctive landscape drove young professionals to move into this area
therefore promoting local economic activity and recreational opportunities. As a public green

space the existing Lamport Stadium Park fails to service new residents in the area. These
social and geographical factors, combining with solar shading analysis, make the proposed

site an ideal place for proposing a new recreational facility integrated with photovoltaic
technologies.

Objectives and building programs presented in this section address the technical and

architectural challenges of photovoltaic integration with building forms to maximize electricity
generation. These challenges are constructed based on the research and investigation of the site. Form exploration examines the objectives and building programs determined in the previous process. The research presented in Section One guides form exploration with criteria such as electricity generation, urban context, structure, flexibility for various technologies and building programs.

An explicit form model generated in the previous step has to be integrated with an
architectural theme to develop an elaborate design. In the process of architectural intervention the author integrated aspects such as expressive ideas, thermal insulation, structure, solar control, dimension, proportion, scale, details of the building, mechanical systems and electronic systems as a whole. This process, depending largely on individual imagination and experience, would lead to various designs. For example, the proposed design project concentrates on the idea of integrating photovoltaic technologies with daylight,
54

55

Ol
O

Proposed site:
Lamport Stadium recreational park 1151 King Street West Toronto. ON Canada
M6K 1E9

Figure 37. The proposed site: Lamport Stadium recreational park, located in west region of Toronto, Ontario Canada. Latitude of the site is 43o 38' 20.20 "N, longitude is 79o 25' 22.87" W.

7. The Ca

Figure38. Site views showing the proposed site is surrounding by low rise historic buildings.

3.2 Solar shading analysis

time zone calculating and seasonal calculation. Based on the data collected in Table 4 an estimation of solar hours for the chosen site can be summarized as follows: Toronto averaged less than nine daylight hours (37.5% daily) at the chosen part of the site in January

Shading analysis is an essential phase for solar building design. During the conceptual phase architects can use simulation tools such as Sketchup or Ecotech to generate a diagram showing the area available for photovoltaic materials. The process helps determine
the appropriate area for proposed buildings. In this process, the adjacent buildings vegetation,

2009; 10 hours, 41.7% in February; 11 hours, 45.8% in March; 13 hours, 54.2% in April; 14 hours, 58.3% in May; 15.5 hours,64.6% in June; 15 hours, 62.5% in July; 14 hours, 58.3%

along with other tall structures, that could cast shadows during the year should be taken into
consideration.

in August; 12 hours, 50% in September; 11 hours, 45.8% in October; 9 hours, 37.5% in November; and 8 hours, 33.3% in December. As shown in the bar graph (Figure 40) daily solar radiation at the site is higher in the summer than in the winter. The best months for solar

Usually, locations available for photovoltaic integration in mixed-use urban areas are

radiation and long solar hours are May, June, July and August during a calendar year.

limited due to the considerable height of the adjacent buildings or vegetation. Finding an
appropriate site for the photovoltaic integration in urban areas becomes important. The diagrams in Figure 39 illustrates that the proposed site is a good fit for photovoltaic

integration because most parts of it are annually free from shades of adjacent low rise buildings. In addition, only the perimeter of the site would be shaded from large conifers and other deciduous plants that are around five to12 metres tall (see Figure 38 for the site views and Figure 40 for area appropriate for photovoltaic integration). Solar analysis implies three
potential shade-free parts in the chosen area for the photovoltaic integration: close to the

Liberty St. (south), at the centre of the site, or close to King St. W (north).

The intention of the design is to provide local residents with convenience of engaging in

activities and events. A proposed location close to Liberty St. or in the centre of the site will fail to achieve this goal. Another concern of a central location is that the whole site divided
into three small pieces lacks flexibility for hosting large events.

The area appropriate for photovoltaic materials is illustrated in Figure 40. The distance between the perimeters of the suitable area and the adjacent trees is designed at least 1.5

times the height of these trees. Since the adjacent buildings do not cast continuous shade on
the chosen part of the site, sunrise and sunset times in Toronto can be approximately taken as the daytime hours for this design project. Table 4 shows the sunrise and sunset times for

Toronto's Eastern Time Zone in 2009. The data calculated and collected through an online
sunrise and sunset calculator (Time and Data AS, 2009) an organization offering services in

58

59

- ill

|

Feburary 1st 8:00
August 1st 8:00 August 1st 12:00

Feburary 1st 12:00

Feburary 1st 16:00

August 1st 16:00

- LL. .' ' ^ '
March 1st 8:00

^M >"*Hi> £-" ^

\

Lj,
March 1st 16:00
October 1 st 8:00

!r%J»TJ^' PV T!
October 1 st 12:00 October 1st 16:00

March 1st 12:00

CD -

O

_

(

jjjy _ n 7j "."" i! I" ^
( .

May 1st 8:00

May 1st 12:00"
May 1st 16:00~

December 1 st 8:00

December 1 st 12:00

December 1 st 16:00

Figure 39. The simulation diagrams of solar shadow showing the site has long hours of solar radiation without permanent shadow.

12

12

12

12

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

am

12

12

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Sunrise and sunset times Hours

Daily solar radiation

kwh/rm Id

15.5 J5
13


9

10 AC
I
I3.36
2.22 1.44

w

i.14
5.47

29
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug

12

daily solar radiation for Toronto region
11

8
3.7!

a.
1.31

daytime hours appropriate for photovoltaic materials in Toronto

Sep Oct

Nov

k

Dec

0

Appropriate sunrise and sunset times in 2009 (average hour/day) and daily solar radiation for Toronto region

Figure 40. The diagram and bar graph showing sunrise and sunset times (top left) and daily solar radiation (bottom left) for the proposed site and the area appropriate for photovoltaic materials (right). Data retrieved

June, 2008 from RETScreen database and Sunrise and Sunset calculator of Time and Data AS.

3.3 Site Analysis

The following figures illustrate the site with information consisting of its urban context, demographic data and community centres in the neighbourhoods. The site is located to the south of King St. W., close to Dufferin St (see Figure 41). The area is experiencing a fast

growing development in which more young professionals are moving in. Young people, a
growing population in local communities, have a strong desire to increase recreational opportunities at the proposed site. However, community centres (see Figure 42) in the neighbourhood are either too small or serve only particular age groups such as high school students. The data from the City of Toronto (see Figure 43) reveals the imbalance between social demands and supply in recent years.
CO

TO

jo '5

3

I

E
o
o
"D

3.4 Design Objectives

CD

To satisfy residents' social needs at the site, a new recreational community facility integrated with photovoltaic technologies - offering multifunctional spaces for local communities, is proposed in this design project. The design objectives are:

         |  "    

in

T3

_*      · »__ --

;Mi_
%  mm** 

1

I 8

1

T3

CD

·

To integrate a recreational facility with photovoltaic materials and technologies to
export electricity into the grid

I i
£
CO

·

To maximize electricity generation in the proposed site
O5

·

To provide flexibility for several solar technologies

 a ·        «   

    --

O

·

To promote and educate people with photovoltaic materials and technologies
m ifiiiitrriti **.»»·  «Tnrt

 I

in
c

o

o o

I 1 i
II
62

(0

T3

TO

16 Holy Family
CC 141 Close Ave. Facilities include multi purpose rooms, a gym integrated into a school. No weekend service.

25 McComick Arena
179 Brock Ave Facilities include an indoor and an outdoor ice rink

Civic Centre

21 Mary McComick RC
66 Sheridan Ave.

27 Parkdale CRC
75 Lansdowne Ave Facilities include multi purpose rooms. 2 gyms, and 2 indoor swimming pools integrated into a junior school.
Population by Age Group - 2001

Recreation Facility/

Community Centre

Facilities include a fitness centre,
swimming pool, weight room, and a gym.

Skating Arena/Rink

(indoors & outdoors)

iiili

Swimming Pool
(indoors & outdoors)

5-9

10-14

15-19

20-24

25-34

35-44

45-54

55-64

65+

 Ward 14

 Toronto

Figure 43. Demographic data and the map of community facilities.
22 Masaryk Cowan CRC
220 Cowan Ave Facilities include a gym, a weight training centre, a swimming pool, an activity room,and multi purpose rooms.

40 Trinity Community Recreation Centre
155 Crawford Street West

Facilities include a weight training centre,
a swimming pool, tennis courts, an ice rink and game room

Figure 42. Community centers in the neighbourhood.
64 65

3.5 Form exploration

be applicable for photovoltaic materials. Another distinct advantage is the whole built-up structure of a cubic form can be integrated with imaginative motifs on which architecture rests. Beyond these benefits of a cubic form one architectural concern is that a large form has to be grounded in careful building programs.

Based on the previous research, there are potential building forms suitable for the
proposed site. Each concept has advantages and disadvantages.

For the diagonal form A (see Figure 44) a slope for optimizing electricity generation can be achieved by tilting the building facade to a certain degree- 20 to 30 degree in Toronto. The efficiency increased compared with horizontal surface is around 10 percent. However, architects have to solve the difficulties that the diagonal interior space brings and gauge the
higher building costs the diagonal form brings. In many cases diagonal interior space is hard

Snow is one concern to the power output of solar panels in cold regions as Toronto.

The diagonal form A and the vertical form C need low or minimal maintenance of snow because their slopes allow the snow to fall down. Both the waving form B and the cubic form
D, compared to form A and form C, need regular maintenance of snow to stabilize the power
output affected by the snow covering the solar panels.

to use as previous research indicates, especially large scale buildings. Visually, a giant dark
blue building is also like an extraneous object to its context.

One of the objectives in the design project is to maximize solar generation. To achieve this goal, the potential power output each form generates should be examined. The following

For waving forms B (see in Figure 44) a better visual effect is achieved easier than

diagonal forms. It reduces the shadows cast by the building on the street and the potential height of the building. One of the major disadvantages is that less than half of the roofs surface faces the sun making less available for flat photovoltaic materials. In addition, the

calculations and comparisons describe the electricity generated by each form.

Comparison of electricity generated by forms:



Project location: Toronto

angle of slopes has to be designed to avoid shadows on the rear slope caused by the front  slope. For other free forms the same problems exist for architects who tend to synthesize the
 building components in developing their themes.
 100% PV energy absorption rate

Solar module: Sharp NT-185u1 (1575 x 826 x 46 mm)
Efficiency: 14.22%

For the vertical form C (see Figure 44) the facade surface has to be covered by as
many powerful photovoltaic materials as possible as the primary goal is to maximize


-

72 kW inverter with 100% efficiency
0% miscellaneous losses

electricity. As a result, the design reduces natural light in the interior space. Vertical forms also raise design problems including limited interior space, less efficient facade (usually
60-70% in Toronto region) and expensive structure. Furthermore, to increase the surface

Assuming the area of each proposed roof surface is identical to 50 metres X 50

metres, 2,500 m2. Based on the assumptions above the comparison of energy generated
from PV annually by these four forms is estimated as follows:

area available for photovoltaic materials, the height of the building has to be high responsively which, in return, casts a large shadow over King St.

For the cubic form D (see Figure 44) the roof offers a fine surface to install various photovoltaic materials. The height of the cubic form can be lower to avoid casting large areas

of shadow in comparison to the diagonal form and the vertical form. Some facades can also
66

67

o
3"
cr

o
o

0)

T3
O
CD

5
CO c

01 c

ot
3.
NJ

Nl CO
CD

0 -=;

3
CD [Q
3

cS

CD
·a

3
CD CD
.
, ^

^1

^

> § 01
cn

3
.

o'

o

CO

T3

O

3
c 3^

cn T3 01

O

1
CO

CD
(Q

yT
C£

CD

0 CD
3

c 3

m'
C m

CD

1

01 0
ro

01

rt

3

O
&T
= CD
Q(Q

S

cn

c

5. c7 ° 3 d
-·

-p

73

o o
g:
--^

CD

cn

CD
3"

p
03 CD CQ

3'
<
01 01 O

<

3J

CD 3

cn

"0
73

a. cr

erials

CO

CO
O
3

3"
CD.
Q.
c 3 cn
C

a 01

x

TO

O

--

01
01
3

3
3 CD 01

neig its
O
-vl

co'
0
CO 3"

01 3

CD

3

X

8 ^
i g
o 3

SI cT i"
CD R-

^

O

CD
O_
^1

Q.

cn 0

01

·~J

3

i. § 01

1 X 5 3
o o

S"
O

03
qY
CT

cub osit
O O O
3"

CD

cr

Q.

a In W.
R
Q.

Q.

<

O

3'

CD

>ISU9
CD

CO

o

CQ

& CO
13

o

toshe trusive pedst
o
CO
tj

Q. CD 03 03
l-f

CD

CO

CD

How

CD CD

CD

3
Q.

5s

SUB uildng obijeoctni
CJl

)nclu

"5:
(Q

proia c1wimaea
CD

C

3
ree

g:

CD
03

0

CO

03

X

31

--y

CQ CD
CO

0 0

CD
03
C_
Q

§.
cr CD
CO

CD
3
to

H!
Si

|.
>
3.
03 03 O

o"
3"

3".
N3

CD
Q.

In
=j

01 CO

CD

i<"
3

Q.

CQ

3

CO

CO

3

CD

3
0 CD

o
03
--(

5'

a

(wtuioad;l iOfP rfa(hietg
01

a

Form A
CD

Form B
pv surface

Form C

n
Incline surface as photovoltaic surface
Advantages: optimize solar panel's performance, more than 90% efficiency can be achieved with an appropriate orientation and an angle low maintenance of snow in the winter Disadvantages: Disadvantages:

Form D

waving surface as photovoltaic surface
Advantages: optimize solar panel's performance, more than 90% efficiency can be achieved with appropriate
orientation and angles

Vertical surface as photovoltaic surface
Advantages: the building area only occupies small proportion of

Horizontal surface as photovoltaic surface
Advantages:

1. approximately 90% efficiency can be the site
minimal maintenance of snow in the winter achieved in the summer

2- be suitable for many photovoltaic materials

such as flat panels, flexible solar
sheets, tublar solar materials, and other

Disadvantages:
1. only about half of surface area is efficient

dynamic materials.

1. a vertical structure is relatively expensive

3. the interior space is flexible.

1. interior space is hard to be organized
2. the building form casts a large shadow
over King street 3. be suitable for limited photovoltaic materials

for photovoltaic panels
2. structure is relatively expensive

2. only approximately 60-70% efficiency can be
achieved

Disadvantages: 3. be suitable for limited photovoltaic materials such as rigid, flat panels and flexible solar such as rigid, flat panels and flexible solar
sheets sheets 4. regular maintenance of snow in the winter 3. the interior space is not flexible 2 be suitable for limited photovoltaic materials

1. the building area has to be large enough to such as rigid, flat panels and flexible solar
sheets compensate for solar gain it loses due to its orientation.

2. regular maintenance of snow in the winter

Figure 44. Comparison between different forms suitable for photovoltaic materials.

1

3.6 Architectural intervention
Service block

From the analysis we have concluded that the flat roof (see Figure 44 for cubic form D) provides flexibility for various photovoltaic materials. This section illustrates how architectural
intervention plays an important role in developing an architectural concept. The facility is
Photovoltaic canopy

proposed to accommodate flexibility for building programs including recreational activities, markets, concerts, public performances or other events that require a large space. One idea is to design an enclosed solar canopy that provides the local communities with a large event space for all seasons. Figure 45, Figure 46, Figure 47, and Figure 48 illustrates the process that an architectural idea is integrated with the cubic form and develops into a building.
Service block Flexible space for community use

Photovoltaic canopy

Outdoor space can be used as multifunctional fields that hold many sports activities (see Figure 49). For interior space, only the service block is proposed to be air conditioned to minimize energy use. The fluid interior space, shaped by steel tube structural components, develops a structural theme to explore the design opportunities that rest upon the cubic form.

Figure 46. Diagrams showing a photovoltaic canopy accommodating a service block and flexible space
for community use.

Retractable seats

Environmentally, the light wells have other benefits such as allowing heated air to escape

Service block

Recreational zone

from the building, encouraging people to collect rain water and functioning as green
courtyards.

Season A. Sport events

Season B. Performance or movie events

Light well

 Operable windows

Cool air

Water collection

Service block

Season C Markets

Figure 45. A diagram showing PV canopy, light wells, and the cubic form are integrated into
one building.

Figure 47. Diagrams showing the building accommodates different events.

The enclosed canopy provides occupants with two zones - a service block and a multifunctional zone. The primary idea to separate functional space with a photovoltaic

70

71

canopy is based on the analysis and research on tradeoffs. This strategy of separation reduces the difficulties in integrating different building components in a large-scale building.

A proposed service block consists of essential space for the requirements of building property management, public washrooms, storages, multifunctional rooms and a fitness centre (see Figure 50, Figure 51). Multifunctional rooms are located close to King St. W. to benefit circulation. A shipping and receiving area is designed close to the northwest entrance, allowing easy transformation from multifunctional rooms to storage space in the future. The
Q.

2
TO

middle of the service block situates public washrooms that provide convenience for the

I
O
O

multifunctional zone and for the offices linked by a corridor. The office entrance is located at
the west part of the building to maintain privacy.

II

05

The south part of the service block contains a mechanical room, an electrical room, a communication room and a fitness centre for local residents. Some retractable seats can be placed against the wall of the service block (see Figure 52). During community events like a
basketball or indoor soccer game, these seats can be drawn out allowing spectators to enjoy the game. When the square needs to be converted into a market, these seats can be retracted to give additional space. The rooftop of the service block, linked by the spiral stair

C

CO CD

05

(/) <"
TO .2
C

>.

fl
o

%t
O CD

Si
Q_

CD 3

and retractable seats, also provides a good space for a cafe and to watch games.

-1
CD

£ 0

0 m

o *
CO

The multifunctional zone can hold different recreational activities. Enough space is provided for two basketball courts, four badminton courts and indoor soccer fields at the same time. Public performances can also be held in the multifunctional zone. The local communities can use this space for other events such as farmers markets, small business
markets or commercial exhibitions.

c -c o ^
c/3
O3

^)

1
g

£ T3

0§

i
e8
o
CD
^-

A key idea of the building's energy design is that the flexible internal space is not fully
heated or cooled. In the summer it is ventilated by opening the facade instead of air

--

CD

.2 3

conditioning, and in winter only the service block is heated and other space relies on passive
solar gain. This idea aims to reduce the energy consumption of the whole building.

J
c

5. CD

8 85
-a

o O

c cd

co §

72

.!>§
LL

3 y
O

The idea to design a steel framework (see Figure 53) is driven by the facts that the average lifespan of photovoltaic technologies is less than that of the building and that the
forms of photovoltaic materials are diverse. Generally, most manufacturers guarantee their

300 Wp, from Solar Integrated is 5600mm long and 900 mm wide, 5.04 square metres in area. The dimensions of poly-crystalline panels, Schott ASE-300-DGF/50, 300 Wp, are only
1892mm long and 1283mm wide, 2.43 square metres in area.

photovoltaic materials for 15 to 25 years while steel buildings can last more than 50 years. For future photovoltaic materials with different requirements a cubic framework provides more possibilities than the diagonal or waving form.

The last one is opaque tubular photovoltaic material (see Figure 55). The advantage

of this material is its fine design for flat surfaces and certain climates. This type of material

needs lightweight hook-like supporters while all the tubes are laid on the supporters. The
gaps between tubular materials are good for ventilation and waterproofing. In addition, these

There are four typical photovoltaic materials and technologies proposed in the project. The first is an opaque thin film panel, First Solar FS-270, 1200 x 600 x 6.8mm, 70 W
(see Figure 54). This thin film module is becoming a major player in the future of the

materials are easily replaced or repaired. A bright roof surface is necessary for increase the performance of this tubular material because it is designed to absorb the light from reflection
and diffusion.

photovoltaic market. The dimensions of this module usually range from 1000 to 2000 mm
depending on the manufacturers. A proper installation needs extra structural supports like clips and framing anchors to fasten flat panels onto the corrugated metal sheet of the roof. In most cases manufacturers provide fundamental hinges to join adjacent flat panels for even surfaces. The design provides an even surface for flat opaque panels like FS-270. Panels

have to be raised up a certain distance from the roof metal sheet for ventilation and drainage.

The second one (see Figure 54) is a typical mono-crystalline photovoltaic cell. This material dominates the photovoltaic market. The reason to choose this material is that when these cells are integrated into a flat glazing roof, many design opportunities exist for skylight and space underneath the roof. As the research reveals, considerable patterns of these cells

are applicable for this roof. One concern is that once the corrugated metal sheet is replaced by this type of sealed translucent roof, the new roof has to take on a waterproofing function that will increase difficulties of maintaining photovoltaic panels.

The third one (see Figure 55) is a thin film, opaque, flexible sheet that is also an

emergent product type. The flat roof can also satisfy the installation requirements of this
photovoltaic module. The reason to choose this material is its considerably low installation cost compared to other photovoltaic materials. It is easy and quick to install and usually only requires small fasteners to fix onto the roof. However, the dimension of this material is large

than that of other photovoltaic materials due to its low efficiency. For instance, SI-M2 288,
74
75

Figure 49. Master plan showing the integration of cubic form of the building and outdoor multifunctional green space.

3

/

a=
i i:

10

;

A_

.

A

10

10

10

r

4V'

·M

10

10

10

,6.5

20.97

19.39

12.14

27.86

7.14

6.5

20.97

19.39

12.14

27.86

7.14

1. 2. 3.
4.

Service block Information desk North entrance
East entrance

6.

Market

7.
8. 9. 5. South entrance

Performance stage
Badminton court Basketball court 10. Sales space

Figure 50. Space configurations showing that the building provides a large event space for flexible programs and
the service block providing an electrical room for photovoltaic systems.

1.

Multifunctional room Lecture room Office Lounge Security room Fitness centre Meeting room First aid Patio Changing room Washroom Storage room Communication room Electrical room

2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
7.

8.
9. 10. 11.

12.
13.

14.

(Photovoltaic system
control room) 15.

Mechanical room

16. Audio room 17. Janitor room 18.

Retractable seats Recreational area

19.
20. Indoor playground GO

0 5

10

20

15

First floor plan of the service block

Rooftop floor plan of the service block

Figure 51. Floor plans of the service block

\

Figure 52. Long section AA looking north; the rooftop of service block on the left hand provides occupants with a cafeteria space and retractable seats are located against the walls of service block.

j
-- ;- -

-4--i--

\
--i-- --
-

-

---- - ---

--llJ

\ f Jr ./V----^
, «

Figure 53. The proposed steel truss structure, steel column system and their geometries.

PV system:

PV application: fiat roof mounted -opaque
Maxmium PV power: 70 W

Framed - regular module,
PV module brand and type.

First Solar FS-270 (thin film) Dimension: 1200x600x6.8mm
Advantages: thin,lightweight.lower cost

PV system: PV application: flat roof integrated -translucent Maxmium PV power: 3W / Unit

Framed - regular moduie,
PV module brand and type: Canadian Solar cell (mono or poly-crystalline)

Dimension: 100x100mm up to 2OOOx3000mm advantages: skylight

Figure 54. Various photovoltaic materials such as thin film panels and photovltaic cells can be integrated onto the flat roof.

1

I

,

PV system:

PV application: flat roof mounted -opaque Maxmium PV power: 300W
Framed - regular module,

PV module brand and type: Solar integrated SI-M2 288 (thin film) Dimension: 5600x900mm
advantages: quick installation,

minimal maintanence, lower cost

00

OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO-C
I

PV system:

PV application: flat roof integrated Maxmium PV power: 300W
Framed - regular module,

PV module brand and type: SolyndraSL-001-150 Dimension: 1820x1080xmm
advantages: fast, easy to install, lightweight,lower cost

Figure 55. Various photovoltaic materials such as flexible thin film sheets and tubular collectors can be integrated onto the flat roof.

East elevation

ffffffl I:  !  I '   I: 

West elevation

00

W

South elevation

Figure 56. Elevations showing that the south and west facades are integrated with photovoltaic cells.


 III

·

m/#  ':

i ·'

mil* 'ii»»itn«*r

.liilitliiiil ·>«*>···««

-"«·

10 0 20

30 40

50

Figure 57. North elevation along King Street.

photovoltaic roof

photovoltaic facade

Sturcture of photovoltaic roof is
seperated from photovoltaic facade

photovoltaic facade openned up for both natural ventilation and better performance in summer
-

roof integrated with
photovoltaic materials

00

en

°

B

8

photovoltaic facade

:

South Facade detail

Vertical section

Figure 58. Facade integrated with solar cells.

Elevations (see Figure 56, Figure 57) are created by using AutoCAD to illustrate the facade-integrated photovoltaic materials and site fabric. The blue squares laminated on the

facades are photovoltaic cells. Only south and west facades are integrated due to their
5.
>

orientations. Transparent north facade (see Figure 57), unlike its adjacent buildings made of
brown bricks, takes on a distinctive appearance.

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

CD T3

Photovoltaic materials, not like other building materials such as glass, stone, plastic or
r ;

0>
Q5

TD 0 "C CD O CD

0

Ct

wood need to be maintained regularly. Engineers need to access these electrical products to replace malfunctioned parts or repair photovoltaic cells and wires. From this point of view the facade distinguishes itself from other parts of the building surface due to its accessibility for

"O
"O
CD

C

1 II

^

Iw

o

photovoltaic integration. Besides, most of the photovoltaic materials selected for the roof do
E

not generate a dynamic visual effect than the facade. One technical fact designers have to

realize is that the vertical surface is less efficient than the horizontal one in building
'c
>

o

cd

integration of photovoltaic materials.

o

0

E

In this project half the facade surfaces are laminated with photovoltaic cells to allow daylight penetration. One idea in the design is to increase the performance of photovoltaic

T3

0

o

T

I

1

!

T

I

I

0

glazing, improve natural ventilation and connect interior and exterior space. A proposed

o
o

solution is to open up part of the facades achieve these goals. As shown in Figure 58, part of
the glass cladding can be raised up through mechanical systems embedded in the framework.
During summer months the opened up facade provides good ventilation while increasing

CO

o

o

T3 CD o CD CD

photovoltaic performance (the most efficient slope ranges from 15° to 30° in the summer at
Toronto). In winter the closed facades are good for indoor activities and photovoltaic

0
O

performance (the most efficient slope ranges from 55 ° to 65 ° in the winter at Toronto)
To maximize transparency the facades must involve large areas of glazing. A technical concern of the design is how to support these glass curtain walls. A responding idea

=====

o

2

T3

0

is to connect the roof and facade with a mechanical system illustrated in Figure 59 so that the
large facade can resist wind loads and temperature changes in Toronto.

j

0£

o O

CT>

The following images illustrate the interior, exterior and aerial views from different
O5

directions and times. Figure 60 demonstrates that the building seen from King St. W.
87

86

performs a transparent effect at night. In the service zone one of the ring-like steel columns

contains a spiral stair for maintaining the photovoltaic roof and accessing the second floor of
the service block. Figures 61, Figure 62 and Figure 63 demonstrate that parts of the facades laminated with photovoltaic cells can be opened up to connect interior and exterior activities
such as community markets. This design provides not only flexibility for space usage but an
c CO

£
'CO

increase in performance of photovoltaic cells and natural ventilation for the building. Figure 64 illustrates that facades integrated with photovoltaic cells can be one visual component in architectural design. The roof, covered with corrugated metal sheets, provides opportunities for various photovoltaic technologies (see Figure 65).

2
o

I
D

CD
g>

Project brief:

CD T3
CO

CO

Project location: Toronto, Ontario, Canada

Service block height: 4 metres Proposed structure: Steel truss system

CD

Latitude: Longitude:

43° 38' 20.20"N 79° 25' 22.87" W

o

Truss structural height: 3 metres

S
"to

Daily solar radiation: 1.0 Kw/h/m2/d (Dec.)

Electricity generation estimated annually: 1,070 Mwh (roof); 19Mwh(fa?ade)
Proposed solar panels:

1
co

6.0 Kw/h/m2/d (June)
Wind speed:
Building Height:

3.3-4.8 m/s
10.5m

CD

CD

1.

Sharp NT-185u1 (1575x826x46
mm), 185 Wp, 14.22% efficiency

Building dimension:

94 metres x 90 metres

I

cn

Building floor area: Roof area:

8400 m2 7600 m2
2.

o
c

Q cells mono-Si-Q6LM-1680
(156mmx156mm)4Wp 16.8% efficiency

CD CD
CO O5

Facade area:
Fagade PV area:

560 m2
144 m2

c

CD

Numbers of PV panels: 4485 Numbers of PV cells: 2568(south facade)
2664 (west facade)

100% PV energy absorption rate 72 kW inverter with 100% efficiency 0% miscellaneous losses

o CD

o CD

2
88

Figure 61. The building seen through the outdoor green space from Liberty Street.

Figure 62. Parts of the building facade can be opened up to connect indoor and outdoor community activities, photovoltaic cells laminated on the tilted facade will be more efficient.

CD

laminated on the tilted facade will be more efficient.

Figure 63. A close view of the building facade opened up for community activities, photovoltaic cells

Figure 64. A view into the cafe area close to the facade- the shade of photovoltaic cells provides a dynamic visual effect.

4.

Principles and conclusions

4.1

Principles for the building forms integrated with photovoltaic materials The research and the design project revealed four general principles that influence

the design of buildings integrated with photovoltaic materials. The principles discussed in this section are applicable to most photovoltaic integration in northern hemispheres. Generally, photovoltaic materials can be installed or integrated with various building surfaces including

flat roofs, sloped roofs, free form roofs and exterior walls. The type of photovoltaic material is
significant to the design process, affecting the form making, architectural ideas and detail
design of photovoltaic integration.

For large scale photovoltaic integrations, accessibility, flexibility and separation from S structure are critical in the design processes. These three criteria affect installation details

CD

and other design decisions. For small scale photovoltaic integration form making and building
geometries vary. Understanding the general principles of photovoltaic integration helps to

CD

reduce the difficulties in the design process and achieve a successful architectural solution
CD
CD
CO

for photovoltaic components.

1
o

~o

s

5
Q.

o

Principle 1: For small-scale buildings integrated with photovoltaic materials

Generally, buildings with simple functions, low energy consumption, simple structures

T3 CO

and small floor areas are considered small-scale buildings. Based on this definition, many
types of buildings fall in to this category, including houses, bus stations, and garages.

JO 0)
M--

Architects need to identify them during the conceptual design process.

o

Diversity of the building forms is one major feature in small-scale buildings. For photovoltaic integration of small-scale buildings, the construction cost of structure supporting

CD

0
CD

free form is not as significant as that of large scale buildings. In addition, the negative influence of diagonal space can be easily offset by adjusting floor height or interior space.

LO

C£>

O)

95

Solar modules installed on the roof are more efficient and economical than solar tiles.
However additional racks of framework must be built to accommodate the solar modules. Efficiency and performance is reduced in the summer when solar tiles are used on the roof
because there is no air convection.

In cold climates, an enclosed interior space provides occupants with more opportunities of
activities than an open structure.

A steel structure is an important option for large scale photovoltaic integration where

large spans are needed. The steel truss system, ranging from 20 metres to more than 100
If flat opaque photovoltaic materials are to be mounted on the roof as an additional
layer without a waterproofing function, then the roof must be designed with complete

metres, is an economical solution for large spaces. In some cases, timber can be also used. However, the short span of timber combined with fire safety requirements limit timber's
application as a structural component.

functions, such as moisture protection, thermal insulation and noise protection. If a tilted
circular roof integrated with photovoltaic materials is visible to the public, the margin between photovoltaic array and the roof edges produces a visual concern. Flexible thin film photovoltaic materials are usually not designed to take on as much static load as roofs do; therefore a supporting structure is needed if flexible thin film sheets are installed on the
building roof.

A sealed roof surface with appropriate photovoltaic panels is preferable if waterproofing function has to be considered in the design. This may result in a thicker roof layering and higher construction cost because a sealed roof needs to bear dynamic and static loads. If an independent canopy is integrated with photovoltaic panels, the roof can be designed into a saw tooth roof to increase performance of photovoltaic panels. If a

If opaque photovoltaic panels replace conventional building facades, then insulation layers should be considered. This is especially important in colder climates. If translucent
photovoltaic panels (amorphous panels, solar cells or other micro photovoltaic cells) replace one part of the building fagade, then the built-form will take on a dark glaze-like appearance. Designers should select other building components to balance the appearance of
photovoltaic materials.

large-scale building roof is integrated with flat photovoltaic panels, better air convection will
improve the performance of the materials in the winter.

If a large structural glazing is integrated with photovoltaic cells, a suitable glazing

structure such as a truss system should be considered because the glass panes integrated with the photovoltaic modules are thicker than normal glazing fagade. If the design objective
is to achieve high performance of photovoltaic panels, then designing a semi-transparent

photovoltaic fagade will not achieve this goal because of its low efficiency. In addition, fagade
Principle 2: For large-scale buildings integrated with photovoltaic materials
integration costs twice as much as roof integration.

Building programs and functions take priority over photovoltaic materials to create building structures. It is important that the structure should be designed to accommodate the
building programs first.

If it is difficult to transform a building form into a diagonal form or free form, then a cubic form with a flat roof may be an alternative. The structure of a flat roof is simpler as compared with other forms, which reduces the construction and electrical costs. If solar

modules are designed with functions such as acoustic protection, thermo-protection and

Separation between structure supporting photovoltaic materials and other building
components will reduce the potential difficulties of integrating photovoltaic materials into

waterproofing, then the thickness of the modules must increase.

building forms. This principle implies that design building components like porches, stands, canopies or other independent infrastructures that support photovoltaic materials is a priority.
96
97

Principle 3: Flexibility for a variety of solar technologies

4.2 Summary of research

Photovoltaic materials and technologies are advancing and architects should design

The primary goal of this thesis was to explore the relationship between building forms
and photovoltaic systems. Through analyzing the interaction between a photovoltaic systems

an efficient framework that allows the integration of various photovoltaic materials.

Flexibility is built by roof surface angles, roof materials and photovoltaic materials. For angled surfaces, some flat photovoltaic materials are easily integrated; however, some
tubular photovoltaic materials may not be easily mounted on an angled surface.

performance and building forms, mostly in small scale residential and commercial buildings, it discusses the implications for the creative architectural integration of photovoltaic materials.
The intent was to provide recommendations for decision making in the primary design

An exposed steel truss system is not as flexible as a flat roof covered with metal sheets or concrete slabs. Generally, customized solar panels are suitable for an exposed steel truss system. In addition, a truss system that is designed for one particular module type does not easily adapt to different module types.

phrase of photovoltaic integration. The principles are applied to the design of the Lamport Stadium recreational facility - a proposed project located in Toronto. The proposed design expresses an idea to transform public facilities into solar electricity generators not only
technically but also aesthetically.

The facade has the same limitations as the roof does. Once particular areas on the

In the decision making, processes of design, availability, accessibility and

vertical surface are designated for selected photovoltaic materials, the possibility of replacing
them with other modules with different dimensions is limited.

perceptibility of building surfaces for photovoltaic materials were significant. The features of
the proposed design also demonstrate that considerable design opportunities exist even though rigid building forms have been determined through rational analysis.

An enclosed flat roof can easily be installed with various solar modules.

The thesis project demonstrates that architectural integration of photovoltaic materials

can achieve unity, harmony and creativity. A successful architectural integration of
Principle 4: For facades integrated with photovoltaic cells

photovoltaic materials relies on comprehending diverse photovoltaic materiality and technologies as well as the interaction between materials and building forms.

Opaque photovoltaic cells can be laminated into double glazed panels to take on a semi-transparent appearance. The sandwich structure, its thickness usually ranging from 18

to 40mm, is heavier than single-layer glazed panels. If a sandwich glazed system is designed,
then a stable structural system must be carefully considered. When designing transparent

4.3 Limitations of the study

facades, it is extremely important that the weight of the glazing be taken into account.

Because of limited information collected and analyzed in this thesis, only major

photovoltaic materials and technologies such as flat photovoltaic panel, tubular thin film
collectors and flexible thin film panels are included. New photovoltaic technologies like semi-spherical materials, due to their experimental stages, are not included in the research.

98

99

Another limitation is that the relationship between building types and photovoltaic

materials has not been explored thoroughly. Whether building types influence building

surfaces applicable to photovoltaic materials remains unclear.

Appendix A
Table 1

The geographical locations for the case studies and the design project are limited to the countries in northern hemisphere such as Austria, Canada, China, Germany, Japan and

Dimensions and architectural properties of selected solar panels
Manufactures

Modules

Cell Tech

Capacity
Watt

Length

Width

Thickness

Weight

U.S.

Therefore the implications and principles applied to the proposed design may be not
BP solar SX3200B SX3200W SX3195N SX3195B SX3190B SX3190W BP4175B BP4175I
BP4175N BP175I

_Kg_
200 200
195 195 1680 1680 1680 837
837

Multicrystalline Multicrystalline Multicrystalline
Multicrystalline

50 50 50 50 50

17.2

suitable for equatorial areas and the southern hemisphere.

www.bp.com

17.2
17.2

837 837
837

1680
1680

17.2 17.2
17.2

Multicrystalline Multicrystalline Monocrystalline Monocrystalline Monocrystalline Polycrystalline Polycrystalline Polycrystalline
Polycrystalline

190
190 175 175 175 175 175 160 140 125 125

1680 1593
1587 1593
1587

837 790 828.4 790 828.4 790

50
50 50 50

15.4 15.4 15.4
15.4

50
50

BP175B BPSX160B SX3140J BP3125J SX 380J

1593 1593 1510 1510 1209

15.4
15.4

790
674
674 537

50
50 50 50

12 12.1
7.7

Polycrystalline Polycrystalline

Canadian Solar

All-Black CS5A

Mono Mono
Silicon

160/170/180 200/210/220/ 230/240 150/160/170

1595
1602
1324

801
1061 982 982
982

40
40 40 40 40

15.5 20 16 18.5 18.5

CS5P
CS6A

170/180/190/ CS6P
CS6P Grade Silicon 200 200/210/220/ 230/240 1638 1638
100x100(min) 2000x3000(max

Poly(Mono)
Crystalline(Mono

or poly
BIPV 125/156mm)

55-115 96 96 29 25 25 180/190/200/ 210/220/230 115/120/125/ 130/135/140 40

)
1204

5kg/sqm 2004 1984
627 17 105

Centennial Solar

Thin BIPV
Film(transparent) Thin

BIPV
OPAK-1-L

Film(transparent)
Thin Film(opaque) Thin

1184
1027 1027

34
17

112
27

THRU-1-L

Film(transparent) Thin
Film(transparent)

627
607

17 32/34 46 35 34

27 24/29
22

THRU-1I/THRU-1-IO

1007
1647

CS180/190/200/
210/220/230

Polycrystalline
Polycrystalline

991

CS115/120/125/ 130/135/140
CS40T

1480
1005

670 605

13

Thin film(opaque)

6.3

First Solar http://www.firstsolar.com/

FS260/262/265/ 267/270/272/27
5/277 Thin film

60/62.5/65/6 7.5/70/72.5/7
5/77.5
1200

600

6.8

12

GE http://gepower.com/

60/200

1507/1485

446/981

52/35

18/39

Isofoton
http://www.isofoton.com/

IS-160/165/171 Si Monocrystalline 65/170/175
210/215/

1600

790

40

14.4

220/225/

IS-210 / 215/22iSi Monocrystalline

230

1600

1047

40

18.5

100
101

Appendix B Table 2
1667 994

205/210/

ISF-205 / 210 / 2 Si Monocrystalline

215/220

40

18.8

Photovoltaic Applications of Different Building Types
Building types

Kyocera KC/KD http://www.kyocerasolar.co m/
Multicrystalline

40/50/65/85/ 130/135/180/

526/640/752/10 653/653/653/
06/1422/1501/1

Envelope suitable for
integration

Photovoltaic
Application Facade integrated

653/653/668/ 990/990/990
35.6

Name of project Wilmersdorfer StraSe

Year 2001

Country Germany

Summary Entire solid southern

205/210

501/1501/1501

Windows, walls, roofs

facades are reused to
mount with vague multicrystalline modules

Q-Cells

CX 35-65 SN2
SL1

Thin film Micromorph thin fllrr CIGS thin film Mono/Multicrystallin

35-60 125-145 60-85
3.44

1200 1684 1190 156

600 1056 630 156

6.8
8.4

12 37 13.2

Apartments Residential buildings

7.4

BIPV

Windows, walls, roofs
Houses

Inclined roof integrated

Villa Garten
Shin-Matsudo

1999

Japan

Roofs have major potentials for photovoltaic
integration.

Note. The data in this table are collected from some manufacturers' websites. The Selection of photovotlaic
panels ranges from 200 watt to 40 watt which are suitable. Several major manufacturers are selected in this

chart. Only photovoltaic products for U.S and Canada regions are chosen if the manufacturers have various products for different regions.

Windows, walls, roofs

Fagade integrated Sun screen

1998

Netherlands Conference hotel is a

in fixed
sunscreens

Leeuwenhorst

multi-story building.
Ideas of photovoltaic integraion seems to be difficultly used in hotles.

Congres Centrum

Commerical
buildings

Hotels

Windows, walls, roofs

Flat roof fixing,

"Madrid-2 La Commercial and leisure Center

2007

Spain

Roofs have major potentials for
photovoltaic integration.

mounted & ballast Vaguada" Shops

Inclined rooftransparent roof

Windows, walls, roofs

Fagade integrated in fixed
sunscreens,

Isofoton
Headquarters

2005 Spain

Great potentials for
photovoltaic

integration. Semitransparent and opque

Fagade -

transparent PV
facade,

materials can all be
used in silimar projects.

Offices

Fagade integrated other,

Inclined rooftransparent roof

roof

Roof integrated

Vauxhall Cross
Transport Interchange

2004

UK

Opportunities for formmaking and
photovoltaic integration in transportation projects

Transportation

Bus Stations

Windows, walls, roofs

Facade integrated The OpTIC Centre

2004

UK

Particular

requirements on

interior daylight and
Research facilities

ventilation provide opportunties for facade and roof
integration

Windows, walls, roofs

Roof integrated, Fagadeinteg rated other

Akademie Mont-

1999

Germany

Multifunctional center,

Cenis, Herne

the seperation of building skins and functional space make
photovotlaic

Institutional
buildings

Colleges/U niversities

integration and formmaking easier.

102
103

Windows, walls, roofs

Roof integrated

Morschwiller

2005

France

Schools have a
particular requirements on Appendix C

School

Schools

interior daylight,the
approach to facade integration has to be

carefully considered. Windows, walls, roofs Facade integrated Leicester in movable
sunscreen

Table 3
Technical and architectural implications for photovoltaic materials

2007

UK

Interior daylight quality is one major concern

University Library

when the facade is
integrated with photovoltaics

Thin film modules

Libraries

Technical and architectonic aspects

Thin film modules (rigid)

(micro-crystalline,

Crystalline silicon modules (rigid)

flexible)
Nanosolar SolarPlyTM

Solar Laminates,(United Sunways Solar Module SM 17
Solar Ovonic, US)
www.uni-solar.com

Walls, roofs Museums

Facade mounted,

The Museum of

Typical products

(Nanosolar.US)
www.nanosolar.com

U, polycrystalline,(Sunways,Gem,
nv) www.sunwavs.com

2006

Sweden

Roofs and facades all have major potentials for photovotltaic
integration.
Photovoltaic technologies

Flat roof mounted & mechanical
fixing

Science &
Technology in

CdTe, a-Si, A-Si+uc-Si
Tandem, CIGS
-it. This approach is more

Amorphous silicon (a-Si) Monocrystalline, polycrystalline

Malmo

Portable. Low efficiency is the major issue
currently when

Fit.Performance price ratio is
the best, recently compared

Windows, walls, roofs

Facade integrated Sanitary
in fixed
sunscreens

2007

Spain

nterior daylight quality s one major concern

Fixed angles

suitable for optimizing
electricity output with rigid

complex of the Alzheimer Project

with thin film
Fit. Heavy supporting structure

when the facade is
ntegrated with

thin film modules.
-it; however, tracking mechanical system,

integrated into buildings. Fit. Low efficiency is the when integrated into
Duildings.

Public buildings

Hospitals

Dhotovoltaics
Form making Tracking system

system needs complicated major issue currently
consuming energy when rotating.

needs to be considered.

Windows, walls, roofs

Facade integrated EWE Arena n movable
sunscreens

2006

Germany

Circular facade was
used to install a two

researchers are testing a new idea for replacing the tracking system. They propose a tinted glass, functioning as a concentrator, wrapped with solar cells around its edges. These photovoltaic glass panels can be integrated into windows, curtain walls, and skylights. The conversion efficiencies can reach as high as 6.8%. Need to consider the form
Mixed angles

Stadiums

dimentional tracking
system

Low efficiency is the
major issue when integrated into buildings.

Form's curve needs to be carefully considered, in cooperation with engineers

s angles of curve, and the size of module

Walls, roofs

nclined roof

Carlow Church*

2001

Germany

The size and color of photovoltaic modules have to be adjusted to
suit sensitive heritages.
Architectural Roofs

ntegrated
Religious

Suitable

Suitable, some products Suitable
such as solar shingles

Churches

can be integrated into a roof covered with
traditional tiles

slot suitable because of suitable building he opaque materials Walls

Suitable for windows
integration

Not suitable

Windows, walls, roofs

Facade integrated Kyocera Mita Hirakata factory

2006

Japan

Solar modules are ntegrated the facade of entrance as an ndependent
component.

components

Suitable
Suitable for independent andscape components

Not suitable

Suitable
Suitable for landscape

Suitable generally for

Insdustrial buildings

curved surfaces such as structures transparent products are suitable for interior.

actories

Others

such as bus stop canopies roof tiles; some

Semi-transparent or
paque

Semi-trans pa rent or
opaque

Achieving semi-transparency by arranging solar cells; some solar cells such as Sunways Transparent Solar Cells achieve transparency by punching holes on cell's

Transparency

Note. The purpose of this table is to explore the photovoltaic applications of different building types. Most of Project data and information in this table are retrieved March 1st, 2008 from PV Database,http://www.pvdatabase.org. PVdatabase is operated by Horisun on behalf of the PV-UP-SCALE consortium and IEA PVPS Task 10.Some projects marked by * are retrived from Hermannsdorfer,!., Rub, C.
(2005).Solar Design:Phtovoltaics for Old Buildings, Urban Space, Landscapes.
Visual elements

Black (CIS), deep blue,
and green (CdTe). flours can be adjusted
o new enhanced solar lodules while reaching

Black, Drown(amorphous
silicon)

3lack, deep blue, and green.

igh efficiency (Covalent
Material weight

Range from 20 to 30
tg/panel Necessary

Range from 5to10 kg/
jiece, some products Not necessary, vary in design

Range from 20 to30 kg/ panel
Necessary

Cover materials

Generally, products
panel changeable Collaboration or cut to size Collaboration with lave their own

Some products can be cut to
size.

dimensions. The size of )anels can be adjusted Manufacturers, structural Manufacturers

Manufacturers, structural
engineers

professional Technical Structural issues structural support
difficulties in assembly

Detail design

Gernally provided by manufacturers, detail design is needed when architects have
distinctive demands on solar panels.Case study: the GreenPix
Meed strong structural
support such as

Relatively simple, can be attached on the roof
or structures

Need strong structural support

such as aluminum, steel Easy

luminum, steel Easy

Easy

104

105

Technical
insulation layer

Need extra insulation layer Glazing as insulation

Need extra insulation layer if installed on facades or roofs

if installed on facades or roofs
Low temperature will increase performance

layer if integrated with windows or skylights

Appendix D
Table 4 Sunrise and Sunset Times for Toronto Eastern Time Zone
Length of day Solar noon Time Altitude Distance

enironmental

-45° to +85°

-45C to +85° high temperature
will decrease performance

Thermal

temperature

Environmental humidity and
waterproofing Conversion

Protection from moisture needed; electrical devices should be insulated from rain

6-10%

3-12%

6-40%

efficiency (up to
date)

Date

Sunrise

Sunset

This day

Difference

Warranties

Over 25 years

Over 25 years

Over 25 years

(106km)
Jan 1
Feb1 Marl Apr1

2009 2009 2009 2009
2009

7:51 AM

4:51 PM 5:29 PM 6:06 PM 7:45 PM 8:20 PM 8:52 PM
9:03 PM 8:40 PM

9h 00m 20s 9h 55m 04s 11h12m44s 12h45m47s 14h10m40s 15h 13m 44s 15h22m56s
14h33m21s

+ 48s + 2m 27s + 2m 57s + 2m 59s + 2m 35s + 1 m 19s
-40s -2m 16s - 2m 52s - 2m 57s

12:21 PM 12:31 PM 12:30 PM 1:21 PM
1:15 PM

23.4° 29.4° 39.0° 51.1° 61.6°
68.5°

147.096 147.416
148.248

7:34 AM 6:54 AM 6:59 AM 6:10 AM 5:39 AM 5:40 AM 6:07 AM 6:41 AM
7:15AM 6:54 AM 7:31 AM

149.511 150.749 151.704
152.084

May 1 Jun 1
Jul 1

2009
2009

1:15 PM 1:21 PM
1:24 PM

69.4° 64.2° 54.4° 42.9° 31.7° 24.5°

Aug 1 Sep 1
Oct1 Nov1

2009
2009

151.815
150.944

7:53 PM 6:58 PM
5:08 PM

13h11m 13s 11h42m48s
10h 14m 22s 9h10m 20s

1:17 PM 1:07 PM 12:01 PM 12:07 PM

2009
2009

149.742 148.452 147.498

- 2m 39s
-1m 27s

Ded

2009

4:42 PM

Note. All times are in local time for Toronto (Eastern Time Zone). Data retrieved June, 2008 from
Time and Date AS online Sunrise and Sunset Calculator,
http://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/sunrise.html.

107
106

References

Hermannsdorfer, I. & Rub, C. (2005J. Solar design: Photovoltaic materials for old buildings,
urban space, landscapes. Berlin: Jovis.

Addington, M. & Schodek, D. (2005). Smart materials and technologies. Oxford: Architectural Press.

Himanshu, D. (2004). A numerical and experimental study for generation of electric and
thermal power with photovoltaic modules embedded in building facade. Concordia University. Masters Abstracts International, 43/03, p.914, 2005.

Bettum, J. (2002, January). Skin deep: polymer composite materials in architecture. Architec
tural Design. 72. p.72-76.

Capon, D. S. (1999). Architectural theory (Volume Two): Le Corbusier's legacy: Principles of
twentieth-century architectural theory arranged by category. New York : John Wiley.

Hindrichs, D. U. & Daniels.K. (Eds.). (2007). Plusminus 20740° latitude: Sustainable building design in tropical and subtropical regions. Stuttgart: A. Menges.

Cericv, Vlatko. Algorithmic art. Retrieved November 11, 2008, from http://www.vceric.net

International Energy Agency (IEA). (2007). PVPS Annual Report. Fribourg, Switzerland: IEA PVPS.

Chino, Mike. (2008, October). New solar captures entire spectrum of the rainbow. Retrieved in November 2008, from http://www.inhabitat.com/2008/10/20/new-solar-material-cap
tures-energy-from-every-colour-of-the-rainbow/

Jeska, S. (2007). Transparent plastics: design and technology. Basel, Boston: Birkhauser

KieranTimberlake.(2008). SmartWrapTM: Building Envelope of the Future. Retrieved Nov

Colt Group. (2008). PV wall tracks the sun at the Oldenburg stadium EWE-Arena. Retrieved

ember 20, 2008, from http://www.kierantimberlake.com/research/smartwrap_
research_1 .html

November, 2008, from http://www.coltgroup.com/projects/sports-stadia-leisure/ewearena/

London SE1 website team. (2008, March). Solar panels at City Hall - are they worth the

Currie, M. J., Mapel, Jonathan K., Heidel.Timothy D.,

Goffri, Shalom, & Baldo, Marc A.

money? Retrieved November 11, 2008, from http://www.london-se1.co.uk/news/
view/3176

(2008, July). High-efficiency organic solar concentrators for photovoltaic materials.
Science. 321. 226-228.

Luque, A. & Hegedus, S. (Eds). (2003). Handbook of photovoltaic science and engineering.

Fazio, M., Moffett, M. & Wodehouse, L. (2008). A world history of architecture (2nd ed.).
London: Laurence King.

Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

Markvart, T. & Castaner, L. (2003). Practical handbook of photovoltaic materials fundamen

Goetzberger, A., & Hoffmann, V.U. (2005). Photovoltaic solar energy generation. London:
Springer.

tals and applications. New York: Elsevier Advanced Technology.

Pearson, C. A. (2006,June). Antoine Predock rides high with the gold medal. Architectural Green, M. A. (2006). Third generation photovoltaic materials: Advanced solar energy
Record, 6. pp. 212-213.

conversion. New York: Springer.

Speck, L. W. (2007). Technology, sustainability, and cultural identity. New York: Edizioni Giovannini, J. (2003). Turbulence House: Steven Holl joins high technology with the prefab
ricated in northern New Mexico. Architectural digest,60, 138-144.
Press.

108

109

Steadman, P. (2008). The evolution of designs: Biological analogy in architecture and the applied arts (revised ed.) New York: Routledge.

Smith, N. J., Merna, T., & Jobling, P. (2006). Managing risk in construction projects.

Ternoey, S. (2003). Diffusion of innovations (5th ed.). New York: Free Press.
Time and data AS. (2009). Sunrise and Sunset Calculator. Retrieved September 15, 2009,

from http:// www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/sunrise.html.

Western Regional Climate Center. (2008). Climate of New Mexico. Retrieved in November 10,

2008, from http://www.wrcc.dri.edu/narratives/NEWMEXICO.htm

Wieditz ,T. (2007). Liberty Village: The Makeover of Toronto's King and Dufferin Area.

Retrieved in May 20, 2009, from http://www.urbancentre.utoronto.ca/pdfs/research
bulletins/CUCSRB32-WieditzJanO7.pdf

110

