Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

The post-Olympic dilemma : a systems approach to architecture
Jorge S. Silva
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Architecture Commons Recommended Citation
Silva, Jorge S., "The post-Olympic dilemma : a systems approach to architecture" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 520.

This Thesis Project is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

THE POST-OLYMPIC DILEMMA:

A SYSTEMS APPROACH TO ARCHITECTURE

by

Jorge S. Silva

Bachelor of Technology (Architectural Science), British Columbia Institute of Technology, 2006

A design thesis|project

presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the

requirements for the degree of

Master of Architecture

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009
©Jorge S. Silva 2009

PR0PSHYGF

Author's Declaration

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis|project.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis|project to other institutions or individuals for
the purpose of scholarly research.

Jorge S. Silva

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis|project by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose
of scholarly research.

Jorge S. Silva

THE POST OLYMPIC DILEMMA: A SYSTEMS APPROACH TO ARCHITECTURE

Master of Architecture 2009

Jorge Sogalho Silva

Master of Architecture
Ryerson University

Abstract

The practice of Architecture is in need of a new methodology towards Olympic sport

infrastructure. The Olympic Games have shown that constructing Olympic buildings with traditional methods is unsustainable. Post-Olympic use is generally unplanned causing financial
burdens for those cities maintaining the large buildings. This thesis|project makes reference to work of R. Buckminster Fuller, Cedric Price, and Archigram in developing a systematic approach to Olympic Architecture. The core concepts of systems theory and cybernetics are investigated and a relationship is made with architecture. This culminates in the design of a
process that looks to successfully locate an Olympic gymnasium in a Toronto community. It

tackles the question of how to build Olympic stadia with lower embodied energy and qualities of
stewardship, adaptability, flexibility and modality while maintaining multi-functionality.

Acknowledgements
Throughout my educational experiences I have had much support and encouragement from both those whom I have worked with and those dear to me.

I would like to thank my thesis committee advisor Yew Thong Leong, who offered insight, encouragement and support while pursuing this research and design. I would also like to thank

my thesis committee external advisor Matthew Delean for his much valued opinion throughout
the process.

c

'

'

I wish to extend my gratitude to my fellow colleagues at Ryerson University for their appreciated input over thejinal thesis year and for making the experience of studying in Toronto one that I
shall cherish.

Furthermore, I must express my love, admiration, and respect for my parents Antonio & Maria Manuela Silva, my brother Carlos and two sisters Jeannie and Vanessa who showed much support in every stage of my education. A special thanks to my brother in-law Michael Martins

for his help throughout my education and my lifelong friend Sandeep Sangha who always
encouraged my abilities within my educational pursuits.

VI!

Dedication

This thesis is dedicated to my father Mr. Antonio Tome Costa Silva born on February 29, 1940
in Atouguia da Baleia, Portugal. My Father has been an incredible inspiration and motivation

reminding me that everyone has the ability to achieve great things so long as they are prepared to take a chance in their life and are willing to spend the time and effort on them.

IX

f

Table of Contents
Author's Declaration iii

Abstract
Acknowledgements Dedication

v
vii ix

Table of Contents

xi

List of Tables List of Figures List of Appendices
1 Introduction 2 Historical Background

xv xv xvii
1 3

2.1 .Ancient Relevance
2.1.1 . Ancient Greece

3
3

2.1.2
2.1.3

Olympia and Ancient Greek Architecture
Olympic Stadia

3
3

2.1.4
2.1.5

Greek Architecture in Relation to Man
Ancient Roman Architecture

4
4

2.1.6

The Renaissance Modern Olympics - The Beginnings
The Olympic Movement

6

2.2

Modern Olympic Games
2.2.1
2.2.2

7
7
7

2.2.3 2.2.4

Development of Changing Program Traditional vs. Recent and Future Games Cybernetics and Systems Theory Defined Where Cybernetics Began R. Buckminster Fuller/ Cedric Price/Archigram
Japanese Modular Experience

7 8

2.3

Introduction to Cybernetics
2.3.1 2.3.2 2.3.3
2.3.4

9
9 10 10
12

3 Theoretical Discourse 3.1 A New Methodology Must be Developed for Olympic Architecture
3.1.1 3.1.2 Introduction Applying Cybernetics to Architecture

15 15
15 15

3.1.3

Architectural Cybernetic Precedence
R. Buckminster Fuller

19
19

3.1.3.1

3.1.3.2 Cedric Price
3.1.3.3 Archigram

23
28

3.1.3.4 Resulting Cybernetic Concepts 3.14 3.1.5 The Human Body, Olympic Sports, and Systems in Architecture Integrated Design Process (IDP)

33 34 38

3.1.6
3.1.7

Olympic Conditions in Canada
Olympic examples of Stewardship

40
42

X!

4 Research Summaries

43

4.1

Theoretical Hypotheses

43 43
45

4.1.1
4.2

The Role of Sports Cybernetics
Case Studies

4.1.2 An Architectural Systems Approach 4.2.1
4.2.2

47
47

Vancouver 2010 Olympic Games, Richmond Olympic Oval
Toronto Ontario, Rogers Centre (Skydome)

53

5 Design Project 5.1 Design Process
5.1.1
5.1.2

59 59
59
61

Principles and Precedence
Moving Forward

5.1.3

Design Methodology - A Three Level Sports Cybernetics System
High Order System

62
62

5.1.3.1

5.1.3.2 5.1.3.3

Middle Order System Low Order System

65 69

5.2

Design
5.2.1 Design Drawings

75
75

6 ThesisjProject Conclusion
Appendices References List

109
111

188

XII

List of Figures
Figure 2-1. Leonardo da Vinci's Vitruvian Man redrawn and inscribed in a circle and square considered the fundamental geometric patterns of the cosmic order (skinner, 2006). From

Da Vinci, L. (c. 1487). Vitruvian Man. Retrieved March 1, 2009 from edupics.com
Figure 2-2. Golden Section Derived from Fibonacci Sequence. From Philosophy and Practice: Sacred Geometry by R. Lawlor, 1982, London: Thames and Hudson Figure 2-3. Fibonacci Sequence Applied to the Arm. From Philosophy and Practice: Sacred Geometry by R. Lawlor, 1982, London: Thames and Hudson Figure 2-4. London 2012 Olympic Stadium. From HOK Sport. Retrieved April 1, 2009 from archifield.net Figure 2-5. Tatami Mats Modular example by Arthur Drexler. From The Architecture of Japan

5
6 6 8 13

(p. 67), by A. Drexler, 1955, New York: The Museum of Modern Art
Retrieved April 1, 2009, oma.nl

13
17

Figure 3-1. Dee and Charles Wyly Theatre, USA, 2004. From Office for Metropolitan Architecture. Figure 3-2. Systems Organizational Principles. From Architecture, Engineering and Construction of Built Enviornment (p. 91) by G.E. Lasker and Y.T. Long, 2005, Canada, International Institute for Advanced Studies in Research and Cybernetics (MAS)
Figure 3-3. 4D Dymaxion House by Fuller, R. Buckminster. In R. Marks, 1960, The Dymaxion World of Buckminster Fuller. New York: Reinhold Publishing Today (p. 36) In J. Baldwin, 1996, Canada: John Wiley & Sons 19 ........22

18

Figure 3-4. Dymaxion Deployment Unit (DDU). From Bucky Works: Buckminster Fuller's Ideas for Figure 3-5. Fun Palace, flexible floor plan. From From agit-prop to free space: The architecture of
Cedric Price , by S. Mathews, 2007, London: Black Dog Pub. Ltd
Figure 3-6. Fun palace. From From agit-prop to free space: The architecture of Cedric Price (p. 68), by S. Mathews, 2007, London: Black Dog Pub. Ltd architecture of Cedric Price , by S. Mathews, 2007, London: Black Dog Pub. Ltd.. of Cedric Price , by S: Mathews, 2007, London: Black Dog Pub. Ltd Figure 3-9. Centre Pompidou by Richard Rogers and Renzo Piano. From S. Glynn, 2001. Retrieved October 1, 2008, from galinsky.com Figure 3-10. Nottingham Shopping Viaduct by Peter Cook.Retrieved December 15, 2008, from
fabiofeminofantascience.org 30

24
25 27 28 30

Figure 3-7. Potteries Thinkbelt, Abandoned Rail Network. From From agit-prop to free space: The Figure 3-8. Giant overhead crane (example). From From agit-prop to free space: The architecture

Figure 3-11. Growth and Change Cycle of Plug-in University Node 1965 by Peter Cook. Note. From Archigram (p. 42 - 43), by P. Cook, Archigram (Group) (Eds.), 1999, New York: Princeton Architectural Press Figure 3-12. The Capsule, Tower & dwelling. From Archigram (p. 45), by P. Cook, Archigram 31

(Group) (Eds.), 1999, New York: Princeton Architectural Press...
New York: Princeton Architectural Press

32
33

Figure 3-13. Gasket Homes. From Archigram (p. 47), by P. Cook, Archigram (Group) (Eds.), 1999,
Figure 3-14. PERI stairs and grandstands. From Successful construction with PERI: Handbook

2005 Scaffolding (p. 111) by PERI, 2005 [Brochure]
Figure 3-15. Auditorium by Santiago Calatrava. From Successful construction with PERI:

36
36

Handbook 2005 Scaffolding (p: 77) by PERI, 2005 [Brochure]

XIII

Figure 3-16. Snowboard Ramp. From Successful construction with PERI: Handbook 2005
Scaffolding (p. 77) by PERI, 2005 [Brochure] 37 . 37

Figure 3-17. Church of Notre Dame. From Successful construction with PERI: Handbook 2005
Scaffolding (p. 35) by PERI, 2005 [Brochure]

Figure 3-18. Triad of Limitations. From Design for the real world: Human ecology and social change (Ed. 2) (p. 73) from V. Papenek, 1997, London: Thames and Hudson 38

Figure 4-1. The common thread of Sports Cybernetics

43

Figure 4-2. This proposed methodology with sports cybernetics outlines the entire system showing
need for establishing design requirements and creating a program to then begin the Sports

Cybernetics three level system. This culminates in a cyclical system containing a learning
feed-back loop ; 46

Figure 4-3. Richmond Olympic Oval - December 2008. Photo by author
Figure 4-4. Triangular Gluelam at Wall. Photo by author

.

47
48

Figure 4-5. Richmond Oval - Gluelam Beam Roof Structure. Photo by author
Figure 4-6. Wood-wave panels. Photo by author Figure 4-7. Richmond Olympic Oval, Street Level Figure 4-8. Richmond Olympic Oval, Activity Level... Figure 4-9. Richmond Olympic Oval, Mezzanine Level
Figure 4-10 Flexible Bleacher System. Photo by author

49
49 50 51 51
52

Figure 4-11 Collapsible Basketball Hoops. Photo by author

52

Figure 4-12: Rogers Centre South Waterfront. From flickr.com Figure 4-13: Rogers Centre, Toronto ON. Canada. Base image from Google Earth
Figure 4-14 - Rogers Centre seating configurations for multiple events throughout the year. From

53 54

Rogers Centre, 2008. Retrieved November 13, 2008, from rogerstentre.com
Figure 4-15 - Rogers Centre seating configurations for multiple events throughout the year. From
Rogers Centre, 2008, Retrieved November 13, 2008, Jrom rogerscentre.com

56
57

Figure 5-1. Telstra stadium in 2000, Austrailia. Retrieved June 16, 2009, from gamesbids.com....59
Figure 5-2. Telstra stadium in 2004, Austrailia. Retrieved June 16, 2009, from gamesbids.com ....59 Figure 5-3. London 2012 Olympic Stadium, England. From HOK Sport. Retrieved April 1, 2009,
from archifield.net --.. 60

Figure 5-4. Vancouver 2010 Olympic Oval. Photo by author
Figure 5-5. Three level Sports Cybernetics system

a:

60
.62

Figure 5-6. Relationship between the Lower Don Lands and adjacent sports venue, Toronto 2007 aerial photo. From author. Base image retrieved June, 15, 2009, from google earth
from bricoleurbanism.org

63
64

Figure 5-7. MWA Lower Donlands proposal, Toronto 2007. From MWA. Retrieved Aug, 20, 2009, Figure 5-8. MWA Lower Donlands proposal, Toronto 2007. From MWA. Reproduced by author. 65
Figure 5-9. High level Olympic systems approach 66

Figure 5-10. Site boundaries, access roads, and predetermined parcels of land Figure 5-11. Permanent legacy infrastructure located on recreational site Figure 5-12. Temporary program located closes roadway Figure 5-13. Organization of programmatic requirements, spatial relationships

67 ..67 67 68

Figure 5-14. Re-establishment of the roadway and community infrastructure

......68

Figure 5-15. Four classifications in an Olympic/post-Olympic systems approach includes Removal
of temporary elements necessary during the Games (ex. structure, seating, broadcast
media booths, and concession stands). Conversion pertains to elements designed for

XIV

future alteration. Addition concerns any added elements to the post-Olympic building. Left As Is are the elements retained as unchanged legacy items (ex. mechanical/electrical
systems, administration offices among other program) ...69 70 71

Figure 5-16. Systems approach to architectural components, permits the use of temporary
elements to enable reacquiring of floor space after the Olympics.... and either retained or moved off site Figure 5-17. Section of retractable seating modules, these may be removed to reaquire floorspace,

Figure 5-18. Concession module section, facing side swings inward to allow for business. Wheels swivel for easy maneuvering Figure 5-19. Concession module plan, designed based on a half of a shipping container Figure 5-20. Broadcast Booth module section, the rear pulls out to create a pathway around the
perimeter ..73

72 72

Figure 5-21. Broadcast Booth module plan, front swings open permitting the broadcasters viewing area. Design is based on a 20 foot long shipping container 73

Figure 5-22. The Don Lands Olympic Gymnasium in context with the proposed MWA future Lower Don Lands proposal floor levels during the Olympic Games 77 78 Figure 5-23. The blue tone represents the areas dedicated to players and officials throughout the 6 Figure 5-24. The green tone represents the areas dedicated to Media Personnel throughout the 6

floor levels during the Olympic Games
6 floor levels during the Olympic Games Figure 5-26. The beige tone represents the areas dedicated to Spectators throughout the 6 floor
levels during the Olympic Games Figure 5-27. The light green tone represents the areas dedicated to administration, although the
administration will have access to the entire building throughout the 6 floor levels during

79
80
81

Figure 5-25. The purple tone represents the areas dedicated to Federation Officials throughout the

the Olympic Games

82

Figure 5-28. Ground Floor Olympic Option
Figure 5-29. 2nd Floor Olympic Option

84
85

Figure 5-30. 3rd Floor Olympic Option Figure 5-31. 4th Floor Olympic Option
Figure 5-32. 5th Floor Olympic Option

86 87
88

Figure 5-33. 6th Floor Olympic Option
Figure 5-34. North-South Section Olympic Option

89
90

Figure 5-35. West-East Sectiondlympic Option
Figure 5-36. West-East Section Legacy Option

91
92

Figure 5-37. Site Plan - Legacy Option 1 - Re-natuaralizing and re-establishing dividing road with

connection from building to water retention ponds and water's edge
open-air covered gymnasium

93
94

Figure 5-38. Site Plan - Legacy Option 2 - The community school insertion and new connection to Figure 5-39. Ground Floor Legacy Option Figure 5-40. 2nd Floor Legacy Option Figure 5-41. 3rd Floor Legacy Option Figure 5-42. 4th Floor Legacy Option 95 96 97 98

xv

Figure 5-43. 5th Floor Legacy Option Figure 5-44. 6th Floor Legacy Option

99 100

Figure 5-45. Commissioner St. Olympic Option
Figure 5-46. Commissioner St. Legacy Option Figure 5-47. Interior Olympic Event View :

102
103 104

Figure 5-48. Interior Community Legacy View
Figure 5-49. South West Olympic View

105
106

Figure 5-50. South West Legacy View

....107

Figure 5-51. Northeast Canoe View Olympic & Legacy Option

108

XVI

List of Appendices
Appendix A: Diagram - Olympic Sports Categories
Appendix B: Matrix - 2008 Beijing Summer Olympics Appendix C: Program Analysis- High Order System
111 113

115 183 185
187

Appendix D: Diagram - Olympic Sports Surfaces Analysis Appendix E: Table - Olympic Scheduling Analysis Appendix F: Table - Future Lower Don Lands Demographic Needs

XVII

1 Introduction

World attention is drawn to one major city every four years to celebrate the Summer Olympic
Games. The Olympics are the largest, and most celebrated multi-sporting event in the world. In the past three decades, the cities hosting the event have been confronted with controversy surrounding the Olympics' infrastructure. Host cities have traditionally erected new or completely rebuilt sports venues to satisfy the two week event, which are seldom used to their full potential following the Olympics. This controversy leads to the question of how to build Olympic stadia with lowered embodied energy and qualities of stewardship, adaptability, flexibility, and

modality in addition to multi-functionality in architecture. This question is best addressed in the
drawings of Archigram and the design of such projects as the Plug in City and Blow Out Village (Archigram, 1999). These drawings showed systems that exhibit most of the above mentioned

qualities. In reference to Archigram's method of design, Arata Isozaki states "the work done has
been totally divorced from the patterned logic architecture has created within itself. (Archigram, 1999, p. 11)". This form of design takes a systematic logic and promotes the need to shift away from the 'patterned logic' of conventional architecture. A systematic logic is one that breaks down a thought process into ^ flexible system able to transform with every new problem
encountered.

In the desire to create efficient and sustainable architecture, an avenue least explored is

systems theory, it studies the natural aspects of complex systems first discovered in biology
(Van Gigch, 1974). Another type of study that comes from systems theory is that of cybernetics.

Cybernetics is the study of feedback, communication and control systems in living organisms and mechanical-electrical systems. Cybernetics studies how these systems process and react
to new information (Ashby, 1963).The studies of both systems theory and cybernetics have the potential to be developed into systems by architects to increase efficiency in design and construction. Describing such systems for architecture would involve a logic containing natural qualities able to deal with an array of issues pertaining to a complete architectural process.

The basis of systems theory and cybernetics parallel the rationale of the development of the Olympics as well as architecture. The similarity that exists is that of testing limitations. Both systems theory and cybernetics studied the human body for further understanding of its limits, where the Olympics provide the stage to push the boundaries of the body. Architecture, in turn

uses the knowledge acquired to test the limitations of design. The Olympics, invented in Ancient

Greece, resulted in the development of structures as the amphitheatre and Roman Coliseum.
The architecture developed for these games formulated the rules and guidelines for the building and construction of the required venues. It is recognized that these ancient structures were

influenced by the human body and developed on human limitations and proportions. As a result
of using the human body's natural limitations (i.e. arm span, lifting capability) and its proportions,
no dramatic transformations in stadia designs have been shown in history as the human body
has not changed dramatically over time.

In an effort devoted to the cause of sustainability, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) recently put forth an edict to make the Olympics sustainable. However, the resulting changes

have been superficial. The development of a system of construction that allows for the flexibility
of stadia may be considered to meet this cause. Such a system should allow the building of new Olympic venues or reuse and adaptation of old facilities. In addition, an understanding of the
community and its specifics should be considered where a holistic approach is absorbed into a
construction that also achieves environmental responsibility.

This thesis|project seeks to develop a systematic design process for the production of

efficient, adaptable, flexible, and sustainable sports buildings for the future. It shall be one that incorporates the necessary Olympic sports regulations and data to guide design of sports
buildings within any community in the world. The creation of such a system for Olympic sports will then enable ultimate design flexibility while ensuring a longer lifespan for stadia and
community buildings. The human biological system serves as the best example of a system that acts in an efficient and functional manner. It works in a closed feedback mode with limitations

as well as flexibility and modality, in a way that allows for natural development and adaptability.

With that, there is great potential to further architectural sustainability by utilizing the knowledge gained from studies into the limitations and systematic processes. Systems theory and cybernetics will be the guiding force for this thesis|project which aims at developing a systems
approach to architecture.

2 Historical Background

2.1 . Ancient Relevance
2.1.1 . Ancient Greece
Ancient Greece was monumental. Their civilization helped create the foundations for future western civilizations to develop democracy governance, and philosophy. The Greek culture's

influence was so powerful that it predisposed one of the greatest Empires, that of the Romans, to conquer and infuse much of Greek culture throughout Europe. It was highly influential in language, politics, educational systems, philosophy, science, and the arts. The Greeks also
innovated much of western sports and architecture (Trustees of the British Museum, n.d.).

2.1.2

Olympia and Ancient Greek Architecture

As the originators of the Olympic Games in 776 B.C., the Greeks made it clear that sport was

an integral part of their life (Wallechirisky, 2000). Olympia was the site of the ancient Games
where the infrastructure necessary to host it was developed. The architectural needs as well as the sports that were played were much different during those times. Sports were held outdoors
in an amphitheatre style stadium therefore not protected from natural elements unlike most modern sports. Additionally, there were sporting events that incorporated horses and chariots which were excluded overtime. Of the sports played in these Games, track and field events
were the most closely related to our modern version. Therefore the architecture of our current

stadia and training gymnasiums find their precedents in those games. The stadium at Olympia was part of a larger Olympic complex including gymnasia and structures for training and development of athletes and the Greek culture. These building's goal were the development of
man.

2.1.3

Olympic Stadia

The stadium in Olympia was an open air rectangular track with artificial embankments for spectators. As stadia design progressed many new ones started incorporating convex long sides and vaulted entrances that directed access to the stadium floor (Romano, 1993). Ruins

of Hellenistic and Roman stadia included theatres that allowed for increased spectatorship and
showed facilities that served multi-purposes. Examples exist in Sardis, Pergamon, Rhrodes, and Athens (Romano, 1993). A relationship between sports/ event viewing and architecture is also

found with the development of collective places, and although sport was fundamental to Greek
culture, the design of stadia for sport was not. More focus was made towards theatricality much

like the Roman Empire where stadia and amphitheatres were designed for spectacles (Tzonis, 2004). This included buildings that had radial aligned columns built for unobstructed view, of
spectacles. These designs evolved to U-shaped designs of column-free space for theatres
seating up to 1,200 patrons.

2.1.4

Greek Architecture in Relation to Man

"Man is the measure of all things, of the existence of things thatare and the nonexistence of
things that are not." Protagoras, Quoted in Plato Theaetetus 152A

In Architectural Space in Ancient Greece, Dixiadis stated that "the Greeks used a uniform system in the disposition of buildings in space that was based on principles of human cognition"

(Doxiadis, 1972, p.3). Recognizing that they developed their system of measurement and city
planning (on site) in an existing landscape rather than on the drawing board it is clear that

building was relative to man (the architect). In studies of Ancient Greek architecture there was
a strong link between the visual perception of the architect and the space planning of the site.

For example Acropolis III was planned with rules based on a Ten Part system designed from visual angles of 30, 60, 90,120, 150 degrees in addition to continued sightlines and composition of the architecture and nature (Doxiadis, 1972). Ancient Greece was also the site of the first multifunctional spaces in the form of stoa which were used to define outside spaces surrounding
sanctuaries or markets, to create areas of conglomeration (Tzonis, 2004). These aspects of the

Greek architecture provided the basis for later refinement and improvement by the Romans.

2.1.5

Ancient Roman Architecture

It is believed that the Romans looked to Ancient Greece for architectural examples as many

societies of the same era must have done. Most notable was the Roman Colosseum which evolved from the amphitheatre designs. Its facade incorporated the architectural orders of
Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian in addition to their own Tuscan orders (Welch, 2007). The Ten

Books on Architecture by Marcus Vitruvius asserted that structure must exhibit three qualities. They were firmitas, utilitas, venustas meaning strong or firm, useful, and beautiful (Vitruvius, 1960). In Vitruvius' writings we can see these ideas were influential in the Colosseum's design which exhibited those qualities. Moreover, the writings created rules that were very influential to the construction that took place during that time. As a result, with knowledge of proportions in addition to Emperors pushing the limits of the engineers, engineers were able to recognize the

4

physical limitations of the workers and therefore develop the necessary tools to construct the
Colosseum based on human limits.

Vitruvius emphasized a human element to architecture which culminated in an understanding

of the human body's proportions (see Figure 2-1). He stated that architecture is an imitation
of nature (Vitruvius, 1960). Roman architecture was based on three principles supported by Vitruvius and incorporated human elements which provided proportion to their architecture. By

understanding these rules Romans, and many future architects would find a rationale for their
designs.

§ £ H
X

Figure 2-1. Leonardo da Vinci's Vitruvian Man redrawn and inscribed in a circle and square considered the fundamental geometric patterns of the cosmic order (skinner, 2006). From Da Vinci, L. (c. 1487). Vitruvian Man. Retrieved March 1, 2009
from edupics.com

2.1.6

The Renaissance

It was during the Renaissance that the introduction to sacred geometry occurred, this worked
as a metaphor for universal order emphasizing the relationship of geometry to nature. It also

defined its association to the human body by using the Vitruvian Man as the ideal average
human body representation and superimposing it with the Golden Section (see Figure 2-2)

(Skinner, 2006). It was further rationalized by the Fibonacci sequence (see Figure 2-3) which
is shown to occur in all natural things in some form (2006). It was eventually proven through mathematics and geometry that man is part of nature and therefore a part of the universal order.

This reaffirmed the idea of Man being the ultimate source of value in architecture and the initial
work done by Vitruvius about 1,500 years earlier (2006).

Figure 2-2. Golden Section Derived from Fibonacci Sequence. From Phi osophy and Practice: Sacred Geometry by R. Lawlor,
1982, London: Thames and Hudson.

Figure 2-3. Fibonacci Sequence Applied to the Arm. From Philosophy and Practice: Sacred Geometry by R. Lawlor, 1982,
London: Thames and Hudson.

2.2

Modern Olympic Games

2.2.1

Modern Olympics - The Beginnings

In 1894, France's Pierre de Coubertin promoted the revival of the ancient Olympic Games which
were then awarded to Athens, Greece for the start of the modern Olympic Games in 1896. Coubertin wanted to inspire French youth and present them with a sense of purpose while

improving the performance of his nation on and off the sports field (Theodoraki, 2007). The
intent was to use the Olympic Games to promote the overall development of mankind as was done in Olympia during the ancient games. The Olympic Games gained a positive worldwide reputation and grew so much that a Winter Olympic event was established in 1924. Coubertin

established the International Olympic Committee (IOC) prior to the 1896 Games to manage the
planning of the events.

2.2.2

The Olympic Movement

The IOC created the mechanism forall of its partners to work together to maintain the Olympic Movement This includes: Organising Committees of the Olympic Games (OCOGs), National Olympic Committees (NOCs), and International Federations (IFs), national associations, clubs and athletes (International Olympic Committee, 2008). Along with the Olympic Charter there
are a number of other documents that are distributed within the organizing groups dealing with

several issues relating to the fundamental ideas of the Olympic Charter. Recently there have
been increased discussion of sport and the environment and the issue of sustainability. These

documents emphasize the roles of the organizations for the goals of sustainability and how
each group can work within their communities to achieve global sustainability. These documents

outline the roles and uses of Olympic buildings during and after the Games (IOC, 2008).

2.2.3

Development of Changing Program

Only 15 of the 38 sporting events in the Beijing Games existed as sports in the Games of 1896. These changes contribute to a dynamic environment every four years. The inclusion or exclusion of specific sporting events is based on world wide support and interest (Wallechinsky, 2000). This has lead to very site and time specific design requirements for each host city every four years. But this often results in budget overruns and financial debt to the host city and

country along with a legacy of grandiose and partially usable buildings following the event. One
of the best examples of this is Montreal's 'Big O' stadium. As a result of these past failures the

IOC is promoting stewardship and sustainability for future Games. The drive to minimize energy
consumption and reducing the carbon footprint is now an important initiative.

2.2.4

Traditional vs. Recent and Future Games

The Olympic Stadium in Montreal is a prime example of a controversial Olympic venue. Neither

the Province of Quebec nor the City of Montreal wishes to take ownership of the building. The

$1.5 billion building constructed for the 1976 Summer Games in Montreal, has only recently
been paid off. The costs of construction and ongoing repairs to the stadium roof are seen as the

main cause for this three decade long debt. The building does not have a bright future owing to the costs, maintenance and issues of ownership. It is not unlike several other Olympic cities
where many legacy buildings are never used to
their full potential as they were during their one time Olympic event. More recently, with pressure

from the sustainability advocacy groups, the IOC

WHm

has made this a key issue for its building program.
In Sydney, Australia there was a push to have their stadium and other sports venues designed
to promote the post Olympic use. Their main

stadium had its seating reduced and now has

continued to be used effectively. The success of Sydney was primarily due to the incorporation of
Figure 2-4. London 2012 Olympic Stadium. From HOK

Sport. Retrieved April 1, 2009 from archifield.net

several initiatives in and around the Olympic site

(IOC, 2008). The National Stadium (Birds Nest)

at the Beijing Games of 2008 was seen as a sustainable building. The building is set to have

the number of seats reduced following their Olympic event from 91,000 to 80,000 (2008). Is the
reduction of seats enough to help global stewardship?

The Vancouver 2010 Winter Olympics, as well as the London 2012 Summer Olympics, have both embraced the concept of stewardship by looking for innovative ways of designing for their
events. Vancouver will use their BC Place Stadium for the opening and closing ceremonies.

The focus for new design is on the holistic or systems approach to the design of their new

Olympic Oval in Richmond. London on the other hand has focused their efforts in revitalizing
a derelict area of London. It is building a stadium that will dramatically reduce its seating

following the Games from 80,000 to 25,000 seats (see Figure 2-4). It will have a flexible frame
wrapped in a mural painted for the Games. They have separated many of the regular stadium

functions from the structure of the stadium such as food kiosks and souvenir shops contained within more permanent modern stadia. This will allow them to achieve the dramatic reduction

of seats. The regular functions would remain on site but separate from the main building
much like the Germans did for the World Cup in 2006 (The official site of the London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games, 2008). The future Olympics are beginning to become more environmentally responsible with Vancouver and London, but they still have to deal with many

of the same issues of construction: speed, safety, efficiency and budget as in all prior Games.
Passed Olympic Games and specifically the Beijing Olympics raised questions of injuries and
deaths during their construction process. This raises the subject of human factors in design and construction. The issues merit further investigation. The complex needs of the Olympic Games

and its architecture wpuld benefit from a systematic planning process involving Cybernetics.

2.3

Introduction to Cybernetics

2.3.1

Cybernetics and Systems Theory Defined

The term cybernetics is explained by its founder Norbert Wiener as the science of control and communication in mechanisms, organisms and society (Wiener, 1961). The cybernetic
theory of contrpl can be applied to any system; meaning any set of elements creating an

interconnected whole. It is also considered the study of feedback, the manner in which things
process and react to new information. This field of study has extensive applications besides just

in architecture. The common link throughout this papers' research shows the primary goal of cybernetics being an understanding and definition of the functions and the way systems work. Essentially cybernetics can be described as a completely autonomous system; any kind of
system that has the ability to define itself.

Closely linked to cybernetics is systems theory. This is the bridging element in cybernetics that
allows an autonomous system to exist. The definition of a system given by John P. Van Gigch's

Applied General Systems Theory is, "an assembly or set of related elements" (Van Gigch, 1974,

p.2). He explains that elements can represent concepts, objects, or subjects within a system. A

system can contain one, two or all three types. Systems approach, derived from systems theory
is one of the main aspects in cybernetics which this thesis seeks to develop. An aim of systems

9

theory is an interdisciplinary investigation of the commonalities of systems including its structure
and properties. By doing so we gain the ability to generalize various systems' organization and how they function. This is an understanding of how systems receive, store, process, and recall information and how they behave, respond, and adapt to varying outside inputs or
environments. (1974).

2.3.2

Where Cybernetics Began

Norbert Wiener applied the Greek word kybernetes meaning "steersman" and in Latin

"governor" to coin the term Cybernetics to define this unique field of study. Cybernetics became
the name for the, "...field of control and communication theory, whether in the machine or in the animal" (Wiener, 1961, p.11). It drew knowledge from the study of biology, neurophysiology, anthropology, psychology, mathematics and electrical engineering, all of which showed a
systems basis. But in addition to systems it was the manner of how they existed, how they

interacted with each other and fed off one another (feedback) and their response to newly attained information (Wiener, 1961). These concepts of controlled systems were clearly

displayed through physical systems such as aiming artillery, electrical circuits, and simpl&robot
movements that solidified Cybernetics' role in engineering. These ideas proved of significance to social systems. Therefore the fields of psychology and anthropology became involved in cybernetic theory. The combination of both engineering and social systems made visible a connection with architecture. From the 1940's many researchers such as R. Buckminster Fuller,

the Archigram group and initially, Cedric Price, used the basic concepts of cybernetics without
actually using the term.

2.3.3

R. Buckminster Fuller/ Cedric Price/ Archigram

R. Buckminster Fuller was a leader and innovator in the movement towards global thinking. Sir
Norman Foster stated:

Bucky was fond of quoting Theodore Larson: "It is not to devise a better society so as to arrive at a finer architecture; it is to provide a better architecture in order to arrive at a more
desirable society" (Zung, 2002, p.3).

Fuller was probably one of the most gifted cybernetic thinkers of our time, owing to his diverse background and interests. He questioned conventional education, what people accepted as

10

truth in school. His lack of interest in conventional learning resulted in him twice being dismissed from Harvard. However, he gained valuable experience in machinery and engineering while

he apprenticed as a machinist in a cotton mill. As a naval officer during the First World War he
was given the opportunity to use and develop his acquired mechanical skills (Baldwin, 1996).

Though the term cybernetics did not exist, Fuller was ahead of his time in developing systems of thought that would take a holistic design approach now at the forefront of architectural practice. This approach saw many original designs focused around sustainability and the concept of
'ephemeralization' or doing more with less that dealt with global issues.

In 1960-65 architect Cedric Price and Joan Littlewood a theatre producer, with the help of

Gordon Pask, was the first to directly apply cybernetics to architecture. The proposal of the Fun Palace was the start of an architectural career for Price that embodied cybernetic principles.
He continued to apply qualities of the Fun Palace into other projects but none would become

as theoretically sound as the Fun Palace itself. The Fun Palace presented the opportunity for
Gordon Pask's affiliation with architecture. Pask created the Cybernetics committee for the Fun Palace that was composed of professionals of various disciplines. The architecture designed by Cedric Price with the help of Gordon Pask sparked an exciting new experimental and leading edge architecture ranging from Archigram, Sir Norman Foster, Richard Rogers, and Renzo Piano, to the projects of Diller + Scofidio.

In the early 1960's around the same time as Price's Fun Palace, there were the famous avant-

garde drawings of Archigram. The group created a magazine of compelling architectural designs
that ranged from futuristic mobile cities and buildings to inflatable environments for one person. The Archigram group's success resulted from presenting hypothetical physical environments that were never dreamt before. At the time, with the discussion focused around Cedric Price's Fun Palace, the concept of adaptation of buildings conforming to the needs of users was presented. The group foynd a way to, "injected flexibility with amphetamines and envisaged adaptation on a daily, if not hourly, basis" as Mike Webb stated (Archigram, 1999, p.2). Over the
years the Archigram design studies proved to be a critical architectural study that investigated

the extreme possibilities of architecture. Several influential architects of our time, some of which are mentioned above, have been known to credit Archigram with influencing their design process. The processes engrained into Archigram's designs created systems that were evident to architects and so they were able to be extracted and adapted to various projects ever since.

11

2.3.4

Japanese Modular Experience

Looking towards the Japanese way of life and the development of their society we can definitely Learn some things from them in terms of a systems language. The Japanese traditionally built their society based on a modular construction system of measurement called the Shakkan-ho which also doubles as a spiritual philosophy (Leong, 2005). This common language used for centuries is still around in today's Japanese industries. Becoming efficient
was imperative for the Japanese during the time after WWII. A high level of quality control was a way of succeeding through the difficult times. Based on quality control and a Kanban
system which allows companies to respond to demand in a quicker manner with little risk of

overstocking a system, the Lean Production Model was developed (Sasaki, 1984). This quality
process is based on the premise that allows for the adjustment of a system until it reaches the desired quality output. At the Toyota Motor Company where the Lean Production method was

developed the idea of mass production was deemed inappropriate and so it was conceived
that an emphasis would be put on a more integrated approach. This approach focused on

"continuous improvement" and "respect for people" (Lesniewski, Krygiel, & Berkebile, 2006).
The combination of Lean Production and the Kanban system minimizes the inefficiencies during the process and increases productivity unlike the backward thinking of many Architectural firms today which allow for the errors to pass through and be part of the process. By putting stress
on the quality of output there is an increase in the level of quality at the end of the process and so the number of adjustments required is therefore reduced. This is achieved through a

high level of integration between the multiple tiers of management involved (Sasaki, 1984). As Lesniewski states the key principle for the Toyota production system is to eliminate waste, and those involved in the design and construction of our built environment have much to learn from this methodology (Lesniewski, Krygiel, & Berkebile, 2006). Therefore the AEC industry can

take these principles of systems to derive quality management and a focus on minimization of
wastage of materials and time.

The Japanese society's long history of using a modular systems approach to architecture has proved successful for them. The Shakkan-ho system of measurement used in modular
construction is closely related is Shaku, which are still used in the manufacturing of construction

materials in Japan. It is the equivalent of a sheet of plywood but measures 3x6 shaku, one

sheet is the size of one tatami mat. The tatami mat is the module that has defined Japanese

12

homes since the Medieval Period (see Figure 2-5). The method of construction is determined

by the number of tatami mats used which further decides the column spacing for a structure. A standardization of such fixtures as sliding doors and paper screens are then enabled by the standard units of measurement (Kansai International Public Relations Promotion Office, 1997).
The Japanese were able to understand these systems on a cybernetic level; allowing for a

complete understanding of how the elements react with one another and create a system that
feeds off each element within ji. }

irg5rgz55===]

--------I----"-:

gig-iE-E-E-E-E-r":
p£-i>i:--:zf~--:

II
llllliii!

iiiiiii

1
I!

I

1 i 1 III
I

1

'I'l'!'!' '

1!!!!!

liiiilii!

rm-.r--r^---jr--jr.r.

||
I
11

'\'\

in

1! i Sjiji i|
I

ijljl

*,

i

| III
BiOBBOOOiE^

§1 IIIIeSeI :
Figure 2-5. Tatami Mats Modular example by Arthur Drexler. From The Architecture of Japan

(p. 67), by A. Drexler, 1955, New York: The Museum of Modern Art.

13

3 Theoretical Discourse

3.1
3.1.1

A New Methodology Must be Developed for Olympic Architecture
Introduction

Architecture is increasingly being criticized for its lack of stewardship of the environment and use of global resources. Many^architects have tried to respond to issues of stewardship but these attempts have been somewhat superficial. Future building typologies are becoming

increasingly dependent on flexibility, mobility, and functionality. Therefore that trend will demand
more multi-use buildings which will render single-use buildings obsolete. The Archigram group

was famous for ideas of dynamicity, flexibility, and mobility. Peter Cook believed civilization was
developing into a high consumer society. But he described this as being a healthy and positive

development of human culture. His rationale for this belief was based on consumer choice and the expendability of products which was understandable during the 1960s (Archigram, 1999). Today, we can parallel our thinking with his view by replacing the words expendability with

stewardship and consumer choice with ultimate flexibility. The similarity between the work of
Archigram and this thesis is the systems approach that was taken and evident in their projects. These include Plug in City, Instant City and Blow-out Village where flexibility was a major theme. Conservation and minimizing embodied energy has become an imperative for large structures

being built for the Olympic Games. A look back to our most radical thinkers in architecture and
cybernetics could give us the direction and knowledge necessary to move forward in developing
a new methodology for Olympic Architecture.

3.1.2

Applying Cybernetics to Architecture

There have been several investigations into the application of cybernetics to architecture since the work of Cedric Price with Gordon Pask in the 1960's. The recent exploration of these applications has experienced a recurring struggle. Issues with the communication and information feedback loops, within these systems have hindered development into mechanically autonomous buildings. Significant strides have been made but we still remain far from developing completely self-governing buildings. A primary problem has been full reliance on software programs. The expectations for them to work as the sophisticated cybernetic system directing design of a building, attempting to make it self-governing have proved unrealistic. The software is designed like a biological system designed to adapt and learn based on inputs from

15

f
the environment. However the system runs into problems when the architecture is actually built because the systems feedback information loops are subsequently broken. This is a result of

the constructed building and its built components having different qualities from those displayed
in a computer model of the building. However, strides are being made in the development of such buildings; but are these developments really what is needed in our immediate future? The
answer is a definite no.

Making buildings mechanically autonomous is not crucial when compared with more pressing global issues. There has been a lack of concerted interdisciplinary work to address issues of

pollution and energy and resource waste. Architects must act quickly to co-ordinate these efforts
or lose their place as the master facilitators of the design/construction process.

No one has fully investigated the connection of cybernetics and systems approach to the
construction processes of the built form. This results in a disconnection from physical

architecture and the information used to design it. Re-fabricating Architecture (Kieran &
Timberlake, 2004) begins to extract the cybernetic qualities in the processes of mass customization. They have focused on constructing architecture by producing blocks or modules similar to the building methods used by aircraft, car, and shipbuilding industries. But this still
presents problems for architects:

One lesson that engineers understand and teach, but architects neglect, is that process sets the stage for outcome. Without a broadly based process that penetrates deeply into the very heart of how things are made, any success will be fleeting and unsustainable.
(Kieran & Timberlake, 2004, pp.107)

The need to understand the cybernetic qualities of these systems is crucial to mastering a
systems approach to architecture. It remains a hole in the body of architectural research today.
Ross Ashby, an instrumental cyberneticist stated:

Many a book has borne the title "Theory of Machines", but it usually contains information about mechanical things, about levers and cogs. Cybernetics, too, is a "theory of
machines", but it treats, not things but ways of behaving. It does not ask "what is this thing?" but "what does it do?" (Ashby, 1963, p. 1)

Analysing architecture based on behaviours and developing behavioural systems that helps
architecture to become more efficient and sustainable is a research worth investigating.

16

Well known architects of the past tried to overhaul the methods and thought processes used during their time. Although we can now look back and criticize them for the architecture that was developed in their attempts at new methodologies, we recognize that they had the right idea in

terms of systems theory. The systems used were not taking into consideration newly developed technologies or being thought of in terms of stewardship of resources. This was why new views of architecture were needed. Incremental improvements would not succeed for a system unless it is based on a flexible methodology. This relates to systems approach and the issue of
Incrementalism versus Innovation as discussed by John P. Van Gigch:

...we are incapable of departing drastically from established solution patterns, we

seek solutions near those presently accepted (Incrementalism) and profess to improve the existing systems by analysing the operation of component subsystems (Systems Improvement). These approaches never succeed in solving the entire problem, which
requires the adoption of novel designs at the level of the Whole System. (Van Gigch,

1974, p.34)

In developing new methodologies some architects have been successful in creating systems

that work with new technological advancements and become responsive to their environment
such as Rem Koolhaas and his Dee & Charles Wyly Theatre (see Figure 3-1). By designing the

ability for the theatre to raise and lower its walls it allowed for a unique experience of the spaces
and permitted changes of configuration for the theatre based on the performance requirements. A key factor for success was the understanding

of the systems that were necessary within a
theatre in order to ensure the best possible user experience. By consideration of the systems
Figure 3-1. Dee and Charles Wyly Theatre, USA, 2004. From Office for Metropolitan Architecture. Retrieved April 1,
2009, oma.nl

involved in any one situation, an importance must be given to the ability to break down a system to

its components. "One of the problems in dealing with systems stems from our inability to know how far to break down or "decompose" a system
into component systems, or how far to "compose" or "organize" a system into larger systems"

(Van Gigch, 1974, p.2).

17

Ross Ashby's (1957) downward causation principle, (as cited in Y.T Leong & George E Lasker,
2005) states: "that each law specifies a particular type of organization at its level, which

downwardly determines the arrangement of the subsystems or components at the level below"

A relationship is apparent in Architecture, Engineering, and Construction (AEC) where architecture is one discipline within an industry of several, which are all guided by the same
values. These values are (stewardship of resources,
user safety and user fit) and should determine the
a Noftsolaation

subsystems that are in place to produce the work
necessary. The issue is the level of adherence by
C-Fu»Realization

the various disciplines working together to produce
one outcome, a building. The current system is not

efficient in the exchange of necessary information between the disciplines and therefore, as mentioned

by Leong, a common systems language is imperative
to our industry (2005). Figure 3-2 shows the AEC guiding principles and the higher order system that

it falls under. It will be important to develop a system

that encompasses the AEC industry's guiding values.

Figure 3-2. Systems Organizational Principles. From
Architecture, Engineering and Construction of Built

Enviornment (p. 91) by G.E. Lasker and Y.T. Long, 2005,

Canada, International Institute for Advanced Studies in
Research and Cybernetics (HAS).

18

3.1.3

Architectural Cybernetic Precedence
3.7.3.7 R. Buckminster Fuller

R. Buckminster Fuller was an inventor, mathematician, geometer, cartographer, ecologist,

manufacturer, industrial designer, moralist, epistemologist and world systems thinker. He used this multitude of skills in creating architecture. He questioned the processes that were being used by architects of his time. Although not an architect at the time of most of his realizations or designs; his outside the box thinking allowed him to gain popularity through his progressive designs and his ability to challenge established norms in architecture.

He was given an honorary degree at the age of 70. He
was one of the first to conceive of the planet as a closed ecosystem which he dubbed as "Spaceship Earth". His designs questioned many of our processes and gave alternatives that were in line with today's examples of 1 stewardship of resources. Learning how to forecast efficiently and knowledgeably allowed him to design things that were much ahead of his time. As a result we
-^ can make connections between Fullers' ability to forecast

c;

and the study of Cybernetics. This will be discussed

later in this section under Cedric Price and the idea's

committee for the Fun Palace. Fuller looked at everything
in the world as a piece of the Universal puzzle where everything has its place (Marks, 1960). Nature has a way of being efficient in its use of structure, as well as its
inherent processes.
Figure 3-3.4D Dymaxion House by Fuller, R.

Buckminster. In R. Marks, 1960, The Dymaxion World of Buckminster Fuller. New York: Reinhold

Most remember R. Buckminster Fuller for his

development of the Geodesic Dome but there were several other key projects that preceded it, of equal or greater importance. 4D Dymaxion House was developed from the 4D Tower, which came before it. This was an apartment with dedicated

functions on each floor and an electricity-generating wind turbine on its roof. The Tower would
be light enough that it could be air delivered replacing the typical house with one that would take

one day rather than six months to erect (see Figure 3-3).

19

The 4D Dymaxion House was designed in the hope of mass production. Fuller claimed that it
made no sense to hand-build houses which didn't benefit from the hands on approach. Mass production would create quality control. One of his arguments was that no person would choose to have their car hand built because it would simply take longer and be more costly (Baldwin,

1996). The design of the Dymaxion House was meant to be built of durable materials making it
an efficient and lightweight home. But it was planned to be built primarily of aluminum which was

hard to obtain and expensive at that time. The House was designed to function with innovative technology and some of which still doesn't quite exist. The ideas inherent in the plans of the 4D

Tower and 4D Dymaxion House encompassed the concept of Autonomy. Fuller was likely the
first to conceive of the idea of an autonomous house.

Allowing a house to function on its own with the minimal intervention of complex networks was Fullers' vision for the 4D Dymaxion House. We are still dependant on sewers, electrical wires, plumbing, and our road networks for garbage pickup. This dependence on the complex system
made a house expensive but with the 4D Dymaxion House there would be instant savings
on construction costs. Fuller claimed the existing house building method was susceptible to

"low bid quality, obsolescence, labour unrest, vandals, deferred maintenance, terrorists, and disaster" (Baldwin, 1996, p.28). With the autonomous house the maintenance was the owners'
responsibility, but the reliability of the system would be better than the complex city system, if

high quality equipment was used. Baldwin states that Fuller believed that:
A house gains considerable advantage from being 'autonomous' that is, from standing alone, with no need for connection to a municipal system of pipes and wires. Undeveloped land is cheaper. Utility bills are lower...With no large-scale hardware and no transmission losses, overall efficiency goes up and environmental problems go down (Baldwin, 1996, p.28)

The Dymaxion House went into production shortly after the Second World War but the
enterprise failed owing to management problems.

An important Fuller idea was for the need to evaluate any human venture in terms of imports and exports. Currently our houses are energy importers (gas, electricity, solar), information (newspaper, internet, cable, radio), food, water, and air; making it in Baldwin's words a net
consumer. Fuller claimed that with the developments in passive solar design and insulation

made heating and air conditioning unnecessary, other than in harsh climates. Additionally

20

people could save money with the integration of these system types. The goal was to have the home completely off the electrical grid by integrating all the necessary technologies to make it a
highly efficient building. This, combined with minimizing household waste by careful shopping to reduce purchasing packaging, and growing one's own food makes for a much more sustainable

lifestyle (Baldwin, 1996). Unfortunately people then did not approve of these advanced ideas as
food and energy were cheap and in boundless supply.

Exports consisted of heated air, grey water, black water, and garbage. The Autonomous House was claimed to minimize heat loss and air pollution which would minimize the heat island effect

and subsequently global warming. Fuller used a Dymaxion waterless toilet design that would package excrement into plastic bags for a scheduled service pickup to be later used as compost
and other uses. Further reduction of water use would be made available through his design of

the Fog Gun, which used compressed air mixed with atomized water to clean household objects
and people with less water (Baldwin, 1996). 4

Because R. Buckminster Fuller had developed such a holistic system he was able to see the

potential in easily incorporating them in various situations. The system allowed him to have the ability to forecast everything that would occur with slight changes to the system. Additionally, it gave him the opportunity to incorporate the system into other modes of architecture. Corrugated cottages for the military became the application for the unaccepted Dymaxion House. Using
galvanized steel bins typically used for vermin and weather proof grain storage could be the

next emergency housing unit. As a result of having resolved the autonomous system for the
Dymaxion House enabled the easy application into the readily available steel bins. The bins

were sturdy, simple, watertight, and fireproof and were designed for quick and straightforward assembly ideal for emergencies.

The Dymaxion Deployment Units (DDUs) were delivered as packaged units that could be easily built from top down by utilizing^metal masts with a winch apparatus (see Figure 3-4). It allowed the builder to remain safe on ground, and speeded up the process. Through knowledge of geometry, material adjustments were made to the roof, making its compound curved panels to
be able to withstand hoisting, wind, and blast concussion. Besides these concerns Fuller gave

consideration to the person putting the units together/Many of the workers assembling them were illiterate. A simple process was necessary for them to understand how to build it.

21

TOF",.·:

'

fm-\.T>-

'

fy:j;

ifc-'/i-.-:

Figure 3-4. Dymaxion Deployment Unit (DDU). From Bucky Works: Buckminster Fuller's Ideas for Today
(p. 36) In J. Baldwin, 1996, Canada: John Wiley & Sons.

Architects were not happy with the idea of mass production and likely felt their livelihoods were threatened as a result of many of Fuller's holistic mass produced ideas. It was in 1928 that the:
_ i

American Institute of Architects (AIA) passed a resolution: "Be it resolved that the American Institute of Architects establish itself on record as inherently opposed to any peas-in-a-pod-like reproducible designs." Bucky retorted that nature commonly makes use of repetition in cells, crystal, and eggs. Evolution tends to standardize design-you don't see animal noses in the middle of their backs, looses are logically placed by their
function (Baldwin, 1996, p.21).

To Fuller and to most of us today it makes sense that we have to accept change in our
processes of architecture. Although it makes complete and utter sense that people should

accept standardized designs for housing as they already do for everything from cars, furniture,

shoes, and books; there is that tendency for people to want something completely unique. The
task of attempting to change attitudes is a very difficult and tedious one. Is the Buckminster

Fuller mode of thinking the only way to have a sustainable home? People have not traditionally
embraced such radical change and so a more gradual introduction of concepts to society

must be made. It may just be that Buckminster Fuller inadvertently gradually introduced these
concepts to our generation. If we can now develop the systems necessary to allow for gradual

change to occur within our current society we will create a platform for success that allows us to control the speed of this change, introducing it at an acceptable pace. The Buckminster

22

Fuller design was not the only way to design sustainably but his way of thinking was one that

encompassed all the right principles for environmental stewardship. His holistic approach was one that worked but was too radical for his time. His system of approach could be broken down

to a few simple processes:

1. Selecting a societal or global issue

2. Approaching the problem holistically (universe inwards)
3. Developing the necessary solutions to deal with the problem

4. Analyzing the solutions' details to minimize overall effects and create flexibility.

Having a system of approach to a design methodology that encompasses these principles can help anyone to develop a sensitive manner for dealing with the real issues of any problem. This is particularly true in architecture and pertains to any building size. As seen in Buckminster Fuller's approach, the system that he used about eighty years ago can still be applied today.

Once a system is in place it sets theLguidelines which you can then build upon, as he did with his Dymaxion House and DDU's. Building from the Universe inwards as Fuller did, gives the
opportunity to deal with the main problems first. It then leads to the intricate details that will allow the systems to remain functioning and flexible.

3.1.3.2 Cedric Price
In the early 1960's Cedric Price's Fun Palace was the first project to use Cybernetics to help achieve a desired architecture. Although the project was never realized for political reasons it came very close to being built. Projections after World War II indicated a trend to shorter working days resulting from automation in workplaces. This would pave the path for a leisure based economy. The Fun Palace was intended to be an outlet for creativity and education during leisure time. The proposal stated:

that every town should have a space at its disposal where the latest discoveries of

engineering and science can provide an environment for pleasure and discovery, a place to look at the stars, to eat, stroll, meet and play (Mathews, 2007, p.78). Leisure buildings of that time included: adult education schools, movie theatres, and sport

facilities like bowling and racetracks. Realistically the problem the Fun Palace encountered was of funding its new architecture typology. (Mathews, 2007)

Cybernetics was introduced into the design of the Fun Palace as the design did not need

23

a specific form or fixed floor plan. Cedric Price approached the design by first developing a

skeletal framework to contain the activities that were free to develop and grow according to
demand (Mathews, 2007).

The premise of the Fun Palace was to have a constantly changing program which deemed the uses for the building unpredictable. The spaces were designed to be changeable dependant on the needs of the users which allowed much of the architecture to remain indeterminate. The Fun Palace had to somehow regulate its configurations within the fixed framework. By using the field of Cybernetics, in addition to Game theory and computer technology, it was possible to analyze
usage patterns. They were used to predict and react to further future trends. This allowed for a

system to be established based on cybernetic principles and game theory strategies that could

learn the usage patterns and adapt accordingly for future activities. (Mathews, 2007) The design of the Fun Palace had a permanent framework that limited its expansion, however
everything within the structure confines were seen to be very flexible (see Figure 3-5). The system incorporated modular elements of aluminum and inflatable plastic to allow for easy repositioning. As expected the need for parking and mechanical systems and service areas would be located on the basement and first floor requiring the levels to be fixed along with the

r' \

a

Figure 3-5. Fun Palace, flexible floor plan. From From agit-prop to free space: The architecture of Cedric Price , by S. Mathews,
2007, London: Black Dog Pub. Ltd.

24

structure (see Figure 3-6) (Mathews, 2007).

Mathews stated: "Cybernetics allowed dynamic systems to self regulate and self correct without

an end state or definite telos. The performative objectives of cybernetics are in reality fluid criteria and are as subject to modification as is the systems itself (2007, p.73).

It is important to note that both Ross Ashby and Norbert Wiener both acknowledge the aspect of cybernetics being a science that deals with biological processes that allow living things

to manage environmental changes (Ashby, 1963; Wiener, 1961). So the use of cybernetics allowed for the Fun Palace to adapt to the environment of the space and regulate the necessary changes to the program. Games Theory principles were used as the system that created
responses and corrections to changing and developing program both in the present and for the future (Mathews, 2007).

What we can learn from the Fun Palace ^roje^t is that it begins to put together two systems
of thought: Cybernetics and Games Theory. Collectively they evolved into one system. This
was the ability to deal with daily and long term adjustments to the programmatic issues of the

Figure 3-6. Fun palace. From From agit-prop to free space: The architecture of Cedric Price (p. 68), by S. Mathews, 2007,
London: Black Dog Pub. Ltd.

25

building. By using design in a manner for maximizing flexibility and functionality, it was believed

that Price was able to derive the ideal system in order to achieve a successful Fun Palace, had
it ever been built. In From Agit-Prop to Free Space: The Architecture of Cedric Price Mathews

mentions that the Fun Palace had established an ideas committee to brainstorm scenarios for

what a space would potentially be used for. In addition, other committees dedicated to structure,
programming, sociology as well as a Cybernetics sub-committee, led by Gordon Pask, founder

of Cybernetics and Systems Research Ltd, were established to work with the Fun Palace Ideas
committee (Mathews, 2007). The committee's that were formed were of great importance to

the progression of the project. They were much like today's collaboration efforts with consultant
groups to obtain the required expertise for a given project. The difference is that these groups

were formed early in the process and were composed not only of those forming the AEC disciplines but rather those dealing with social aspects. The groups had people from the fields of
psychology, sociology, an editor of New Scientist magazine, as well as a theatre professor.

The success of the Fun Palace possibly the most successful theoretical project ever planned
can be attributed to five key factors:

1. An idea (Fun Palace) responding to a social issue

2. A well rounded collaborative team implemented early in the process

3. A combination of systems: Cybernetics and Games TheQiy dealing with present & future
4. A framework to work within 4

5. A modular system of components aluminum modular elements and inflatable plastics.

Essentially this collaborative project was initiated by the architect Cedric Price who assumed the role of coordinator which is the method practiced today, as it serves as the ideal way to create

large infrastructure. Collaboration also proving to develop architecture that is better informed
and in tune with its surroundings whether it be natural, social or cultural.

The Potteries Thinkbelt was another example of a project that was designed as a practical
proposal but did not materialize. The Thinkbelt included several objectives of Price's, Fun

Palace. It focused the project by controlling physical interactions and specific social exchanges through the use of cybernetics. Aside from its two major similarities it contained one important difference: mobility. Price aimed at dealing with educational issues and providing people with the practical knowledge he believed necessary for England's progress in the postwar era (Mathews,

26

2007). Mathews stated: "Both
PITTS HILL
RANSFERAREA

=
r=

the Fun Palace and Potteries
Thinkbelt exhibit Price's

approach of a responsive, anticipatory architecture,
adaptable to the varying needs

and desires of the individual and of society" (Mathews, 2007, p.195). And like the Fun
TRANSFER AREA
OM.ICS 1 2 3

Palace, the plan had the ability

Figure 3-7. Potteries Thinkbelt, Abandoned Rail Network. From From agit-prop to

.- transfer area ..>..._

to change form, based on the

free space: The architecture of Cedric Price , by S. Mathews, 2007, London: Black

information gathered by the

09

computer technology derived

from the cybernetic principles of Norbert Wiener and John von Neumann.

Mobility played the biggest role in the Thinkbelt project. It gave the opportunity for Price to

explore never-ending possibilities with the physical rearrangement of the new technical school
program continuing on with the concept of future adaptability. This was ultimately made possible by having access to an old vacant railway network (see Figure 3-7). The network was the vital system of mobility needed to create utmost flexibility. "Mobile classroom, laboratory, and
residential modules would be placed on the revived railway lines and shunted around the region,

to be grouped and assembled as required by current needs, and then moved and regrouped
as those needs changed" (Mathews, 2007, p.209). Within the entire project there were three

Transfer Areas which were the only permanent parts of the system. The Transfer Areas were utilized to move housing and teaching units using giant overhead cranes (see Figure 3-8). The utilization of mobile and modular units resulted in flexibility of location within the Potteries district. The Transfer Areas served also as connection to national transport networks which presented yet another system of mobility (Mathews, 2007). But was mobility really a necessity in

the overall scheme of things?

In From Agit-Prop to Free Space: The Architecture of Cedric Price, the author also shares the opinion that the mobility factor was not needed, or the way of the future. The reality of the Internet in today's society renders physical mobility of buildings practically useless. Today,

27

we are capable of taking courses online in our homes, and ordering goods or services over the Internet. We have become virtually mobile which would present a problem for the Thinkbelt project today as there would be no need to expend energy in hauling buildings around from place to place.

However the thinking that was involved for

agit-prop to free space: The architecture of Cedric Price. by S.
Mathews, 2007, London: Black Dog Pub. Ltd.

Figure 3-8. Giant overhead crane (example). From From

the transPort^'on system presents the idea
of mobile units, which if thought of in a less

...

...

.

-

.'

..

extreme way begins to work quite well. This was definitely a beginning to the reusing and

recycling of architecture elements rather than production and fabrication of new material. The

Potteries Thinkbelt did portray a valuable system which could be interpreted as comprising of
the following four key components:

1. Social Change - A plan for societal change or a new view of education 2. Network - Thinkbelt transportation network, for mobility of the system

3. Minimized permanent infrastructure maintaining maximum flexibility-Transfer Areas; and
4. Modular unit - teaching units and housing units.

These four components of the system are in hierarchal order similar to the list discussed in the work of R. Buckminster Fuller. This maintains the idea that the analysis of greater issues
enables an understanding of how to solve the smaller problems in a way that allows tackling of

larger concerns simultaneously. Like Buckminster Fuller's view, we have to look inwards from
the Universe. c

3.1.3.3 Archigram

During the 1960's, although Cedric Price's Fun Palace was a major topic of discussion, the
Archigram Magazine's nine issues between 1961 and 1974 had also become very popular.
The architectural group of Archigram consisted of Peter Cook, Warren Chalk, Ron Herron,

Dennis Crompton, Michael Webb and David Greene. They were based at the Architectural
Association in London where they had all studied (Archigram, 1999). The Archigrairi Magazine

issues contained very avant-garde projects that tested conventional thinking in much the same

28

manner of Cedric Price and R. Buckminster Fuller. The projects displayed were futuristic, using
very advanced technology for theirjime, and expressed in a seductive manner through their

intriguing pop art architecture. The group was heavily motivated to test their current conditions
in London, which they described as boring architecture, with new and innovative visionary ideas.

In doing so they produced drawings for such influential projects as Plug in City, Living City,
Walking City and Blow up Village.

Existing in many large cities are forms of the Plug in City; from the transportation networks and
underground passages for movement of pedestrians or various forms of mechanical systems

to the very condos that we inhabit. We essentially live in a Plug in City. Massive condos spring

up everywhere and are tied into a network that sees ever increasing turnover of the units
themselves. People have more choice, they know what they want and they are able to access it most of the time. This relates to the word "expendability" that Peter Cook emphasized in the Archigram compilation meaning the ability to afford change within a consumer based society (1999). The condo unit of today is not a plug in unit that can literally be taken out or unplugged
from the building as Archigram displayed. However, it does have similarities to one by how it is

created with products that can change or be modified according to the users' needs or wants.
Although Plug-In City was never built it has certainly influenced design. Change was gradual but

pushed into a direction, one which displayed a system of thought.

Our society, which is largely consumer based is now experiencing the effects our lifestyles are
having on the environment. As such society is now trying to embrace environmental stewardship by looking critically at large infrastructure projects being built today. Archigram attempted to

do this by giving full control to the user of the Plug in City. They also made us recognize the
expendability of architectural parts or wholes used in our daily lives. That trend endured and we now must find ways to minimize the harmful effects that this has on the environment.

An early and almost literal example of Archigram's influence in architecture was Richard Rogers and Renzo Piano's 1977 Centre Pompidou in Paris. The massiveness of the structure and its lightweight exoskeleton steel structure embodies the design principles of the Plug in City's 1962 Nottingham Shopping Viaduct (see Figure 3-9 & 3-10). With the Nottingham Shopping Viaduct, Peter Cook of Archigram demonstrated that a mega-structure is structured to accommodate

change through its flexibility could work. This design allowed for multiple functions in the same

29

Figure 3-9. Centre Pompidou by Richard Rogers and Renzo
Piano. From S. Glynn, 2001. Retrieved October 1, 2008, from
galinsky.com

Figure 3-10. Nottingham Shopping Viaduct by Peter Cook.Retrieved December 15, 2008, from fabiofeminofantascience.org

structure with expendability determining a hierarchy for those spaces. Spaces with a higher

rate of expendability or change would be placed higher in the structure while those of lower needs were located at the base. The Centre Pompidou houses four major activities: a museum,

a reference library, centre for industrial design and a centre for music and acoustic research.
In addition there are book shops, restaurants, cinemas, children's activities, car parking and a
transportation network of transparent escalators. The Centre Pompidou can be clearly attributed
to the influences of both Archigram and Cedric Price's Fun Palace.

The concepts used in designing the Plug in City and Fun Palace introduced a thought process that enabled societal interaction with the built form. These concepts are in accord with Gordon Pask's cybernetic research on the Fun Palace. Peter Cook of Archigram used (see Figure

3-11) a systems approach to architecture that relied on the thinking of several levels of systems simultaneously. It was developed as a set of hierarchal rules based on expendability which
governed the overall system. The intention was holistic. Looking at Figure 3-11 shows the clear and precise way the system will develop socially. It becomes a flexible system that allows the actual idea of the university to develop into something much different. The physical flexibility

imparted by the design gives way to social flexibility. The plug-in component modules that are developed allow for the ease of change, however considering the sequencing of the university's
growth is itself another system of specified components. These components are required to

have the ability to host a series of changing events over time. One component system consists of pylon feeds, silo decks, and lift tubes. The teaching rooms, housing modules, and the

30

111LJL

ROOMS

10.MAXBCHNG ROOMS

11 SILO EXPANDS

12

Figure 3-11. Growth and Change Cycle of Plug-in University Node 1965 by Peter Cook. Note. From Archigram (p. 42 - 43), by P.

Cook, Archigram (Group) (Eds.), 1999, New York: Princeton Architectural Press.

inflatable assembly become yet another component system. The entire growth and change

cycle of Plug-in University Node is a higher order system which has the potential to grow into
and combine with other Plug-in systems. All of these systems would therefore establish a network to work together resulting in endless possibilities due to the adaptability and growth aspects that are inherent in the original concept. The key projects that were designed by the group were focused on modularity and the use of components within various other systems.
The systems developed by them were very hierarchal and displayed an ease of construction.

When looking at them today, in light of this research, we can see certain aspects of projects such as the Plug in City becoming established. Their approach although based on the idea of
expendability, which doesn't fit with our view of architecture and the environment, is still a very

good example of how there exists layers to an approach. These layers can manifest in different
forms and change over time. If a valid and well planned out system is established, whatever the necessary changes are can then occur within the layers of the system but can do so in an

efficient and still valid manner. In the following examples the systems that Archigram established with its design methods were composed of characteristics that allowed for inevitable change. The Plug in City mentioned earlier was derived from the concept of the Living City where the premise was to have a city that focused on its total environment. Social aspects, crowds, movement, communication, sense of place, and particular immediate environmental changes were all looked at in depth. That led to the Plug in City which became an architectural solution for the concept.

31

The Capsule was a project that was designed
to work on a similar level as the Plug in City

(see Figure 3-12). "The statement was a
capsule dwelling, with the ergonomy and the

sophistication of a space capsule. The parts would be tailored and able to be updated as

technology moved forward, &nd the dweller changed his needs" (Archigram, 1999, p.44).

The concept was one that allowed a crane
to move the large elements of the tower and small elements could be moved within. The

Capsules were clipped into place along the
structural core of the tower. This became

part of the Plug in City because it was easily
integrated as a result of having the same methodology behind it. Similarly the project

.

(p. 45), by P. Cook, Archigram (Group) (Eds.), 1999, New York:
Princeton Architectural Press.

Figure 3-12. The Capsule, Tower & dwelling. From Archigram

version of Pods *hat hooked up to a system
wjth services (see Figure 3-13). Unlike the

known as the Gasket homes were yet another . , . .. ±. . .

Capsule the Gasket homes display even more flexibility through their flexible service core while
inside the home it "uses a series of plastic strip profiles of different patterns that can be built up into an almost infinite series of enclosures" (Archigram, 1999,^6). On another level there
was the Blow-out Village which was a disaster relief project that was also a good example

of flexibility in a self contained system. Ijt would work based on a series of rearrange-able
components and hydraulic masts. P"

Archigram used a design system that expressed adaptability, flexibility, and mobility through their highly developed architectural drawings and were able to do so as a result of establishing
an overall hierarchal system with the following principles:

1. A Societal goal (Social and Physical flexibility)

2. Higher order System (system framework) of the Plug-in-City

3. Designed Plug-in components based on expendability

32

Figure 3-13. Gasket Homes. From Archigram (p. 47); by P. Cook, Archigram (Group) (Eds.), 1999, New York: Princeton
Architectural Press.

3.1.3.4 Resulting Cybernetic Concepts
From Fuller to Price to Archigram we can clearly see that there is a special importance in the

thought process involved within all of their designs. The methodology used is highlighted by the
systematic approach toward each and every design. Resulting from this kind of approach are projects that begin to build upon one another. The Idea of Plug in components is an indicator of a system working together in order to maintain variables that allow for change. It becomes a balance of trying to accurately predict change and having an established system of maximum

flexibility makes the process easier. A cybernetic systems approach allows for growth within
a system because it references the systems' limits to produce complete flexibility within these

limits to provide everlasting adaptability. In An Introduction To Cybernetics, Ross Ashby stated:

"Cybernetics typically treats any given, particular, machine by asking not "what individual act
will it produce here and now?" but "what are all the possible behaviours that it can produce?" (Ashby, 1963, p.3). This speaks to the importance of looking beyond the conventional means

and fully investigating all the possible limitations of any system be it architecture, a mechanical
object or a human being.

Information linking cybernetics and a systems approach to architecture has more recently
revolved around robotic-like processes and its software rather than with the actual construction technique of these flashy robotic architectural forms. As seen in Architectural Principles in an

Age of Cybernetics (Hight, 2008) history demonstrates that change is expected. Hight describes
how Le Corbusier took the principle of the Vitruvian figure to create his Modular Man. He later crossed it with the Golden Section to develop his Modular system of measurement (2008). By

33

creating a new unit of measurement, Le Corbusier was looking into the cybernetic qualities that
were contained within the two systems of proportion. By examining human based systems such

as Le Corbusier's, we can analyse their cybernetic qualities that inform various approaches to
complex systems that could be applied in architecture.

3.1.4

The Human Body, Olympic Sports, and Systems in Architecture

The human body has played an important role throughout our Architectural, scientific, and
cultural history. Human based systems and human body factors and limitations are integrated

into what we design. This is how architecture has evolved over time. The importance of the human body and its impact on cultural development and architecture was seen in the Ancient Greek's treatment of the human body. The interconnection between the human body and
architecture was further seen in the Vitruvian Man, and the discovery during the Renaissance
that geometry, man and nature were interconnected.

In 1956, the Human Factors Society was established in the United States. At about the same time the study of Cybernetics was becoming a leading edge science. Human Factors Sociefy,
like the study of Cybernetics, was derived from other disciplines both of which included
physiology and psychology. Tilley & Dreyfuss in The Measure of Man and Woman state:

The term Human Factors ...covers most factors affecting human performance of tasks using tools or in man-made environments...we have broadened the human-factors view to include
cognition - the users' thought processes - in the design equation. Products have become operationally more complex, and a product's physical form often envelopes numerous hidden possibilities that await the user's beck and call. As with the microprocessor and the computer,
a product's behaviour may vary depending on the user's input and the if-then conditions
programmed into the product. Through the application of cognitive ergonomics to design,
products can become easier to use (p.9).

We can appreciate the advances that studies into human factors (also known as Human Engineering or ergonomics) have made. Their most visible role in society has been in the
industrial design of products and services to make life more comfortable, easier and safer.

We see this in the height of door knobs and maximum stair riser heights as well in adjustable
chairs and computer screens. In construction we see it in the manageability of a sheet of

34

drywall, a standardized window size or the weight of a roll of carpet. Similarly, we see it in
athletes' equipment that is becoming more advanced to increase their potential to succeed.

This equipment ranges from low friction swimwear, to carbon fibre hockey sticks and to training aids. The goal is to become as efficient as possible, an idea which is emphasized in architecture but rarely achieved. An understanding of the body is required for the best design of these tools so that athletes can fully utilize them. Typically, these tools are developed for the average percentile population in order to satisfy the common denominator. However, the most successful products are those that have the inherent flexibility to allow for adjustment to accommodate those outside the average percentile.

Tilley & Dreyfuss explain that man's tools are an extension of his hands. We see this in pre historic thumb tools developed for scraping animal skins or the later development of the bow
and arrow to extend man's limits even farther. The military has traditionally been a driving force for technological advancements and the relation of man and machine. We have developed such

Human Engineered devices to become more efficient for the work that must be accomplished (1993). The level of efficiency gained with the development of tools reflects the importance of incorporating humanistic behaviours into aspects of architecture, design and building. The
incorporation of humanistic aspects can lead to additional efficiencies in our building processes
by applying the "feedback loops" seen in cybernetics further leading to an easier and safer process in both construction and design.

Safety and efficiency are key elements which modern society is constantly striving to achieve.
"A biological design approach can provide solutions to problems by translating a natural, organic design or system into a man-made system or object, so that it operates analogous to

nature" (Papanek, 1983, p.7). PERI, an international company that provides and manufactures formwork and scaffolding systems, is an example of a company looking at and considering human factors in order to develop their various scaffolding systems. The use of aluminum for its components results in a lightweight and manageable system designed to assemble in an efficient and safe manner. Each system is developed to allow for ease of use and quick installation on the construction site. The systems require only a minimal number of tools, such
as a hammer to set anchoring pins and contain a limited number of components. Systematic

assembly sequences with component elements that are designed to hook into each other and swivel into place allow for increased flexibility. The ability of a system that works with minimal

35

tools, components, and assembly sequences have allowed PERI to take over the scaffolding

industry and begin to diversify into other areas, such as providing temporary public use systems

for grandstands and stairways (see Figure 3-14). Flexibility in architecture is being sought after
and this has allowed PERI to capture a large market share in the scaffolding industry.

The PERI formwork, scaffolding, climbing and working platform systems as well as others have

been used in several worldwide examples from Santiago Calatrava's Auditorium in Santa Cruz,
Tenerife, Spain (see Figure 3-15), and snowboard ramps in Turin, Italy (see Figure 3-16) to
restoration on the Church of Notre Dame du Lac in Le Thor,

Vaucluse, France (see Figure 3-17). The versatility of these
modular systems of components is evident when applied

to the previously mentioned projects. Realizing that these
systems are strong, durable and efficient temporary systems

makes us question their temporary status asking why they are not used as more permanent flexible systems. Is it scale

issues, workable spans, aesthetics, or are they just not able to perform for a buildings lifecycle? Possibly the truth lies in all three as a result of being designed specifically to deal with certain loading and manoeuvrability of units. This
Figure 3-14. PERI stairs and grandstands.
From Successful construction with PERI:

being said, it opens up the possibility for interpretation of the
system and how the individual components clip in and fasten

Handbook 2005 Scaffolding (p. 111) by
PERI, 2005 [Brochure].

to each other which is very reminiscent of Archigram's Plug

in components. The PERI systems are typically exposed and therefore not used in an architecturally pleasing manner.
However if there were an alternate additive system which
adds an aesthetic aspect to an already existing PERI system, the future could potentially see the creation of aesthetically acceptable architectural solutions.

Papanek in Design For The Real World: Human Ecology
Figure 3-15. Auditorium by Santiago

And Social Change states that people respond to nature as
a result of our fascination with pattern and that we constantly
try to understand it by seeking order within it. Unconsciously

Calatrava. From Successful construction
with PERI: Handbook 2005 Scaffolding (p.

77) by PERI, 2005 [Brochure].

36

or subconsciously we react positively to underlying biological systems because we find simplicity and elegance in nature (Papanek, 1997). The beauty found in these natural occurrences, described further in section 1.06 of this paper, can be explained by the Fibonacci sequence which was developed during the Renaissance when an emphasis on

exploration of the relationship of man and nature took place.
Papanek states that, human beings have basic needs: food,
shelter, clothing, clean air and pure water. He says that over

the years we have poisoned our air and polluted our water;

for complex reasons. He blames this on the design industry (of which he is part) for not focusing on what is important
but rather to create aesthetics. Allowing aesthetics to be derived by the nature of the function of the object in question should determine its design and be what is practised (Papanek, 1997). He preaches design simplification to create what is actually required to survive as we designers share the responsibility for stewardship of the environment. It is assumed that most architects and designers share Papanek's view. The task will not be easily accomplished.
Figure 3-16. Snowboard Ramp. From Successful construction with PERI: Handbook 2005 Scaffolding (p. 77) by
PERI, 2005 [Brochure].

The Triad of Limitations (see Figure 3-18) is explained
by Papanek to be the limitations that man must conquer in order to realize his full potentiality. He states that man has traditionally been able to conquer two of the sides

of the Triad but has never conquered his limitations of
mortality, but even that seems to be coming our way with

the investigations into cloning and the human genome. These small victories become progress to each individual group and the Triad of Limitations can become a filter establishing a design's social value. Papanek cites U.S. car manufacturers lying to Congress about their failure to
achieve basic safety laws within reasonable costs. Instead
Figure 3-17. Church of Notre Dame. From Successful construction with PERI: Handbook 2005 Scaffolding (p. 35) by PERI, 2005 [Brochure].

37

BIOLOGICAL
LIMITATIONS

LIMITATIONS OF
HABITAT

LIMITATIONS OF MORTALITY
Figure 3-18. Triad of Limitations. From Design for the real world: Human ecology and social change (Ed. 2) (p. 73) from V.
Papenek, 1997, London: Thames and Hudson.

they hire lobbyists to fight their company's cause. But, Europeans and the Japanese invest in research to develop safe and efficient cars (Papanek, 1997). The Japanese principles in car manufacturing are to eliminate the root of the problem so more effort (i.e. time and money) is spent up front to design systems which will eliminate recurring issues (including safety issues).

The outcome of this is an overall acceptance by society for their products and increased profits
through increased sales and lower costs (efficiency). The approach is more holistic, which
is what the architecture industry is now searching for Our industry has complicated all dur
processes to maximize profit, without realizing the unintended consequences. We are no longer

master builders but rather co-ordinators of architecture but do not co-ordinate ourselves to truly

maximize efficiency. Early co-ordination and collaboration, as mentioned previously with the Fun Palace is proving to be the best way to successfully complete a building. With the increasing need to take social responsibility for stewardship we have no choice but to embrace this piece
of the architectural puzzle.

3.1.5

Integrated Design Process (IDP)

It is seen through Cedric Price's Fun Palace and can be seen with the Richmond Olympic Oval case study in section 4.2 that it takes a collaborative effort to capitalize on the expertise
necessary to accomplish these complex architectural projects. Integrated Design Process

(IDP) is seen to be an effective strategy for the design of large intensive building projects by
keeping overall costs down, by creating successful and more efficient projects (Reed & Gordon, 2000). As communication and coordination become increasingly more important along with the implementation of a more Integrated Design Process (IDP), the traditional firm will not survive

without making changes. Unsteadiness in the environment creates the need to be flexible to

38

cope with constantly changing conditions which is crucial for a successful business. The IDP
process looks at establishing a systematic complete method by using most of the existing

elements of our current design and construction practice. The process calls for a more active role taken by the client while the architect becomes more of a coordinator and team leader and the electrical, mechanical and structural engineers are brought in during early design

(Larsson, 2004). The change toward the idea of stewardship of resources is critical practice for
architecture in order for it to embrace changes exerted by today's society.

With increasing pressure placed on environmental issues such as increasing greenhouse

emissions, climate change, and depleted resources, pressure is being put on government to respond to these changes. Government is beginning to realize the architects' importance and
the role one plays in anticipating change over time primarily with how cities grow and develop. This has resulted in a shift in the way we think of the role of the architect. The broad knowledge and awareness that an architect brings to a project is one that allows them to create a system in which a project can develop in a holistic and sustainable manner. It gives the opportunity to
create not only a building system but a management system put into place early in the process

in order to proceed collaboratively and successfully (Reed & Gordon, 2000).

The use of an integrated design process will add to the efficiency of buildings in addition to
adding to the current knowledge base which will result in providing viable matrices for future

constructors, architects, owners, and developers (Reed & Gordon, 2000). With the addition of certain Building Information Modeling (BIM) software the industry today is beginning to shift into
a more collaborative environment. This will help foster an IDP guided building industry allowing

for a better informed team of professionals with the overall same goal of User Fit, User Safety

and Stewardship of Resources. With the globalization of businesses the future will call for
collaboration between firms in order to cultivate successful business ventures. The technology inherent in Building Information Modeling (BIM) will begin to play a very large role in allowing for this to develop. BIM technology allows us to create a three dimensional building model in a virtual environment the way it would be built in reality. It works on the basis of a set of rules and dependencies that allow an individual 3D model to adjust according to relationships established between certain objects. This begins to read as a very intelligent model that has the ability to be used as a communication tool as well as one that generates many of the tedious office tasks

such as window and door schedules on its own. Using BIM technology also means constant

39

interaction with other team members while working with the same model which translates into a high level of collaboration and more importantly quality output. Many more of the advantages of
BIM are listed below (Lesniewski, Krygiel, & Berkebile, 2006):
· higher productivity

· reduction of conflicts between disciplines
· reduction of schedule time for construction

· reduction of costs associated with complexity · reduction of information/ intent lost in translation · reduction of material waste
· reduction of errors and omissions · increase of precision

· increase of communication and integration

By using a technology like BIM that encompasses a common system language and promotes
such things as communication between AEC firms; it will allow a company to more readily share

information in real-time with clients and consultants. This will be imperative in establishing an IDP process, and for a company looking towards becoming completely sustainable in its
practice, highly efficient and ahead of the curve within new emerging economies. We can begin
to see that the IDP process fosters the improvement of environmental performance in addition

to other facets of the AEC industry. In The Integrated Design Approach, Larson states that

"Experience shows that the open inter-disciplinary discussion and synergistic approach will often lead to improvements in the functional program, in the selection of structural systems and
in architectural expression." (p.2, 2004).

The IDP process is systematic; it has been founded on dealing with issues and changes at the beginning of any design process. To confirm the established observation that IDP works is the
complex and troublesome nature of the current process for dealing with issues of a project as

they later unfold. The reality of a defined plan for the entire design process gives credibility and form to the process, and allows for easier implementation (Larsson, 2004). It has never made
more sense than in today's times of sensitive environmental need.

3.1.6

Olympic Conditions in Canada

Canada makes the Olympic Games a priority like most other countries do every two years. The
only issue is that it is not a priority anytime between. The lack of sports funding in Canada has

been an issue for many years. Canada is well known for its minimal athletics funding (Odland,
2008). Lack of funding for sports and athletes is an issue at several levels. It exists not only at

40

the Olympic level but at the grassroots level as well and creates significant problems. Calgary

and Vancouver, will now, have g legacy of training facilities for Canadian athletes; that have
resulted from hosting the Games. Approximately 40 percent of Canada's population resides in

the province of Ontario which lacks Olympic training facilities. Canada's slow start in the medal count for the 2008 Olympics raised questions about the Canadian system. This was associated with the lack of accessible facilities for Olympic athletes and the fact that many had to work full
time to support themselves and had little time for training.

The majority of athletes begin training with Olympic hopes at a very young age; which means,

without facilities relatively accessible it is less likely that an athlete will excel in his or her sport.
We are potentially losing several gold medalists every year. Recently the "Own the Podium"

program was initiated; it is a five year plan that will distribute $130 million to athletic funding at
the level of the sports Federations. This gives Canada hope, but does not guarantee funding for provinces to build sports infrastructure. Therefore the need exists to create Olympic capable

facilities for mirtmal costs. In Developing Sports Convention and Performing Arts Centers (Peterson, 2001) states that the public sector has taken more responsibility for ownership and
development of large sports facilities which were traditionally privately owned. With public ownership there has been an increase in multifunctional stadia/arenas. Cities need to create revenue. Multi-functional buildings create more opportunities for both revenue generation and overall use therefore making them a more viable investment.

Sports buildings are related to culture. "Culture is a large economic, social and political force nationally and internationally;" this statement was presented from a study created by Michael Bloom from the Conference Board of Canada. Bloom adds "Countries around the world, as well as many cities and regions, recognize that a dynamic cultural sector plays a key role as a magnet for talent, enhances economic output, and acts as a catalyst for prosperity," (Babiak, 2008). It was recognized in Ancient Greece that sport was a key part of their culture and even part of their religion. Sports are a part of our culture and contribute to our prosperity through health and well being which has numerous positive effects.

With careful planning Olympic facilities could be built for a multitude of sports training purposes. This raises the question of how to build facilities that are multi-functional and cheaper to build
than conventional sports infrastructure. The answer is partially in the cybernetics and systems

41

design approach of the Fun Palace. This thesis seeks to find more answers. There are multi

functional buildings that include some of these necessary qualities. The use of cybernetics and
systems theory will help in designing multi-functional buildings with greater flexibility, longer

useful live spans and lower construction costs. Such a concept makes sense as Canada strives
toward excelling on the world's Olympic stage. Such a system would require very careful

planning to incorporate the strategies discussed to achieve flexibility, adaptability, functionality,
and modality.

3.1.7

Olympic examples of Stewardship

As previously discussed there have been several attempts by cities to achieve a level of
stewardship in the Olympics. But the degree of success has varied. Cities truly committed to

a level of stewardship have been blinded by the marketing of the word sustainability. Though

they have incorporated many of the LEED requirements for sustainability they have failed to
deal with the major issue of legacy. Canon Design and the City of Richmond-took a different
approach from previous attempts. They looked beyond the Olympic Games and approached the project in a holistic way considering various program variables and planning with legacy in mind

(see Case Study 4.2.1). The host stadium for London 2012 has an innovative design with a two
stage construction process. Firstly, it is designed for Post Olympic use like the Richmond Oval

and secondly for the Summer Games event. Although, London has experienced some problems

in acquiring future ownership for the stadium, but have a system in place fi> drastically minimize
costs. The building makes for an allowance to reduce the seating from 80,000 to 25, 000.

Kieran and Timberlake believe that society has developed to a point that we now have the tools to be efficient in every aspect of architecture. However an issue not fully resolved is the process
that creates Olympic buildings that become inactive for long periods of time. By synthesizing

the systems design information that has been gathered by some of the most revered architects

of the 20th century we can now create future guidelines. There is a real need for these systems
to be developed. Peterson explains in his Developing Sports Convention and Performing Arts

Centers, how the public sector has taken greater responsibility for ownership and development
of large sports facilities which were traditionally privately owned. With public ownership there has been an increase in multifunctional stadia/arenas (2001). There currently are multi

functional buildings but cybernetics will help to design the ultimate multi-functional building with
the greatest flexibility and longest lifespan to justify their high construction cost.

42

4 Research Summaries
4.1
4.1.1

Theoretical Hypotheses
The Role of Sports Cybernetics

This thesis has shown the previous connections made between cybernetics and architecture in addition to presenting information about the Olympics and its origins. Together they form a common thread for which this writer coined the term Sports Cybernetics. That is, the common

human factors found in cybernetics, architecture and the Olympic Games. The term is made
apparent when analyzing the relationship between cybernetics and systems theory with

architecture and Olympic sport. Cybernetics and systems theory are both based on human
biology; cybernetics further studies the feedback, communication and control systems in living organisms. They both share a human element with Architecture which has its origins in the proportions and direct interaction of the human body. Also, the thread is apparent in Olympic sport ever since Ancient Greece began its quest to improve humanity by testing its limitations.

Human desire to examine its limits and seek efficiency is displayed most successfully through sport. Similarly, cybernetics also uses systems theory to seek optimal efficiency using minimal
resources to create maximum effect. These qualities are increasingly desired in architecture to develop stewardship towards the environment.

Sports Cybernetics:
Cybernetics/
Systems Theory

4-

Architecture

+

Olympic Games

Human Factors [- .........J

Figure 4-1. The common thread of Sports Cybernetics

The majority of the cybernetics information considered for this thesis dates from 1940's to the 1970's. As a relatively new field, cybernetics made its way to the forefront of advanced technology in a short time. Applications of it vary from biology to psychology, anthropology, physiology, mathematics, computer systems, business management, architecture and others.

Architecture found its relation to cybernetics and systems theory fairly early and peaked as
a study in the 1960's and 1970's with Cedric Price and Gordon Pask. During that time, the

43

Archigram magazine was able to prolong the visions of a systematic architecture of flexibility and adaptability by tantalizing architects with images of unlimited technological possibilities. As architectural cybernetics progressed over the last fifty years, studies have become quite varied and are more associated to computer applications of architecture. Considering information

from the beginning of cybernetic application to architecture has enabled a fresh look at the raw
aspects of the study and, more importantly, its effects on the AEC industry.

Contemporary architects like Richard Rogers and Renzo Piano were able to push the limits of a
building with the Centre Pompidou by introducing flexible systems and technological advances. Similarly, Moshe Safdie's Habitat 67's, reinforced concrete building modules while Kieran and Timberlake's manufacturing methodologies begin to encompass ideas of modularity and mass
production (Kieran, 2004). The influential projects of the past attempted to overhaul the methods and attitudes of architecture during that time. Although initially^criticized for their attempts of

drastically changing architecture, it is recognized and supported through systems theory that the change was pivotal. Today we are able to see that these critical thinkers were correct in their
suggestions and many of our environmental problems could have been avoided if these ideas
were adopted many years ago. Today we find crucial need to implement many of them.

The Olympics are one of the world's largest recurring events; the popularity of the Games shows the need for it to continue as a world cultural event. The infrastructure built for the

Games has traditionally been specific for the one time use. A legacy of under-used massive infrastructure and resources that may have been better served elsewhere is then left for the host city to manage. Only recently has there been a move by the IOC towards environmental
stewardship. As a result we have seen several attempts in the past 12 years by cities to host a sustainable Olympics. Only now are we beginning to see more sustainable thinking by the

designers associated with the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver, Canada, and the 2012

Summer Olympics in London, England. The methodology used for the design of the main stadia for both these Games enables better future use of these facilities. By analyzing successful

examples in addition to other methods such as the Japanese modular systems or PERI
scaffolding systems we are able to develop deeper understanding towards architecture. This knowledge adds to the idea of stewardship, adaptability, flexibility, modality in addition to multifunctionality.

44

liiherent in architecture are aspects of the human body, moreover, sports are known to test
and extend the limitations of the human body. Systems theory studies the natural aspects of complex systems discovered in biology and is synonymous with cybernetics. Cybernetics on its own has been a test of the biological nature of the human body which investigates man's natural systems and their limitations. Systems theory and cybernetics allows us to create the necessary bridge connecting the natural human systems intrinsic in both architecture and sports, to help

create the concept of Sports Cybernetics (see Figure 4-1).

4.1.2

An Architectural Systems Approach

The importance of a systematic approach to architecture must be made. This approach should involve a system that is inspected in detail upon the analysis of all the facets of the particular system. As stated earlier in section 3.02 of this research, it is difficult to understand the extent
to which we have to break down a system into component sub-systems. Furthermore, to

what extent we organize the higher order systems in which they are contained. A need to

have different orders of systems is crucial in the comprehension of Sports Cybernetics. R.
Buckminster Fuller emphasized the importance of starting the analysis at the highest level possible and developing a system in a hierarchal manner. As Fuller explained, it is necessary

to start at the universe and work inward (Marks, 1960). Moreover, systems theory indicates
that each level of a hierarchal system cannot be governed by the rules of the level below it. It is
supported with the downward causation principle, stated in section 3.02, which indicates that the

system level above dictates the rules for the level below.

Sports Cybernetics will be a system within a higher order universal system (see Figure 4-2) that

contains a three-level system of its own. Sports Cybernetics is divided into the following three
Levels:

1.

Overall organisation of the major systems (ex. site, access, program organization)

-based on design requirements for specific events. 2. A Building system - determined by program - flexible specific needs (ex. floor, roof,

and wall systems that are able to be adjusted) 3. A Building components system, where the previous building systems of level 2

are broken down further to encompass human factors (components are able to be manually manipulated)

45

AEC Industry (Universal System)
Design Req's
Programs

· Stewardship of Resources
Sports Cybernetics

· User Safety

· User Fit

& Specified Requirements

Develop the major system of organization (site, access & program) Based
on Design Requirements.

2. Define a Building system (determined by program) flexible to specific
needs (floor, roof, wall systems)

Building
Flexible

3. Create a Building Components System. Above building systems are

Adaptable
Low embodied
energy

broken down further incorporating human factos and ideas of
modularity & pre-fabrication

Feed Back Loop

c

Learn

Rework

>--c

Program Changes

Figure 4-2. This proposed methodology with sports cybernetics outlines the entire system showing need for establishing design requirements and creating a program to then begin the Sports Cybernetics three level system. This culminates in a cyclical
system containing a learning feed-back loop.

By creating a three-level system that gets broken down to a system of components we may
consider the factors involved within the higher order systems while remaining flexible.

For this systems approach in architecture to take place it will require the need for further
research and the attainment of the necessary design requirements. The information shall
contain all necessary characteristics for each of the spaces indicated by the governing

institution establishing these outlines. This information shall be the body of knowledge used to

inform the following levels of the system above. Additionally, this knowledge base creates the
opportunity to synthesize characteristics of different spaces allowing for architectural decisions based on the evidence gathered. This allows us to work through level one and two. It also

informs level three, but inherent in this level is the human factor. By incorporating human factors
we begin to look at ideas of modularity and the ability to manually manipulate architectural
systems that are in place. We can then achieve flexibility through level three resulting from

developing it based on human factors and limits. This sets the stage for a construction that speeds up the building process, enhances safety, and decreases cost; while being very flexible

in constructing, renovating or dismantling and reusing elsewhere. A structure built using this
system should become flexible, adaptable and have low embodied energy as a result. In addition, any necessary future changes that may take place will be able to work through a

feed-back loop. This creates the ability to direct changes back through either level 1, 2, or 3 of Sports Cybernetics, creating a learning platform for the AEC industry based on stewardship of
resources, user safety, and user fit.

46

4.2
4.2.1

Case Studies
Vancouver 2010 Olympic Games, Richmond Olympic Oval

Historically, Olympic host cities face problems in that legacy buildings remain seldom used and never regain their full potential after the event for which they were designed. The Richmond Oval demonstrates a responsible approach to the sensitive issue of designing Olympic Legacy

buildings. Located along the Fraser River, the $178-million building will act as a multi-purpose
facility that integrates sports, recreation, culture, and business year around. It is intended to become the heart of a mixed-use neighbourhood.

The 33,700 square-foot, Olympic Oval opened in December of 2008. During a lecture by Greg

Scott, the Oval's facilities manager, he spoke about the key issues dealt with during the planning

Figure 4-3. Richmond Olympic Oval - December 2008. Photo by author

and construction of the Oval and those receiving special focus. A mutual understanding, business terms of agreement, culture, programs, challenges and opportunities were the issues

spoken about. Most importantly, the plan for post-Olympic use was made clear throughout the
presentation. Post-Olympic use of the Oval was made a priority from the start of the project. Typically, most Olympic stadia have focused primarily on the two week long event, and then

found it difficult to incorporate program to pay for the operation and maintenance of the stadia.
By using an Integrated Design Process (IDP) to deal with these key issues initially guaranteed

the Oval a successful future. Canon Design Inc worked with the local community groups and
organizations to ensure that the building would cater to everyone's needs. A three tier business

plan was used where the three stages were Pre-Olympics, Olympics and Post-Olympics. The Authorities involved were: the parties paying for the building, the IOC, and the City of Richmond who is the heir to the building. This Olympic Oval is meant to be an iconic building where

47

sustainability and wellness were major aspects that the designing group and community wanted
to display and then inherit." Greg Scott.

In his presentation at the IIDEX 2008, Greg Scott stated that the success of the oval was primarily attributed to organization. The ability to develop a successful system involved getting a
project team together right at the start, essentially beginning with the I DP process. This allowed

the professionals to begin discussing and working together earlier. It provided the opportunity

for close collaboration in such details as reusing waste heat produced in the ice factory to help
heat other spaces and containing the air ducts within the gluelam beams of the structure. It also
meant collaborating with the local First Nations groups and integrating local art and culture into

the facility. Moreover, Richmond contains the largest Asian population in Greater Vancouver and
so the post-Olympic sports incorporated into the facility were catered to the majority.

When visiting the Richmond Oval, site supervisor Greg Kensick described several of the
processes and decisions that took place during design and construction of the project.

In analysing the methods used for the completion of the project they can be said to have cybernetic or systems approach qualities. The Richmond Olympic Oval was analyzed according to the hypothesis and three level system for Sports Cybernetics established in section 4.1.2. It showed a similar approach as that discussed in the previous section. The system established by the Canon Design designers is broken into a three level system that is described below:

I.They established the building typology based on the Olympic requirements and

addressed post Olympic use early in the process. It was also determined by the types of sports
and permanent facilities required for Post-Games success. They

considered the decisions discussed with the local community. With]
the information gathered, they set their stewardship goals which became their designing principles. In summary, they determined the building typology and their highest order laws of stewardship.

They then considered all issues inherent in the Olympic typology,
which set the stage for level 2.

2.Designers determined the playing surfaces that were
necessary for the multi-functioning venue. With this information
.. . ... .r. Figure 4-4. Triangular Gluelam at Wall.

they established the specific building systems necessary to allow

Photo by author

48

for the functioning of the intended sports. The permanent floor system was determined by the

speed skating function but remains flexible with the incorporation of a system of valves. These
valves allow to control the areas of the slab that are cooled which then allow for dividing the

ice surface into two hockey rinks without energy waste. Furthermore, a system of removable
seating was used so that the Post-Olympic uses are able to maximize the floor area. The roof

system takes advantage of long spans that allow for column free space making for a flexible
interior during the building's lifetime.

3.Analyzing the building components system is defined by the systems used for the roof,

floor, wall, seating and other miscellaneous items.

Roof- Starting with the main feature of the Oval, the gluelam beams (see Figure 4-4)
came from 500 km away in Penticton BC. These were made in 4 sections. The sections of
gluelam were designed smaller than necessary in order to ease transportation (on the back of

a flat bed transport truck), construction and fit in a steel fabrication shop. Rather than delivering
these beams to the site, they were taken to the steel fabrication shop. There they were able to coordinate and apply the triangular duct work placed within the V-shaped Gluelam beams (see Figure 4-4 & 4-5). The resulting four sections were then moved to the site and assembled in
place easily during the construction process. The other elements described as the wood-wave panels that span between each beam were also very systematic in design. These were made

in three sections and from dimensional lumber of the compromised pine beetle wood from the forests in British Columbia. This allowed for easier integration with the acoustics, sprinkler, and lighting systems that are hidden within the wood-wave panels (see Figure 4-6). The three

Figure 4-5. Richmond Oval - Gluelam Beam Roof Structure.
Photo by author

Figure 4-6. Wood-wave panels. Photo by author

49

sections of wood-wave panels were then assembled on site on the ground and hoisted into
place, spanning each consecutive gluelam beam as they were installed.

Floor -As mentioned earlier, the floor system is determined by the speed skating

function but remains flexible by incorporating a system of valves. The floor of the space is finished concrete and is completely flush in order to maintain flexible and able reorganization (see Figure 4-7, 4-8 & 4-9) for division of the floor program. The speed skating oval is placed on
the second level as a result of a high water table enabling the organizers to maintain the strict

skating surface regulations of the Olympics. In addition, they were able to place controllable
valves on the underside of the slab to regulate the cooling of the floor for making ice. The piping was distributed in three different sections of the floor to allow for turning off the main section of

the oval and maintaining control of the Olympic hockey rink ice following the Olympics. A thick 40mm nylon rope was used for the inside and outside perimeters of the oval which was then
simply sprayed with water in layers allowing for the water to freeze. The centre of the oval is wood gym flooring permitting multi-sport use. For the Olympic ice rinks a board system that is

intended to run on a track for easy installation and removal was indicated by the site supervisor although there was no visible evidence of the track system. It is intended for the combination of the two rinks for larger community ice events. The remaining floor functions will be simply
applied onto the finished concrete.

Street Level

Parking

(including indoor bicycle parking)

Sport Sciences / Research & Testing for Athletes and Community Fitness Testing

Performance Enhancement
Research & Testing

Sport Medicine / Rehab Services for

General Public and Athletes

1

1 High Performance |
Support Services

:-\f

!f!f"'-!
Multi-Purpose Space for Community
programs

Physiotherapy

Chiropractors
Injury Rehabilitation Therapy

||

Cardiovascular Assessments

I Childminding

fl

[| Mam Entrance & Lobby |

Figure 4-7. Richmond Olympic Oval, Street Level

50

Activity Level

Gymnasium Zone - 8 Gyms with Walking Track Proposed activities include: Badminton
Ice Zone - 2 Olympic Ice Rinks

(Moveable Seating)
Multi-configuration ice options have

Volleyball ·Table Tennis

the ability to host a full range of icerelated activities

·Wheelchair Sports
Synthetic Surface Indoor 200m Track with Infield Proposed activities ·Athletics ·Indoor Soccer ·Field Hockey ·60 Metre Sprint Track ·Gymnastics

·Events

I

I

I

I I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

Program Space to support Events/ Teaching Kitchen
- Catering, Nutrition, etc

Fitness & Wellness Studio  Yoga Pilates - Group Rehab Classes - Etc.

Figure 4-8. Richmond Olympic Oval, Activity Level.

Mezzanine Level

18,500 square foot Fitness Centre with three activity zones, virtual personal training
kiosks.and knowledgeable staff on hand to help you achieve your wellness goals. 3 Activity Zones: · General Population Fitness
·Youth Zone

·Seniors Zone & Rehab Zone

Figure 4-9. Richmond Olympic Oval, Mezzanine Level

51

Wall - The wall system that was utilized for the building, aside from areas of glazing, was a combination of corrugated aluminum panels and poly-carbonate cladding. These were meant

for fast and easy installation and they are lighter materials and are less intensive a process to install. The poly-carbonate cladding provides a high insulating value as a result of being a panel

of corrugated plastic sandwiching a sealed airspace. Modular, easily handled sizes were used.

Seats - Within the Olympic oval there will be approximately 5000 seats for viewing the event. This is in the form of a collapsible bleacher system (see Figure 4-10). It will allow for the maximum use of the floor area after the Olympic event is over by simply removing
these bleachers and reusing them for other community events

^iwJl mTTfl
T" I

I

elsewhere; some maybe retained for use with the ice rinks.
Miscellaneous -The mechanical louvers placed within the gluelam beams regulate the different heating and cooling zones of the open space; they are all controlled automatically. Indoor
soccer nets and basketball hoops used are of the collapsible
type (see Figure 4-11).

Figure 4-10 Flexible Bleacher System.
Photo by author

With tne Olympic Oval's ability to contain a multitude of activities
for Post-Olympic use it should become the most successful legacy building built for either the Summer or Winter Olympics. Although many of these spaces are most likely going to remain in place for the life of the building, the potential exists for the
space to be transformed back to the original long track speed skating oval. The fact that it encompasses ten different sports

in addition to other functions makes it a sustainable building.

Within the limits of the highly specified 400m speed skating Oval
requirements, the design team was able to make design choices
that will guarantee the longevity of this legacy building.

Figure 4-11 Collapsible Basketball
Hoops. Photo by author

52

4.2,2

Toronto Ontario, Rogers Centre (Skydome)

Known as the SkyDome until 2005 the Rogers Centre in Toronto Ontario, Canada was built from 1986-1989 (see Figure 4-12). The Stadium is famous worldwide for its fully retractable roof. As a premier stadium it has been home to the Toronto Blue Jays MLB Baseball Club and the Toronto

Argonauts CFL Football team. It also accommodated the Toronto Raptors NBA Basketball
Team from 1995 - 1999 during the construction of the Air Canada Centre. The versatility of the venue allows for a variety of events suited for arenas, domed stadiums and open-air facilities. Its capacity ranges from 5000 to 60 000 when used for sporting events, concerts, family shows, trade shows, motor sports, conventions, and private events. In addition, the Rogers Centre also

Figure 4-12: Rogers Centre South Waterfront. From flickr.com

holds businesses such as Premier Fitness, the Renaissance Hotel, several restaurants, bars

and a Theatre (Rogers Stadium Limited Partnership, 2009).

The architect Roderick Robbie was able to create a stadium with the ability to transform its

function to accommodate a variety of uses throughout the year. In 1997 the stadium recorded 302 event days making it one of the most used venues in the world. The design of this
stadium was an important investigation into flexibility and adaptability, as it has continuously

been successful in adapting to different functions. When analyzing the venue, it can be seen
that there are several things occurring within the structure and its components. The following

analysis of the systems approach used for the Rogers Centre is broken down only to explain its
high level building system and organization:

53

1. Roof System - The Rogers Centre's retractable roof system allows for an increased attraction for events taking place during good weather months. It allows for the traditional

ballpark open-air experience while giving the venue a dynamic presence in Toronto. The roof is
comprised of four sections, three of which are moveable (see Figure 4-13). While two sections simply retract back over the stationary northern part, the smaller southern section of the roof
uses a track to guide its rotation and tucks underneath the larger northern circular part. The

roof covers approximately 8 acres and weighs 11,000 tonnes. By designing the retractable roof
system using railway tracks a reliable proven system, the roof has been functioning successfully

since its completion. Using this system it minimized the number of movable parts within it, which
allows the roof to retract in approximately 20 minutes. This permits the stadium to allow for 91%

of the seating area and the whole field to be exposed when in the open position (Munsey &

Suppes, 2005). This emphasizes the possibility and importance in developing high technological
solutions using low tech but proven systems.

Figure 4-13: Rogers Centre, Toronto ON. Canada. Base image from Google Earth

2. Floor System - A large part of the success of the Rogers Centre is due to the

flexibility of its floor system and the speed and efficiency in which it can be reorganized. By
having this ability it is able to respond to the several changes that take place, due to the varied
events scheduled throughout the year. To accomplish this task, Rogers Centre makes use of a

synthetic playing surface for baseball, football, soccer and other sporting events. This synthetic

surface is called 'FieldTurf, it is made to look, feel and react just like natural grass (Rogers

Stadium Limited Partnership, 2009). It enables the field to be rolled up quickly, which permits the

54

99

seoeds }U9A9 J9i|p Aubuu ojin }tiepe 0} e\qe s\ wrnpejs aq; eoeds p|9!ju| em p
joj 6u!M0||B pue HBqesBg joj p9>|J0M \em 9|npow b 6u|abi| Aq jnq neqeseg sj 9sn jBnwisssp ;sow

PUB }S86JB| 8L|1 "UOJlBJnB^UOO 6U!}B9S 9WBS 8l|} 9ABl| ||jM JU9A9 J90Q0S AUB SB ||8M SB UN PUB

idO Mlocl ||Bqi.OOJ 8^1 'SJJ80UO0 SB ;U8LU86UBJJB 8LUBS 8L|J 'UOflBUBA ^q6l|S q^M 'S^dBpB OS|B 80|
UO A8USJ0 SB L|OnS }U8A8 UB JO^ U8A8 'iU8LU86UBJJB 6lM}B8S 8LUBS Bi\\ 8ABL| |||M
;so|Al sgrubijiujs 8iuos 8abi| o\ uj68q Asqi \ei\\ S8|daiBX8 xjs 8S8q^ l^m sss

8aiopA>is QMU° suoftBjnBiiuoo snouBA 8^ AB|dsjp (Qi~p 0} pi-p

"8SU8S S|l|} U|

6u!p|mq 8|qBUjBisns b \\ 6u|>iblu !jbsA b p ssjnoo em js'ao 8OB|d
8snoi| oi ajnpnjisejju! s^iods sibujs^b pnnq o; 6uiabl| ;noq;jM
i '86Bsn s^j sziluixblju o^ oinipB^s em smo||B \e\j\

p jsqujnu sqi

A^o siup spssu ei\\ Ajba b saoiooaq ;!
p|3!J. ||Bqpoi

poo6 l^m pauiquuoo -(6002 'diMSjeu^iBd pB\\\ur\
U8L|M

\ed o) sjnoui 91,
01 sjnot| 02

A|uo }\
\\ s^ugao
01 s\m smo||b

01 ;q6u puowBi.p ||Bq8SBq
sBq o; ||Bqpo| iuojj

joj -sjnoq 08 o; dn

/6UIJB9S puB joo|| aijip

'swsjsAs jofBiu OMi s;| p uouBiuqaioo

-sesn punojB

isoai s\\ u98Miaq A^omb Ajga
JOfBLLI J9L|P p AlUOfBOl

9i|} ^j9auoo 01 A;!nqB s^ s| pijom

LJUO4 9p|SB ^UUOpA^S,, 9J1U9Q SJ96o^J 9l|}

(9003 'S9ddn$ ^ A9sun|/\|) 9OB|d
9Lj;p siu9LJU9jmb9J gnbjun em jo; suo!;Bjn6|poo 1U9J9J^!P ojih

i A|isB9 oi9;sAs em

6lH>|BW SJ9||0J UO p90B|d 9JB SpilBJS J9M0| 9L|1 -90BJjnS 6u|AB|d 9l|J 0}
S|9A9| 1S9MO| em VS 9JB SpUB}SpilBj6 9S9L|1 :6U|1B9S 9|q|X9|| p
9PBLJU OS|B S| J9A0 96uBL|O
Aq 9|qiSS0d

'(9002 'S9ddns ^ AgsuniAi) }ii9A9 ;u9J9j^!p A|9i9|doioo b
jo \es J9i|puB

b jo; s;u9oi9Jjnb9J p }es 9uo ljuoj; 90Bjjns em P

WBC - World Baseball Championships
Seating arrangement in the infield changes
for each sport to be played

NFL Football (BILLS Toronto Series)

Seating arrangement for the CFL and NFL is
the same the difference occurs on the field
size where the CFL has larger end zones.

Supercross 2009 Configuration
Arrangement is similar to that of the CFL
except that there are not any seats at surface

level these are all raised.

Figure 4-14 - Rogers Centre seating configurations for multiple events throughout the year. From Rogers Centre, 2008. Retrieved
November 13, 2008, from rogerscentre.com

56

Monster Jam 2009 Configuration Seating arrangement for the Monster Jam and Supercross remain similar.

AC/DC Concert Configuration

For most concerts the seating configurations
should be very similar to this example.

Disney On Ice: A Disneyland adventure This example shows the seating arrangement
similar to the one above.

Figure 4-15 - Rogers Centre seating configurations for multiple events throughout the year. From Rogers Centre, 2008. Retrieved
November 13,2008, from rogerscentre.com

57

5 Design Project

5.1
5.1.1

Design Process
Principles and Precedence

After an in-depth review of the work of R. Buckminster Fuller, Cedric Price and Archigram, we may consider them systems approach precedence. We may take from Fuller's work the idea
of stewardship of resources; learning from his views on the impact of construction, choice

of materials and reusing and recycling. This differs from the focus of Price's work which was

heavily based on the flexibility of his designs. We must move forward his design methods that
respond to social issues, dealing with present and future trends while creating a framework to work within and using systems of modular components to achieve flexibility. Similarly, the work of Archigram was a systematic approach where ideas of physical flexibility and plug-in
component modules may be brought forward. In researching current systems of flexibility, PERI Formwork Systems Inc. provides various modular systems that are used worldwide. These

systems of formwork allow for complex designs to be achieved safely and accurately. Their success has spilled over into providing temporary public use systems for grandstands, stairways
and various temporary structures (see Figure 3-14) that are proven to be quick, sturdy, and able

to withstand the stresses of live loads. In summarizing a systematic approach to architecture,
we will carry forward 4 principles into the design phase:

1. 2. 3. 4.

Consideration of short and long term uses; Planning with future programmatic changes in mind; Identifying and understanding the needs of the particular architecture; And, developing methods that work together to create a successful system.

Figure 5-1. Telstra stadium in 2000, Austrailia. Retrieved June 16,2009, from gamesbids.com

Figure 5-2. Telstra stadium in 2004, Austrailia. Retrieved June 16, 2009, from gamesbids.com

59

In re-associating with the Olympic Games, precedence studies show an attempt to achieve a sustainable event status. The first effort of sustainability recognized by the IOC was the Sydney,

Australia Olympics in 2000. Its major objectives for the Olympics were to remediate an industrial
wasteland and create an Olympic park where venues work in partnership to create a successful long term attraction and use of these facilities. With respect to the Telstra Olympic Stadium, the
major adjustment that took place was the removal of excess seating following the Games (see
Figure's 5-1 & 5-2).

The London, England Olympics of 2012
is another example of a local organizing

committee placing a focus on sustainability. These Games focus on remediating Lee Valley which was another industrial

Figure 5-3. London 2012 Olympic Stadium, England. From HOK
Sport. Retrieved April 1,2009, from archifield.net

wasteland. The design of the main venue
for Athletics will have its seating capacity

reduced by 55,000. This is achievable because of careful planning for flexibility. The designers located food concession pods around the site rather than within the building which automatically
relieves the building of much of the utilities necessary for the extra 55,000 spectators during

the Olympics (see Figure 5-3). It creates a division between the temporary and permanent
elements; this allows it to have a clear post-Olympic reduction plan.

The designers of the Olympic Oval for the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver British Columbia showed sensitivity towards designing Olympic venues in a community setting (see Figure 5-4). An emphasis was placed on locating it within a growing community and truly considering the
post-Olympic effect early, by involving the community in the programming process. The Oval, also indicated in case study 3.2.1, was planned to have its main sports surface reprogrammed

for the Games and then back to its community configuration following the events. Its architecture
is also comprised of a set of prefabricated
and modular elements such as gluelam

arches, wood wave panels, cladding,
and the smaller elements of collapsible

basketball hoops and temporary seating.
Figure 5-4. Vancouver 2010 Olympic Oval. Photo by author

This made the construction very systematic,
and allowed the project to be completed

60

ahead of schedule (as per discussions with the site supervisor Greg Kensick on December 15,

2008)

.

r

5.1.2

Moving Forward

In linking the research presented earlier to a design project, a focus is placed on creating a system that can deal with the concern surrounding the legacy of Olympic buildings. The issue of stewardship towards resources is a matter that pertains to all communities and cultures. Using
a systems approach we can build Olympic venues that reduce embodied energy and increase

adaptability and flexibility for post-Olympic community use. In utilizing the examples set forth
by R. Buckminster Fuller, Cedric Price, Achigram and others and moving forward, it is crucial

to tackle more than simply the issues pertaining to any one particular design. As stated earlier, a great problem encountered is the large infrastructure built but never utilized to its intended capacity following the Olympic event. Consideration should be given to the aspect of creating
Olympic structures for the communities that help pay for them. Ideally the desire is to create a design that has the ability to be iconic while respecting the post-Olympic community scale in a
sustainable and efficient manner.

The decision to propose a new methodology for the building of Olympic Venues is one that looks at key issues dealt with during the Olympic bid process. This design project builds upon the idea of the City of Toronto, Ontario Canada hosting a Pan American or Summer Olympic Games event. It is developed based on the establishment of a future neighbourhood contained within

the winning bid design by Michael Van Valkenburgh Associates, Inc. (MWA) for the Lower Don
Lands hosted by Waterfront Toronto. The MWA bid is designed on the basis of being flexible & adaptable and remaining sustainable throughout its development. This begins to tie in with the approach that this thesis design project is aiming for.

Recognizing that a community has several needs, the decision to focus on the recreational
needs was made as the logical choice given the topic of this research/This design thesis attempts to show how to develop the architecture required for hosting an Olympic event or events while showing sensitivity towards the legacy for a community. This legacy shall recognize
the community's needs as well as scale. The design begins to distinguish between a permanent

Olympic legacy and a temporary Olympic event. The key terms of assembly, disassembly and
reconfiguration become important in the creation of this particular methodology and design.

61

5.1.3

Design Methodology - A Three Level Sports Cybernetics System

A categorization of Olympic sports shows a division between Water, Gymnasium & large/small
courts, and Outdoor sports (see Appendix A). During the Beijing 2008 Olympics, 15 of 37 sports were played within the Gymnasium and large/small court sports category (See Appendix B).

It becomes clear that this category is the area in which we may have the greatest influence
on stewardship of resources in the Olympics. The decision to focus on a design project was

made with this information. The following methodology deals with this category of Olympic
Infrastructure.

The methodology used during the design process was based on a systematic approach to the
construction of an Olympic venue. This system considers the macroscopic issues involved with

locating a venue in a bid city. The same system also requires analysing the microscopic details

Low Order system
itectura! Approach to buildinq

f----Figure 5-5. Three level Sports Cybernetics system

compulsory to the success of the venue itself. Recognizing these facets of the system we may introduce a process that involves a High, Middle and Low order system (see Figure 5-5).

5.1.3.1

High Order System

The High order system is established to define the most efficient building in a specific setting. It is divided into the aspects of Space, Time and Site. Space deals with exploring the microscopic
details and technical requirements of an Olympic venue specified by the IOC and its member sports federations. A detailed investigation of these needs was essential to understand the

requirements of the eleven sports considered. Each sport was surveyed for its technical and
spatial needs. A synthesis of the support space programming was necessary for all sports

62

Figure 5-6. Relationship between the Lower Don Lands and adjacent sports venue, Toronto 2007 aerial photo. From author. Base image retrieved June, 15, 2009, from google earth.

considered. By using the strictest programming requirements, we are able to develop a template drawing for each space (see Appendix C). In conducting this research it enables logic behind

the potential overlapping of sport surfaces (see Appendix D). The decision of the sports that
may be played in the venue can remain flexible during this stage of the process. The ability to keep this flexibility results from combining the strictest requirements for the support spaces of
all sports considered. The variables of Space become a data set to help predict the sports that

shall work together for optimal efficiency for a building when evaluated with Time and Site.

The aspect of Time addresses the information needed to accommodate Olympic sports in the typical two week timeframe in which the Games are generally held. In the table seen in
Appendix E, information compiled based on the 2008 Beijing Olympics synthesizes the data

collected from the scheduling of the games. The information shows the number of surfaces
necessary for any of the eleven sports in consideration. In addition, it indicates the number of

events per day per surface that is required and is color coded as preliminary, quarter-final, semi
final or final events. This information gives us the opportunity to determine the sports that may be hosted within the same building with no scheduling overlap.

When considering the aspect of Site, we begin to look at the site, its relationship to the other

potential venues and demographic needs (see Figure 5-6). The site chosen for this design

63

Figure 5-7. MWA Lower Donlands proposal, Toronto 2007. From MWA. Retrieved Aug, 20, 2009, from bricoleurbanism.org

project is a future redevelopment of the Lower Don Lands in Toronto, Ontario Canada (See

Figure 5-7). It has been indicated that the demographic targeted for the Future Lower Don

Lands community will represent a diverse neighbourhood much like the city of Toronto (Waterfront Toronto, 2008). Therefore, the decision was made to base the table seen in

Appendix F on the demographic of the district of Toronto and East York. It is found that the most
popular sports for the area are badminton, basketball and volleyball. Furthermore, the popular
community programs found are yoga, various dance classes, cardio and ball hockey.

After considering the information pertaining to the categories of Space, Time and Site we
are able to make an evidence based decision on the ideal and most efficient type of Olympic and post-Olympic venue for this particular site and demographic. The decision was made to
create a venue that would have an Olympic use of taekwondo and basketball or volleyball.

It is determined that the efficient number of seats is 8000. It should be noted that only the

64

Figure 5-8. MWA Lower Donlands proposal, Toronto 2007. From MWA. Reproduced by author

preliminaries of basketball or volleyball would be played in the venue, considering the final
games would likely be hosted in the Air Canada Center. The post-Olympic use would be for basketball, volleyball, badminton among other flexible program.

5.1.3.2

Middle Order System

The Middle order system is a consideration of the systematic approach to the site. Atypical site
analysis is required for this to take place. When looking at the future plan for the Lower Don

Lands (see Figure 5-8), the selected site is bounded by Commissioner Street to the north and
the MWA proposed naturalized Don River running along the east and south. It also contains several access roads that have been deemed as the fixed elements for the purpose of this

project. There is a visual connection to outdoor recreation fields towards the south and west

of the site. General transportation for the area would be in the form of a Light Rapid Transit (LRT) line that will have major stops at the intersections of Cherry and Commissioner Street
and at the northeast corner of the site. The Lower Don Lands will maintain a connection to the

65

Martin Goodman Trail that runs along the Toronto waterfront. This major trail is connected to the recreation site via new park trails that diverge from it, bringing people to and from the site via various paths. The major multi-use trail that runs north-south along the Don River has a
connection to the Lower Don Lands via access through the site. Additionally, it connects to the
new park trails making its way along the future estuary planned as part of the naturalized Don River and then reconnecting to the existing waterfront path to the west.

Olympic
Need

Community
Need

Olympic Venue

Olympic Infrastructure

Post Olympic
Legacy

Figure 5-9. High level Olympic systems approach.

With the pre-existing conditions for this project established in conjunction with the MWA
proposal we can now look more closely at the approach that can be taken towards the particular site. If we look at any Olympic project there is a clear division between the Olympic and post-

Olympic setting. Furthermore, there occurs a very clear separation between the needs during
these periods of time. Taking into consideration that this project is being designed within a

future community we can approach it by looking at the Olympic need versus the community
need (see Figure 5-9). The logic is that the addition of the Olympic need to the community

need shall render an Olympic venue. If these needs are situated in a manner that a separation
may be made after the event, then, the Olympic infrastructure may be removed from the post-

Olympic infrastructure. This would leave us with a community size building as a legacy. When
considering the site we must acknowledge the fact that for an Olympic building we necessitate
more area than only one of the two parcels of land indicated within the site property line (see

Figures 5-10 to 5-14). This is a result of the space required to seat 8000 spectators and provide
safe and easy access and exiting for the building. It requires us to look at developing the two
parcels that are divided by a road into one larger parcel that can then accommodate the space

requirements that were established via the programmatic research in the high order system.

66

7.

Figure 5-10. Site boundaries, access roads, and predetermined parcels of land

Figure 5-11. Permanent legacy infrastructure located on recreational site

Figure 5-12. Temporary program located closes roadway

67

Temp.

Main

Retract Retract

Stands

Olympic
Surface

Stands Stands
&

Figure 5-13. Organization of programmatic requirements, spatial relationships

Figure 5-14. Re-establishment of the roadway and community infrastructure

The access roads surrounding the two parcels create boundaries that shall be considered
as long term infrastructure. The original site deemed for a recreational building will be the location for the permanent legacy program, whereas the temporary Olympic program may be placed adjacent to it. This will temporarily close the access road that divides the two parcels

for the period during the Games. This systematic approach allows us to begin organising the
entire area in terms of permanent versus temporary infrastructure using the programmatic requirements found in the program analysis (see Appendix C). This information is used to inform
space relationships and sequence of events among other considerations established in the

high order system. Creating a system that has this clear division permits us to re-establish the
dividing road and provide area for the future school, which is slated for the adjacent site, after
the Olympic event.

68

Removal

Conversion

Addition

Left As Is

·

i

j

5 I
c



0
I

I

>=

IT

Figure 5-15. Four classifications in an Olympic/post-Olympic systems approach includes Removal of temporary elements
necessary during the Games (ex. structure, seating, broadcast media booths, and concession stands). Conversion pertains to

elements designed for future alteration. Addition concerns any added elements to the post-Olympic building. Left As Is are the
elements retained as unchanged legacy items (ex. mechanical/electrical systems, administration offices among other program).

5.7.3.3

Low Order System

The Low order system shall be defined as the architectural approach to the building

components. First, we will clarify four classifications in an Olympic and post-Olympic approach,

please refer to explanation found in figure 5-15. By establishing the Removal, Conversion,
Addition, and Left As Is classifications of components to the system, it is easier to visualize

the separation between Olympic and post-Olympic infrastructure. These categories become
important throughout the consideration of the Low order system and design process.

Furthermore, this enables us to keep comprehensive hold on the elements that are found throughout the two stages of design.

This approach to the architectural components of the system begins with knowledge of the site boundary and the need to create a division within it. It enables the allotment of a permanent

versus temporary site (see Figure 5-16). A permanent infrastructure can then be considered first and the needs of the community moved forward with the legacy building design. This
simplification initiates thoughts of using Conversion, Addition or Left As Is elements within the

69

legacy building and its considered program.

Once set, we may consider the addition of infrastructure needed for the Olympics. This Olympic infrastructure required becomes
Site Boundary

the designated Removal items of the four

classifications in an Olympic and post-Olympic
approach.

Temporary Site

Permanent Site

The temporary portion of the Olympic venue, indicated as the Removal items, shall be designed as a system that enables for dismantling of everything from flooring and

I

Temporary Site

Permanent Site

' i

finishes to structure and roof. The use of
materials such as steel and aluminum for
structural and cladding purposes and glass

where necessary will permit for the reuse or recycling of these components elsewhere after
Additional Infrastructure Needed In the Olympic Setting

the events. If we use the same methodology
r,"

as proven in the PERI examples discussed in

Chapter 3 it will allow for a design of a structure
able to withstand the live loads of a venue.
Temporary Site

Permanent Site

The logic behind this is direct. We will create
an exoskeleton using steel to span the larger

distances and carry the major loads. The rest
I I

of the system resembles a post and beam style
construction where the exoskeleton of steel

Temporary Site

Permanent Site

combines with the lightweight PERI aluminum
supporting elements creating the interior

Broadcast
Concessions

supports. These interior supports become the second level support for the flooring modules

Temporary Site

Permanent Site

that will get laid as per the PERI system. This

Figure 5-16. Systems approach to architectural components, permits the use of temporary elements to enable reacquiring
of floor space after the Olympics

is an overview of how this temporary portion of

the design may be realized. To get into extreme

70

detail would involve defining the entire construction of the system and a comprehensive account of the components that would be needed. As for this thesis|project we will continue to focus on
the overall methodology towards the design.

With the additional Olympic infrastructure defined as a set of removal elements we can now look at the Low Order set of modular elements. The use of temporary removal items for seating, concessions, and broadcast booths are used for the purposes of space planning (see Figure 5-16). This permits designing spaces that typically require large areas for the Olympics but are
unnecessary in community buildings; spaces may then be reacquired for community use in the
legacy building.

When planning out the seating modules we must acknowledge sightlines for spectators. This
concern is addressed by a balance between sightlines and floor to floor heights in order to stay within acceptable sightline standards (John, 2007). Using established retractable seating

will allow the legacy building to retain seating without having to dedicate a large gross floor
area (see Figure 5-17). This also enables flexibility for the future community to hold large events when desired. Any remaining seating may then be relocated to public schools or other
community buildings that may require it.

Figure 5-17. Section of retractable seating modules, these may be removed to reaquire floorspace, and either retained or moved off site

71

Figure 5-18. Concession module section, facing side swings inward to allow for business. Wheels swivel for easy maneuvering.

Food and snacks are an important part of the experience spectators have at every venue.

Concession stands become a necessary part of the Low order system but one that is completely
unnecessary for a community recreational building. Portable concession stands already exist

but there has not been any example of modular concessions designed to accommodate the
needs of indoor stadia. According to stadia guidelines the standard concession stand measures 2600mm x 2600mm (John, 2007). This happens to be a size that can be accommodated on a typical flatbed transport truck. The hope is to have a series of modular concessions built from

typical shipping container units and outfitted with the necessary fittings to allow the plugging
into an already planned Ibcation within a venue. These
modular concessions would be transported to the site
and hoisted to the floor level required and be guided .
2600

into place easily via pre-assembled wheels (see Figure 5-18 & 5-19). It would then plug into the predetermined
power outlets enabling it to function as a regular
concession stand.

=

Media is very crucial to the delivery of an Olympic

Figure 5_19 Concession modu|e p|an desjgned based

event to offsite spectators. Broadcast booths therefore

on a half of a shiPPin9 container

72

Figure 5-20. BroadcastBooth module section, the rear pulls out to create a pathway around the perimeter.

become a key part of a successful venue and the last of the Low Order set of modular elements.
Building upon the idea of the use to shipping containers and modularity it was found that it would be extremely beneficial to modify these into broadcast booths (see Figure 5-20 &
5-21). With a few modifications, these containers could be pre-packaged with the necessary equipment, transported to the site, hoisted and slid into place, and plugged into the existing infrastructure. Using the same plug-in method we could also retain several additional container

units. These would serve for placement of the dismantled removal items following the Games; they could then be shipped away directly from the site.
5500 I I

0.5

1

Figure 5-21. Broadcast Booth module plan, front swings open permitting the broadcasters viewing area. Design is based on a 20 foot long shipping container.

73

By considering the seating, concession, and broadcast booth modules as removal items it enables us to toggle back and forth between the Olympic and post-Olympic design options
more easily. Having the foresight of temporary versus permanent with assembly, disassembly,

and reconfiguration creates ultimate flexibility of the spaces on each level. More importantly, it

facilitates the design process to remain more flexible when laying out spaces within the building
for the legacy option.

After applying the three level Sports Cybernetics system to the chosen Gymnasium & large/ small courts category we were able to create a balance between the Olympic and post-Olympic

situations. It became increasingly apparent the importance of approaching this system from both the macroscopic as well as the microscopic levels. By establishing a systematic approach to the
project it enabled a more comprehensive and ordered method to follow. The High, Middle, and Low Order system provides a method that takes into account the regulations and guidelines of the governing body while creating the ability for design choice. In addition, it allows us to respect
the scale of the post-Olympic community with a scaled down legacy building.

74

5.2

Design

5.2.1 Design Drawings
The Don Lands Olympic Gymnasium design took into consideration the Olympic needs and

those of the future Lower Don Lands community. It began with a detailed understanding of the Olympic requirements which allowed for the development of a successful Olympic building design. In doing this, we greatly exceeded the needs of the community legacy building. For that reason it was desired to physically reduce the size of the building for the legacy option. Reduction in the building size was achieved with the use of the three level sports cybernetics system discussed earlier. We attained the knowledge of the individual user groups within this system. An important aspect of this design was the sequencing of the user groups during the
Olympics. The users are divided into five groups: 1.
2.

Players and Officials;
Media Personnel;

3.
4.
5.

Federation Officials;
Spectators;
Administration.

In order to create a cohesive approach to the design, the criteria of the five groups were
combined with the concept of separation between the temporary and permanent infrastructure.

To accommodate proper security measures for the five groups, an understanding of the technical and spatial criteria is needed but more importantly the knowledge of the arrival times of each group. This pertains to secure building access for user groups into private areas in addition to shared areas that occur between players and media personnel and their arrival
sequence.

The players and officials share the same access point to the building. Players may arrive by team bus or shuttle service and have direct access into the building and towards the change room and player areas, whereas the officials arrive by car and require secure parking spaces. They access the building as the players do and are directed to the referee change rooms.
Media personnel similarly require a secure parking area for media trucks, as well as secure

building access. Upon entry, they are directed towards an accreditation center in order to gain

access to the broadcast booths on the sixth level among other media areas within the building. Players and officials along with media personnel arrive much before the federation officials and

75

spectators and have separate controlled access into the building.

Federation officials typically arrive from one to one and a half hours before the event and are

ushered into the building by the administration staff and accredited volunteers. Generally, they
are brought to the designated Very Important Person (VIP) hospitality areas, VIP seats or VIP

suites and those officials who require offices within the building are given passes to access
the secure offices on the fifth level. When approaching the building as a spectator one would

be encouraged to arrive by the LRT line, shuttle bus or by foot along Commissioner Street or
nature paths. The spectator is then able to access^ upon presentation of an event ticket, the

major access stairs at the four corners of the building. They may then make their way up to the
second, third or fourth levels in order to reach their seats.

The Don Lands Olympic Gymnasium has double height entrances on the north and south side.
The north lobby entrance is connected on the ground floor to the south main entrance and

lobby creating a funnelling effect towards this south entrance and reception area. This lobby looks out to the future Don Lands estuary. The intention is to encourage people to be part of the
revitalization of this area and become sensitive to the environment. It attempts to reconnect the
users to the ehvironment and provide a direct path out into nature.

The gymnasium located on the second floor has allowed for the design and placement of the
supporting infrastructure on the ground floor beneath it. This allowed for maximum flexibility

of the floors above, especially important for a building with a legacy option involving different
program. The Olympic building undergoes a removal of the west portion in preparation for

the legacy mode. This allows for the re- establishment of the planned roadway and pathways
immediately adjacent to the building. An initial intention of removing the warm-up gymnasium
was reconsidered. It is expected that this gymnasium may be stripped of its flooring and surrounding walls and retained as an outdoor covered space for a multitude of summer and

winter recreational programs. Throughout the planning of the legacy there was conversion of
spaces as well as the addition of a 200 meter indoor running track that bridges the fifth level
north to south side along the west side of the building.

The following is a compilation of the design plans sections and renderings.

76

Figure 5-02. The Don Lands Olympic; Gymnasiumlin denfext with the proposed MVVA

nds proposal.

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

JUL-- 0

0

Level 4

Level 5

Level 6

Figure 5-23. The blue tone represents the areas dedicated to players and officials throughout the 6 floor levels during the Olympic Games.

Co *'

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

CD

0

Level 4

Level 5

Level 6

Figure 5-24. The green tone represents the areas dedicated to Media Personnel throughout the 6 floor levels during the Olympic Games.

_^J_i5

(7)

0

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

00

o

0

Level 4

Level 5

Level 6

Figure 5-25. The purple tone represents the areas dedicated to Federation Officials throughout the 6 floor levels during the Olympic Games.

6

10 16

26

0

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

00

Level 4

Level 5

Level 6

Figure 5-26. The beige tone represents the areas dedicated to Spectators throughout the 6 floor levels during the Olympic Games.

_^j_»

0

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

CO r

Level 4

Level 5

Level 6

Figure 5-27. The light green tone represents the areas dedicated to administration, although the administration will have access to the entire building throughout the 6 floor levels
during the Olympic Games.

CD
00

Figure 5-28. Ground Floor Olympic Option
Medki1.Araed.Ceritre2l\^edZcneMecla3.Mecfe 12. Doping Control 13. Ref Change 14. Players FirstAid 15. Team Storage

\^y
4. Press Conf. 5. Comm. Centre 6. Private Entrance PlavoB&Clcials 7. Pri\^le Entrance 8. WamrvUp Gym 9. Players Lounge 10. Team Change 11. Indiv. Change 16. w/c 17. Cafe/Restaurant 18. Concession Zone 19. Fan Zone Admin. & Others 20. South Lobby 21. Reception 22. Offices

23. Olym. Gift Shop & Fan Zone 24. Commercial Partner Storage 25. Shipping & Recieving 26. Sign Storage 27. Bee. 28. Water Entry 29. Mech. 30. Volun. Centre 31. Gen. FirstAid 32. Security 33. North Entrance

10

15

25

Figure 5-29. 2nd Floor Olympic Option
1. Lower Tier Seating Access Media 2. Media Seating Players & Officials 3. Court Access Federation Officials 4. VIP Hospitality Rm. 5. VIP Seating Admin. & Others 6. Equipment Rm.

/\

00 CD

5

10

15

25

Figure 5-30. 3rd Floor Olympic Option
1. Lower Tier Seating Access 2. w/c Federation Officials 3. V-VIP Hospitality Rm 4. VIP Suites Admin. & Others 5. Concessions

00

5

10

15

25

Figure 5-31.4th Floor Olympic Option
1. Upper Tier Seating Access 2. w/c Federation Officials 3. V-VIP Hospitality Rm. Admin&Others 4. Concessions

Z_Y

00

|

5 10 15
Figure 5-32. 5th Floor Olympic Option
Federation Officials 1. VIP Office 2. Meeting Rm.

25

r?\

3. General Offices 4. Commissioners Office 5. Services Office Admin. & Others 6. General Meeting Rm.

5

10

15

25

Figure 5-33.6th Floor Olympic Option
Media 1. Broadcast Booths 2. Interview & Media Amenities

6th
CD
CO

I

-)

Figure 5-34. North-South Section Olympic Option

Medial Broadcast Booths 2. Mixed Zone Media Players & Officials 3. Corridor4. Referee Change Room 5. Players FirstAid 6. OlympicTeam Storage Administration 7. North Lobby 8. Olympic Gift & Souvenir Shop 9. South Lobby Spectators 10. Second Tier Seating Access Federation 11. VIP Suites Other 12. Gymnasium 13. Equipment Rm 14. Roadway

Figure 5-35. West-East SectionOlympic Option

Media 1. Broadcast Booths Players & Officials 2. Warrn-Up Gymnasium 3. Players Lounge 4. Team Change Rooms 5. ShowerArea 6. Corridor 7. Oyrrpic Storage Administration 8. VolunteerCentre 9. General Corridor 10. Commercial Partner Storage 11. Shipping /Reoeiving Spectators: 12. Concessions Federation 13. VIP Hospitality Room 14VIPSuites Other 15. Roadway

12

ffo

Figure 5-36. West-East Section Legacy Option

Community Users 1. Covered Open Air Court 2. Team Change Rooms 3. Shower Area 4. Corridor 5. Arts & Crafts Studio 6. N - S Corridor 7. Class / Conference Rm. 8. Boxing Zone 9. 200 m Running Track Administration 10. Community Storage 11. Shipping/Receiving Other 12. Roadway 13. Re - Established Roadway

CD

Figure 5-37. Site Plan - Legacy Option 1 - Re-naturalizing and re-establishing dividing road with connection from building to water retention ponds and water's edge.

CD GO

Figure 5-38. Site Plan - Legacy Option 2 - The community school insertion and new connection to open-air covered gymnasium

Figure 5-39. Ground Floor Legacy Option
Ground Floor
Conversion 1. Bicycle Rness 2 Plate's/ Dance/Table Tennis 3. Juice Bar/Cafe 4. Covered OpenAirCourt 5. Music Rm. 6.Art-Crafls 7. CcmmLiity Storage 8. Bulding Storage 9. hdv. Change Rm 10. Team Change 11. RefereeChange 12SecurityRm 13. Gen. FirstAid 14. South Lobby 15. Reception 16. Admin. Offices 17. Shipping &Recieving 18. Bee. 19. Water Entry 20. Mech. 21. w/c 22. North Entrance Addition 23.ExitStair

x en

Figure 5-40. 2nd Floor Legacy Option
Conversion 1. Weight Rm Area 2. Cardio Zone 3. Main Gymnasium Left As Is 4. Equipment Room 5. Exit Stair

__

CD

Figure 5-41. 3rd Floor Legacy Option

Conversion 1. Flex. Activity -Spin /Aerobics 2 Female Fitness Only 3.Aerooic 4. Meeting Rm 5. Clas&Conference 6. Storage 7.Daycare 8. Physio-Massage Therapy Clinic

9. w/c Addition 1O.ExitStair

CD

Figure 5-42.4th Floor Legacy Option

Conversion 1. Dance Studio 2. Ballet Studio 3. Flexible Space 4. Locker Area 5. Boxing Zone 6. Martial Arts Zone

7. w/c

8. Exit Stair

CD
00

Figure 5-43. 5th Floor Legacy Option
Conversion 1. (3/4) Running Track 2. Cardio & Stretching Area Adcition 3. Bridge (1/4) Running Track

Figure 5-44.6th Floor Legacy Option
Conversion 1. Clear Storey Glazing ft As is 2. Outdoor Space Addition 3. Channeled Glass Wall

Figure 5-45. Commissioner St. Olympic Option

Figure 5-46. Commissioner St. Legacy Option

Figure 5-47. Interior Olympic Event View

o

Figure 5-48. Interior Community Legacy View

Figure 5-49. South West Olympic View

g

Figure 5-50. South West Legacy View

Figure 5-51. Northeast Canoe View Olympic & Legacy Option

6 Thesis|Project Conclusion

This research inquires into the application of concepts used by systems theory and cybernetics

to the process of architectural design. It presents evidence that supports the argument that by
using a systems approach we can build Olympic venues that reduce embodied energy and

increase adaptability and flexibility for post-Olympic community use. Evidence is presented in support of systematic processes and examples are shown from practice and theory that exhibit
the potential of systems approach in architectural design. It is revealed that there have been architects in the profession that have made strides towards achieving qualities of stewardship,

adaptability, flexibility and modality in architecture by using a systematic approach. Current studies into the application of systems theory and cybernetics in architecture have been much
removed from their root studies. This thesis shows that a renewed interest is needed into the origins of these studies in order to have a positive effect on the environment.

The research supports the claim and hypothesis that it is the origins of systems theory and cybernetics that architects need to utilize in the search for stewardship of resources, flexibility,
and adaptability within design. A model system for enabling a systems approach to architecture in conjunction with a systems attitude towards design thinking strategies are the needs this thesis addresses most explicitly. The focus of the thesis is the development of a generic

system for architecture and to show how this system may be used within a project example. The creation of, what this author has named the Sports Cybernetics system, is a system that
can be adapted to encompass all architectural typologies. It is the goal of this thesis to have it

tested through the intensive regulations of Olympic sports architecture in order to allow for the
adaptation into other less regulated typologies.

The exploration into applying the system to a site in Toronto, Canada initiates an intensive front

loaded process that requires research for knowledge of the technical and spatial needs of the
eleven sports considered for the project. With this particular information we have the ability to work with any city in the world, on the development of the most efficient and adaptable Olympic gymnasia for each city. There is only minor research needed to tailor this system to any site context. The required research would involve investigating the community aspects of the Three
Level Sports Cybernetics System, shown in section 5.1.3 of this thesis, in order to tailor the

particular design to its physical setting. The inherent quality of adaptability and flexibility in this

107

system is passed onto the design project and is shown in the degree of flexibility of the Olympic gymnasium design and its legacy option. The ability to synthesize the micro and macroscopic

information pertaining to those Olympic sports into a set of requirements that satisfy all the
sports considered was essential to achieving a high degree of adaptability. It should be stressed

that without the investigation into the microscopic detail of the program spaces it is impossible to understand the macroscopic details of the entire project. Therefore, a great deal relies on a full understanding of each space in terms of what is required, the reason for use, who is the user, how it will be utilized and its relation to its adjacent spaces. With the explored information, an
architect may then make his design choices based on rationale and evidence.

It is the hope that this research has begun to create a focus on the value of developing a
systems approach and systems thinking towards design in contribution to furthering the sustainability movement. The design process of an architect is something that is unique to

each individual. Therefore, it is important to establish systems that allow for flexibility within the

built structure and most importantly flexibility within the design process itself. People are visual
beings and the need to have variety is essential to creating environments that generate interest in our lives. By ensuring flexibility, we ensure adaptability and create environments that are
more susceptible to change.

108

·o

>

1

Q.

X

CD

0)

s
g


 
E
E
O CN o
o
**"!


E
"""

o CD
E
T

.Em
CM

o>E
o CD
X CD CD X
^.

ecnj

·Eo
CD
X
^--

05 E
X CM
OO

o F
X CD X o CD X CD

ECNJ

Q_ CM

oo
CNJ
T-

in

E

O5

E

E
E

E

E

E

x--

x

Ex
T~
o
£Z
--}

- x
T~

x

oo

3
CO
O

oo

CNI

X OO

X ^

TO

ieghtliftir

o
0 CD

O 2.
Outdoor Sports
0 0)

Water Sports

Gymnasium & Large/Small Court Sports

The above diagram accounts for the sports surfaces involved in the Summer Olympic Games. The measurements shown are for the playing surface boundaries. Note (1): this information was extracted from the IOC, and individual sports federation websites. A link to each federation is supplied from within the IOC website at (www.olympic.org). Note (2): The information supplied by the gymnastics sports federation is incomplete, and further discussions with the federation have yet to yield new information.

Appendix B: Matrix - 2008 Beijing Summer Olympics

Back of page: Matrix based on the 2008 Beijing Summer Olympics. This matrix provides analytical information that rationalizes the focus behind minimization of stadia infrastructure that is built for each of the Olympic Games. The key information has been
highlighted or noted at the bottom to the matrix

111

Building Type & Name

Existing Perm,

New Perm.

Temp.
Venue Track

bldg
Stadium

Bldgs

Field

Capacity
91,000
X

1 2

Birds Nest

Athletics

Olympic Sports Centre Workers Stadium Shanghai Stadium Fengtai Softball Field
Wukesong Baseball Field

Football, Modn-Pen (X36,228
X X
x

3
4

Country & Show Jump) Football

70,161
80,000

5
b 7

10,000
15,000

X

Softball
Baseball

Olympic Green Convention Cente
Shenyang Olympic Stadium Tianjin Olympic Center Stadium

5,695 60,000
54,696
X X X

8
9

Football Football Football

10
11

Qinhuangdao Olympic Sports Centre Stadium Olympic Green Hockey Stadium

31 085 17,002

Arena

12 13 14

National Aquatics Centre Beijing National Indoor Stadium Beijing Wukesong Indoor Stadium
Laoshan Velodrome

17,000 20 000 18,000 6 000 17,400 13,000
x

2

1b 16
17

X

Beijing Olympic Green Tennis Court
Workers' Indoor Arena

X

_J

to

18
19 20 21

Capital Indoor Stadium

17,345
12,200 4,852 5,000

X
X
X
x

X

Chaoyang Park Beach Volleyball Ground
Ying Tung Natatorium

Olympic Green Archery Field

Gymnasia
o

22 23 24

China Agriculture University Gymnasium
Peking University Gymnasium

8,200
8 000 8,024 7,500

X
X X

o

o

Beijing Science & Technology University Gymnasium
Beijing University of Technology Gymnasium

25 26
27

Olympic Sports Center Gymnasium
Beijing Institute of Technology Gymnasium Beihang University Gymnasium

7,000
5,000

28

5,400

X

Hall

29

Beijing Shooting Range Hall, (8,600 Capacity)

8,600

Nature

30 31 32
33 34 6b

Shunyi University Rowing-Canoeing Park
Laoshan Mountain Bike Course (with fixed building) Beijing Shooting Range Clay Target Field
Laoshan Bicycle Moto Cross (BMX) Venue Triathlon Venue Urban Cycling Road Course

1,200 Perm, 25,800 Temp
2 000 Temp
5,000 4,000
X

X

10,000
o
X

X

36
3/

Qingdao International Sailing Centre
Hong Kong Sports Institute 18 000

**26 of the 37 venues contain only one event.

"Handball is able to be held in both Gymnasia or Stadia **12 of 37 venues are New and 6 of which house only 1 sport

**5 Separate venues are used for Football

"Volleyball is able to be held in both a Gymnasia or Stadia

**16 of 37 were existing permanent bldgs and 13 of which house only 1 sport

The Orange highlighted finding indicates a very important factor. The fact that 15 of the 37 sports played in the Summer Olympics are actually housed within a Gymnasium, Large Court and Small Court. This indicates that If the largest grouping of sports are those played on the smaller

112

Generic Playing Surface (Lage to Small)
ool Gymnasium 3ourt (Large)

Dourt (Small)

Nature

Fencing, Modn-Pen.

(Fencing & Shooting)

Swimming, Synchronized
Swimming, Diving, Water Polo

Gymnastics Artistic, Trampoline, Handball Basketball

Tennis
Boxing

Volleyball
Beach Volleyball

Water Polo, Modn-Pen

Wrestling

Table Tennis Judo, Taekwondo Gymnastics Rhythmic,
Badminton

Handball
Volleyball

Weightlifting

Shooting

Rowing, Canoe, Kayak
Cycling Mountain Bike

Shooting (skeet & trap) Cycling BMX Triathlon Cycling Road Sailing
Equestrian

** 15 of 37 sports were housed in Either a Gymnasium, Large court, or Small court
** 9 of 37 sports are outdoor nature sports

** 4 sports are pool sports

**9 sports are held in either on a Track or Field

113

Appendix C: Program Analysis- High Order System

Note:

The following pages are a detailed synthesis of the programmatic requirements that are strictly regulated by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) and its member sports federations. It is part of the High order system defined within the Design|Project Chapter. It combines the strictest regulations of the eleven gymnasium sports considered in this thesis. It is developed as
guidelines that facilitate a faster design process by presenting the pertinent design information

first. It is developed once, as done here, and will only involve further updating as sports change
and adapt according to the IOC and its member sports federations.

115

Analysis of physical facility requirements Project: Olympic Gymnasium 2009 Badminton Floor
Department Playing Surfaces

Space Components:
Dimensions

Finishes

Misc.

Name of Space:

Net Assignable Sq. m

Working Surfaces

Space Description

Purpose:

To provide a gymnasium floor area for Olympic Badminton as per the requirements
of the Olympic Games. To serve as a spectator viewed space and a space where
media may set up for broadcasting live events.

Types

Space Relationships:
a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.
ngKeqi

Mo. of Seats

spectc

Located to allow for multiple access points by spectators. Close to warm-up area, equipment storage areas, loading, change rooms, referees rooms, first aid.
b. Specific Is this space part of a suite? Yes | |

Reserved Seats

J_L
head of state
25 100

Presidential stand

Stand A a)Federation members
b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP

No [7]
Stand B Stand C Stand D

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov officials

100 Varies Varies determined by # matches Dlaved ables & chairs

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Press - Journalists & photographers Team members, players, tech's, other officials Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

Activity Description:

G)

Playing Olympic, national, provincial and community level badminton games

Activity type: (insert x in applicable box)

Posts 6. Fitness 5. Spectator Seating

1. Private Office
2. Admin Office

Q
Q

3. Classroom
4. Staff Room 5. Sports Surface

^H
Q [x~|

6. Concourse 7. Medical Clinic

 ED n 

Referee Elevated Chair shair for Service Judge
ape (for Taping ends of synthetic floor to permanent floor)

Playing floor (Synthetic rolled floor)
Adequate lighting
spectator seating for 5 - 8,000

8.Other Specify: |--|

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Federation/Staff

I

I
Floor personelle

Competitors ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's

| |

12 6

| |

Communications:
(place X in box if required)

fVudio Visual
he following audio visual aids will be used:

Telephone PA System Cable TV

Scoreboards

Average hours per week usage

Television
-"rojector

Wireless Internet Satelite Communication Other Specify

Sound Reinforcement Dther Specify: Announcer mic plugged in to PA

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard |

| TackboardQ]

Shelving^
Tables, Chairs

Advertising Boards|x j

Movable: (List items and quantity)

Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate coiu nn)

dge
/es Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy
Does activity require quiet

Yes Ceiling Heights: Any special requirements
X

No

No
X

If any state clear height

min-9m-14m

Heating & Air Conditioning:

Lighting: Any special requirements
X X

x

Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned

Is natural daylight needed Above average Intensity Ultra Violet required
Dimmer Control
X

x x

ohers
jdges

x

ach line
Flooring:

Accurate Temp. Control required
If so, give range from to

What type of flooring will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X

Tile
concrete
X

x

non-slip

X

Other (Specify under comments)
Services: (place x in box if required)

X

Water: Hot ^J Electrical Power:

Cold Q]Deionized ^^Distilled [^ Drainage: Floor ^ Trough [_^ Local Emergency Power Required |x|
13400
15400

ice Judge

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Playing floor must be Sprung wooden floor at a length of 42,000mm and a minimum width of 25,000mm Synthetic flooring may be used to comply with the regulation of: Only Badminton court lines shall be
used on courts for an Olympic event

19000
_25000_

Line Judges
court

The Referee chair shall be those specifically built for the height at which the net is placed
Direct Natural light shall be eliminated from the gymnasium

12000
19x 12m

4

All lighting shall be placed in order NOT to interfere with the view of the shuttlecock in play
Drop down lighting may be used with low brightness.

Individual Court

Control over main lighting for dimming of the space or switching off completely so light may be focused
properly

Badminton

42 x 25m

Analysis of physical facility requirements Project: Olympic Gymnasium 2009 Basketball Floor
Department Playing Surfaces

Space Components:
Dimensions

Finishes

Misc.

Name of Space:

Net Assignable Sq. m

Working Surfaces

Space Description

Purpose:

To provide a gymnasium floor area for Olympic Basketball as per the requirements
of the Olympic Games. To serve as a spectator viewed space and a space where media may set up for broadcasting live events.

Space Relationships:
a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Seating Requirments
Total spectators

No. of Seats

Located to allow for multiple access points by spectators.

Reserved Seats Presidential stand

±-±
head of state
25 100 100

Close to warm-up area, equipment storage areas, loading, change rooms,
referees rooms, first aid.
b. Specific

Stand A
Yes

a) FIBA members
b) FIBA guests, sponsors, VIP c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. officials

Is this space part of a suite?

No [7]
Stand B Stand C Stand D

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Press - Journalists & photographers Team members, players, tech's, other officials Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

ables & chairs
determined by # matches played

Activity Description:

Equipment

Playing Olympic, national, provincial and community level basketball games

00

Activity type: (insert X in applicable box) 1. Private Office
2. Admin Office 3. Classroom 4. Staff Room 5. Sports Surface 6. Fitness 5. Spectator Seating

Backstop units, consisting of:

6. Concourse 7. Medical Clinic

8.0ther Specify: |

|



 El 

Basket comprising (pressure release) rings and nets Backboard support structures including padding 'coreboard - each end, & if applicable 1 cube type center court
Adequate lighting
spectator seating

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)
I I

Federation/Staff

Competitors

Floor personelle

ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's

|

14

\
ommunications:

Audio Visual
The following audio visual aids will be used:

Average hours per week usage

|

80

\

(place X in box if required)

Telephone PA System Cable TV

Scoreboards Television
Projector Sound Reinforcement Other Specify:

Wireless Internet Satelite Communication
Other Specify:

  

(place x in box if required)

Fixed blackboard

[ ] TackboardQ^

Shelving|""~]
Tables FT] Ct

Advertising Boards[|

Movable: (List items and quantity)

Benches

Q]

Ball trolley\

aphers Positions

Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate colu nn)

Yes
Ceiling Heights: Any special requirements
X

No
Noise: Any special requirements

Yes Is activity noisy Does activity require quiet

No
X

If any state clear heiqht

min - 7m

Bench

Heating & Air Conditioning:

Lighting: Any special requirements
X

X x

Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned
X
X

Is natural daylight needed Above average Intensity
Ultra Violet required
Dimmer Control Black out
X
X

x

's Table
cian

Other (Specify under comments) Flooring:

X

Accurate Temp. Control required If so give ranqe from to

What type of floorinq will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X
X X

Tile
concrete non-slip

Team Bench

CD
Services: (place x in box if required)

X
X

Other (Specify under comments)

Advertising board(s)

Water: Hot Q Electrical Power:

Cold Q^Deionized [^Distilled

Q] Drainage: Floor Q Trough Q Local Emergency Power Required [7|

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Playing floor must be Sprung wooden or synthetic flooring but may be permanent or mobile and a
minimum length of 32,000mm and a minimum width of 19,000mm

Lighting - Each set located min. 5,000mm from the boundary line and at a recommended ht. 15,000mm It must be uniformly lit with no less then 1800 lux in the vertical plane measured 1.5 m above the playing court, and spread evenly on the basketball court floor area without any shadows or patches. The rest of the Venue should have sufficient illumination approximately 1000 lux) Seating - All spectators bust be seated at a distance of at least 5,000mm from the outside edges
of the boundary lines of the playing court

Warm-Up Court - One court is required in the same venue

Basketball 38 x 25m

13

5

10

Analysis of physical facility requirements Project: Olympic Gymnasium 2009 Boxing Ring Area
Department Playing Surfaces

Space Components:
Dimensions
age

Finishes

Misc.

Name of Space:

Net Assignable Sq. m

Working Surfaces

Space Description

Purpose:

To provide an area for Olympic Boxing to take place as per the requirements
of the Olympic Games. To serve as a spectator viewed space and a space where
media may set up for broadcasting live events.

Space Relationships: a. General How should this space relate to general areas In the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.
beating Kequirments

No. of Seats

Total spectators

Located to allow for multiple access points by spectators.

Reserved Seats Presidential stand

x I
25 100

I

Close to warm-up area, equipment storage areas, loading, change moms,
referees rooms, First aid.
b. Specific Is this space part of a suite? Yes | |

Stand A

a)Federation members
b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. officials

No [7]

100 Varies Varies determined by # matches plaved tables & chairs

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Stand B Press - Journalists & photographers Stand C Team members, players, tech's, other officials

Stand D

Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

Activity Description:

Competing in Olympic, national, provincial and recreational level boxinq matches

Activity type: (insert x in
1. Private Office 2. Admin Office 3. Classroom 4. Staff Room 5. Sports Surface

applicable box)

6100

    El

6. Fitness 5. Spectator Seating 6. Concourse 7. Medical Clinic



 El 

Set of Steps Chairs for Officials
ables for Officials

8.0ther Specify: fl

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Staff

|

|
Floor personelle

Competitors

ommunications:
(place X in box if required)

Audio Visual
he following audio visual aids will be used:

ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's

I

19

Telephone PA System Cable TV

c

icoreboards 'elevision Projector

Average hours per week usage

Wireless Internet

Sound Reinforcement

Satelite Communication
Other Specify:



Dther

Specify:

Announcer mic plugged in to PA

Furnishings:

i box if required)

Fixed: blackboard Q TackboardQ
Movable: (List items and quantity)

Shelving|
Tables, Chairs

|

Advertising Boards|x |
Gong, Announcer

Photographers

environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate coiur nn)

Yes Ceiling Heights: Any special requirements
X

No Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy Does activity require quiet
X

If any state clear height

Heating & Air Conditioning:

Lighting: Any special requirements
X

X

Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned
X

Is natural daylight needed Above average Intensity
Ultra Violet required
x x

Dimmer Control

x

Flooring:

Accurate Temp. Control required
If so, give range from to

X

What type of flooring will be required:
Gymnasium sprung

Tile
concrete

x

x
X

non-slip

I\J
Services: (place x in box if required)

Other (Specify under comments)

x

Water: Hot ^1 Electrical Power:

Cold £^Deionized ^^Distilled ^] Drainage: Floor ^ Trough ^J Local Emergency Power Required jx|

6850

J,

6100
19800

J,

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Surface of the Ring Floor shall be covered with felt, rubber or other suitable approved material over which a
canvas shall be stretched and secured in place. Canvas shall cover the entire platform and be of non-slippery material. Competition floor surface must be of elastic tatami surface Direct Natural light shall be eliminated from the gymnasium

All lighting shall be placed in order NOT to interfere with the view of the shuttlecock in play

Individual Ring
19.8 x 19.8m

Control over main lighting for dimming of the space or switching off completely so light may be focused
properly

Analysis of physical facility requirements
Project: Olympic Gymnasium 2009 Fencing Floor

Space Components:
Storage

Finishes

Misc

Department

Playing Surfaces
Working Surfaces

Name of Space:

Net Assignable Sq. m

Space Description

Purpose:

To provide a floor area for Olympic Fencing as per the requirements

Types

of the Olympic Games.

To serve as a spectator viewed space and a space where

media may set up for broadcasting live events.

Space Relationships:
a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Seating Requirments Total spectators

No. of Seats

Located to allow for multiple access points by spectators. Close to warm-up area, equipment storage areas, loading, change rooms, referees rooms, first aid.

Reserved Seats Presidential stand Stand A a)Federation members
n/a n/a n/a n/a
n/a

J_L

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP

b. Specific -

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes FTM"

No|x~|

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. officials
Stand B Press - Journalists & photographers

varies

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

varies varies determined by # matches played

Stand C
Stand D

Team members, players, tech's, other officials
Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

iquipmcnt

ho

Activity Description:

Competing in Olympic, national, provincial and recreational level Fencing.

Preliminary rounds Activity type: (insert x in applicable box) Chairs for fencers

A scoring hits apparatus including 2 electronic reels

1. Private Office 2. Admin Office
3. Classroom

4. Staff Room 5. Sports Surface

    ID

6. Fitness 5. Spectator Seating
6. Concourse



NOTE: requirements for preliminary rounds do not
require public viewing

7. Medical Clinic





Direct Elimination rounds also include
Tables and chairs for representatives of the federation

Must contain tiers of seats or gallery for spectators

8.0ther Specify: |"~~l

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Staff

I

I
Floor personelle

Competitors ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's

Communications:
(place X in box if required)

Audio Visual
The following audio visual aids will be used:

Telephone
PA System

Scoreboards
Television
rojector Sound Reinforcement

|x~"

Average hours per week usage

Cable TV Wireless Internet Satelite Communication Other Specify:

Other

Specify:

Announcer mic plugged in to PA

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard |

| Tackboard[^

Shelving^
Tables, Chairs

Advertising Boardsjx |

Movable: (List items and quantity)

Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate column)

Yes

No
X

/es Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy Does activity require quiet

No
x

Ceiling Heights:

Any special requirements

II

I

I

Ml

If any state clear height

Heating & Air Conditioning:

Lighting: Any special requirements
X

X
X

n
X X

i

in

Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned
X

Is natural daylight needed Above average Intensity

Ultra Violet required
Dimmer Control
X

Flooring:

Accurate Temp. Control required
If so, give range from to

What type of flooring will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X
X

i

i

i

i

Tile
concrete
X X
X

non-slip Other (Specify under comments)

GO
Services: (place x in box if required)

Water: Hot Q] Electrical Power:

Cold Qoeionized ^Distilled Q Drainage: Floor Q Trough Q Local Emergency Power Required [7]
Competitors

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Playing floor must be Sprung wooden floor at a length of 40,000mm and a minimum width of 50,000mm
Direct Natural light shall be eliminated from the gymnasium

All lighting shall be placed in order NOT to interfere with the view of the shuttlecock in play Control over main lighting for dimming of the space or switching off completely so light may be focused
properly
s

\[2

II

1

1

1

I
/

Fencing (

33 x 15m

Fencing (Preliminary Round)
40 x 50 m

Analysis of physical facility requirements
Project: Olympic Gymnasium 2009 Handball Floor

Space Components:
Storage Finishes Misc.

Department

Playing Surfaces _
Working Surfaces

Name of Space:

Net Assignable Sq. m

Space Description

Purpose:

To provide a gymnasium floor area for Olympic Handball as per the requirements of the Olympic Games. To serve as a spectator viewed space and a space where
media may set up for broadcasting live events.

Space Relationships:
a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Seating Requirments Total spectators

No. of Seats
8 - 20,000

Located to allow for multiple access points by spectators. Close to warm-up area, equipment storage areas, loading, change rooms, referees rooms, first aid.
b. Specific -

Reserved Seats
Presidential stand Stand A a)Federation members
25 100 100

J_L
head of state

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes

No[T]
Stand B Stand C
Stand D

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. official;

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Press - Journalists & photographers Team members, players, tech's, other officials
Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

ables & chairs determined by # matches played

Equipment
Activity Description:

ro

Playing Olympic, national, provincial level Handball
Item
Match Balls former and women (different weight & size)

Activity type: (insert x in applicable box) 1. Private Office

2. Admin Office
3. Classroom

4. Staff Room 5. Sports Surface

   

6. Fitness 5. Spectator Seating 6. Concourse 7. Medical Clinic

22 m

 

8.0ther Specify: |~~|

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Federation/Staff Floor personelle

Competitors
ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's

I 28

Communications:
(place X in box if required)

Audio Visual
The following audio visual aids will be used:

Telephone
PA System

Scoreboard(s)
Television rojector

Average hours per week usage

Cable TV
Wireless Internet

 

Sound Reinforcement Other Specify;

Satelite Communication Other Specify:

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard Q] Tackboard[^
Movable: (List items and quantity)

ShelvingQ
Tab/es^] Cfta/rsQ^

Advertising Boardsjx"!
Benches ^] Ball trolley^

Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate coiu nn)

Yes Ceiling Heights: Any special requirements
X

No Noise: Any special requirements
Is activity noisy

Yes

No
X

If any state clear height

Does activity require quiet Heating & Air Conditioning:

Lighting: Any special requirements
X

X

Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned
X

Is natural daylight needed Above average Intensity Ultra Violet required
Dimmer Control
X X X

X

X

Black out

Flooring:
Accurate Temp. Control required If so, give range from to What type of flooring will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X

Tile
concrete

X
X X

It

HICh

en
Services: (place x in box if required)

ho

non-slip

Other (Specify under comments)

Water: Electrical Power:

Hot ^j

Cold Q]Deionized Q^Distilled

[ ^ Drainage:

Floor Q^

Trough ^^ |xj

Advertising board(s)

Local Emergency Power Required

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Advertising board(s)

Handball 48 x 26m

Analysis of physical facility requirements
Project: Olympic Gymnasium 2009 Judo Mat
Department Playing Surfaces

Space Components:
Storage Finishes Misc.

Name of Space:

Net Assignable Sq. m

Working Surfaces

Space Description
Purpose: To provide a competition area for Olympic Judo as per the requirements of the Olympic Games. To serve as a spectator viewed space and a space where media may set up for broadcasting live events.

Space Relationships:
a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Seating Requirments Total spectators

8 - 10,000

Located to allow for multiple access points by spectators. Close to warm-up area, equipment storage areas, loading, change rooms, referees rooms, first aid.
b. Specific 

Reserved Seats
Presidential stand Stand A a)Federation members
25
100

J_L
head of state

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP Is this space part of a suite? Yes

No[T]
Stand B Stand C
Stand D

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov officials

100 tables & chairs determined by #
matches played

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Press - Journalists & photographers Team members, players, tech's, other officials
Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

Activity Description: Competing & practicing Olympic, national, provincial and community level Judo

Equipment

O)
Activity type: (insert x in applicable box) 1. Private Office 2. Admin Office
3. Classroom 4. Staff Room

6. Fitness 5. Spectator Seating 6. Concourse 7. Medical Clinic

 El

|

Scoreboard - each end, & if applicable 1 cube type center court

37 m
Adequate lighting

18 m

5. Sports Surface

8.Other Specify: |



Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Federation/Staff

Competitors

|

4

\

Floor personelle

ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's

|

14

\
Communications: Audio Visual
he following audio visual aids will be used:

Average hours per week usage

(place X in box if required)

Telephone PA System Cable TV

   

Scoreboards

Television
Projector Sound Reinforcement

Wireless Internet
Satelite Communication

Other

Specify:

Other

Specify:

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed blackboard

[ ] Tackboard^

Shelving^
Tables \11\ Chair\45 \

Advertising Boardsjx |

Movable: (List items and quantity)

Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate colur nn)

Yes Ceiling Heights: Any special requirements
X

No Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy

Yes

No
X

If any state clear height

mm - 7m

Does activity require quiet
Heating & Air Conditioning: Lighting: Any special requirements
X X

Scort
X

Standard for building is all that is required. Space must be air-conditioned
X

Is natural daylight needed
Above average Intensity Ultra Violet required
Dimmer Control
X X
X

X

Control Committee

Deieqates
Court Announcers

Black out
Flooring:

Accurate Temp. Control required If so, give range from n/a to Wdgr's

What type of flooring will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X
X

Tile
concrete

X
X

N>
Services: (place X in box if required)

non-slip Other (Specify under comments)
X

Water:
Electrical Power:

Hot F~J

Cold Q^Deionized |

JDistilled |

| Drainage:

Floor Q^

Trough

Local Emergency Power Required

D

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Tatamis Flooring - must be made of 1m x2m pressed straw or pressed foam. Must be on a

Resilient floor or Platform built up to ensure a solid base for tatamis & may be mobile Lighting - Lighting on the playing area should range from 1500 - 1800 lux at 1m above the surface Spare Equipment - Changing Booth for any competitor needing to change during competition

Warm-Up Room - 400/600 m2 tatami surface

individual Fioor
14 x 14m

Judo 43 x 24m

Analysis of physical facility requirements Project: Olympic Gymnasium 2009 Table Tennis Department Playing Surfaces _

Space Components:
Finishes Misc.

Name of Space:

Net Assignable Sq.m

Working Surfaces

Space Description

Purpose:

To provide a floor area for Olympic Table Tennis as per the requirements of the Olympic Games. To serve as a spectator viewed space and a space where
media may set up for broadcasting live events.

Space Relationships: a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Seating Requirments Total spectators Reserved Seats Presidential stand

No. ot beats

comments

Located to allow for multiple access points by spectators. Close to warm-up area, equipment storage areas, loading, change rooms, referees rooms, first aid.
b. Specific

head of state
25 100

Stand A

a)Federation members

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes |

|

No[T|

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. officials
Stand B Stand C Press - Journalists & photographers Team members, players, tech's, other officials

100
Varies

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

tables & chairs determined by # matches played

Varies

Stand D

Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

Equipment

K CD

Activity Description:

Playinq Olympic, national, provincial and community level Table Tennis games

Table-Tennis Table
Activity type: (insert x in applicable box) Umpire Chair 6. Fitness

1. Private Office 2. Admin Office
3. Classroom

4. Staff Room 5. Sports Surface

   

5. Spectator Seating
6. Concourse

 ID

Assistant Umpire Chair
Tape (for Taping ends of synthetic floor to permanent floor)

7. Medical Clinic





Playing floor (Synthetic rolled floor)
Adeguate lighting

8\ 14m

8.0ther Specify: PH

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Federation/Staff

Competitors

Communications:
(place X in box if required)

Audiovisual
The following audio visual aids will be used:

Floor personelle

ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's

|

16

Telephone P.A System

Scoreboards

Television
Projector Sound Reinforcement

"~|

Average hours per week usage

Cable TV
Wireless Internet Satelite Communication Other Specify:



Other

Specify:

Announcer mic plugged in to PA

Furnishinqs:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard Q TackboardQ
Movable: (List items and quantity)

Shelving|~l
Tables, Chairs

Advertising Boards

iOmm ht.
Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate coiur nn)

Yes

No

Ceiling Heights:

Any special requirements min-5m

X

Noise: Any special requirements
Is activity noisy

X

If any state clear height

Does activity require quiet Heating & Air Conditioning: Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned
X
X

Lighting: Any special requirements Is natural daylight needed Above average Intensity

x X X

"I Television

I Photographers

Ultra Violet required
Dimmer Control
x

x

Flooring:

Accurate Temp. Control required If so, give range from to

What type of flooring will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X

Tile
concrete

X

rrounds
| Television
Dmm ht.

x
X X

non-slip

l0 CD
Services: (place x in box if required)

Other (Specify under comments)

I Photographers

Water: Hot ^] Electrical Power:

Cold ^^Deionized ^JDistilled ^] Drainage: Floor ^ Trough [j Local Emergency Power Required |x|

·\

Additional Requirements or Comments:

The Light source shall not be less than 5m above the floor Table Tennis Table must be 760 mm high and a perfectly level playing surface

7000.
25000

JOQJ

| ,1525

Playing floor must be Sprung wooden floor at a length of 48,000mm and a minimum width of 25,000mm Synthetic flooring may be used to cover the sprung wood floor to ensure a non-slip surface
Direct Natural light shall be eliminated from the gymnasium

Light intensity at the height of the table shall be 1000 lux and at least 500 lux elsewhere Level of lighting in the background shall not be greater than the lowest level in the playing area

Control over main lighting for dimming of the space or switching off completely is needed
Changing rooms with individual lockers for players shall be provided

Individual Court
14 x 7m

Table Tennis
48 x 25m

3

5

10

Analysis of physical facility requirements
Project: Olympic Gymnasium 2009 TaeKwonDo Floor

Space Components:
Dimensions
Storage
hinisnes misc.

Department

Playing Surfaces
Working Surfaces

Name of Space:

Net Assignable Sq. m

Space Description

Purpose:

To provide a gymnasium floor area for Olympic TaeKwonDo as per the requirements of the Olympic Games. To serve as a spectator viewed space and a space where
media may set up for broadcasting live events.

Space Relationships:
a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Seating Requirments
specta

Mo. of beats

comments

Located to allow for multiple access points by spectators. Close to warm-up area, equipment storage areas, loading, change rooms,
referees rooms, first aid.
b. Specific ·

Reserved Seats
Presidential stand

head of state
25 100

Stand A

a)Federation members

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes |

|

NoJT]

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. officials
Stand B Stand C Press - Journalists & photographers Team members, players, tech's, other officials

100 Varies Varies determined by # matches played tables & chairs

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Stand D

Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

Equipment

GO O

Activity Description:

Partake in Olympic, national, provincial and community level TaeKwonDo matches

Scorer's Table
Activity type: (insert x in applicable box)

Doctor and Recorder's Chairs ludge's Chair

1. Private Office 2. Admin Office 3. Classroom 4. Staff Room



6. Fitness 5. Spectator Seating
6. Concourse



  

7. Medical Clinic

ID  
|

Court AnnouncersTable
& Platform
Playing floor must be covered in Elastic tatami mats (1x2m)

Built-up Platform 1m hiah from the base floor
Stair up to platform

18m

5. Sports Surface

8.0ther Specify: |

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Staff

I

I
Floor personelle

Competitors

:ommunications;
(place X in box if required)

Audio Visual
The following audio visual aids will be used:

ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's

|

8

|

Telephone PA System

   

Scoreboards

Television
Projector Sound Reinforcement

|

|

Average hours per week usage

Cable TV Wireless Internet Satelite Communication
Other Specify:

Other

Specify:

Announcer mic plugged in to PA

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed:

blackboard |

| Tackt

Shelving^]

Advertising

Movable: (List items)

Tables, Chairs, small court announcer platform

Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate coiun in)

Yes Ceiling Heights: Any special requirements
If any state clear height

No
X

Yes

No
X

Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy

Does activity require quiet
Heating & Air Conditioning:

Lighting: Any special requirements
X
x

X X

Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned

Is natural daylight needed Above average Intensity Dimmer Control
X

X

Flooring:

Accurate Temp. Control required
If so, give range from to

X

What type of flooring will be required:
Gymnasium sprung Tile
concrete
X X X

and limits +-

%RH

Intake air must be dust free
Other - (specify under comments)

non-slip

X X

Other (Specify under comments)
Services: (place x in box if required)

Water: Hot Q Electrical Power:

Cold Qoeionized ^Dist lied Q Drainage: Floor Q Trough |~l Local Emergency Power Required |7]
| |00Q

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Competition floor must be a raised platform of Sprung wooden floor at a length of 43,000mm and a minimum width of 18,000mm and height from the base floor of 500mm -1000mm
Competition floor surface must be of elastic tatami surface Direct Natural light shall be eliminated from the gymnasium

[

All lighting shall be placed in order NOT to interfere with competing athletes or referees/judges

:loor

Tae Kwon Do
43x 18m

Analysis of physical facility requirements

Space Components:
Storage Finishes Misc.

Project:

Olympic Gymnasium 2009 Volleyball Floor

Department

Playing Surfaces _
Working Surfaces

Name of Space:

Net Assignable Sq. m

Space Description

Purpose:

To provide a gymnasium floor area for Olympic Volleyball as per the requirements of the Olympic Games. To serve as a spectator viewed space and a space where
media may set up for broadcasting live events.

Space Relationships:
a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Seating Requirments Total spectators Reserved Seats Presidential stand Stand A a)FIVB members

No. of Seats

Located to allow for multiple access points by spectators. Close to warm-up area, equipment storage areas, loading, change rooms, referees rooms, first aid.

head of state
25 100 100

b) FIVB guests, sponsors, VIP Yes

Is this space part of a suite?

No|x~|
Stand B

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov officials Stand C Stand D
Press - Journalists & photographers Team members, players, tech's, other officials

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

ables & chairs determined by # matches played

Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

Equipment Activity Description: Playing Olympic, national, provincial and community level basketball games

GJ

Activity type: (insert x in applicable box)

Vets and Posts

1. Private Office
2. Admin Office 3. Classroom 4. Staff Room

6. Fitness 5. Spectator Seating 6. Concourse 7. Medical Clinic
(posts are placed 3t 1m outside sidelines

5. Sports Surface

8.Other Specify: |~~|

 

Scoreboard - each end, & if applicable 1 cube type center court

Adequate lighting

spectator seating

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Federation/Staff

Competitors

|

24

\

Floor personelle ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's £
Communications: Audio Visual
The following audio visual aids will be used:

Average hours per week usage

(place X in box if required)

Telephone PA System

Scoreboards

Television Projector
Sound Reinforcement

Cable TV Wireless Internet
Satelite Communication Other Specify:

Other

Specify

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed blackboard

[ ] TackboardQ

Shelvmg|
Tab/es FT]

|
Che

Advertising Boards[~~| Benches Q] Ball trolley [T|
n-Up Area

Movable: (List items and quantity)

Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate colu mn)

Yes Ceiling Heights: Any special requirements
X

No
Noise: Any special requirements

Yes Is activity noisy Does activity require quiet

No
x

If any state clear height

min - 7m

Heating & Air Conditioning:

Lighting: Any special requirements
x

X

Standard for building is all that is required. Space must be air-conditioned
X

Is natural daylight needed

X X

Above average Intensity
Ultra Violet required Dimmer Control Black out
Flooring:
X X

X

imittee
cers

Accurate Temp. Control required

What type of flooring will be required:
25dgr's
Gymnasium sprung
X
X

If so, give range from

16 to

Tile
concrete
X

CO

non-slip

X X

GO
Services: (place X in box if required)

Other (Specify under comments)

Photographers Positions

Water:
Electrical Power:

Hot ^|

Cold ^]Deionized ^^Distilled ^] Drainage:

Floor ^

Trough ^

Team Statistician

Local Emergency Power Required

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Playing floor - must be Sprung wooden or synthetic flooring but may be permanent or mobile and a minimum
minimum length of 32,000mm and a minimum width of 19,000mm

Lighting - Lighting on the playing area should range from 1000 -1500 lux at 1m above the surface Spare Equipment - 2 official nets with antennae, a pair of posts and a measuring rod

Two ball measuring devices, pressure gauges, two mops, 30 towels for moppers, extra balls, 4 red or
yellow flags for the line judges

Warm-Up Hall - is required close to the Main Hall. No less than 7m in ht. and 32,000 x 19,000 mm

Volleyball Court
38 x 25.5m

3

5

10

Analysis of physical facility requirements Project: Olympic Gymnasium 2009 Weightlifting Area

Space Components:
Dimensions
Storage

Department

Playing Surfaces _
Working Surfaces

Name of Space:

Net Assignable Sq. m

Space Description

Purpose:

To provide a floor area for Olympic Weightlifting as per the requirements of the Olympic Games. To serve as a spectator viewed space and a space where
media may set up for broadcasting live events.

Space Relationships:

a. General -

How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Seating Requirments
Total spectators

no. of beats

Located to allow for multiple access points by spectators. Close to warm-up area, equipment storage areas, loading, change rooms, referees rooms, first aid.
. Specific -

Reserved Seats

Presidential stand
Stand A a)Federation members
25 100

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP

Is this space part of a suite?
If yes, then describe its relationships to other i

Yes|~l
as in the suite.

No|T]

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. officials
Stand B Press - Journalists & photographers

100
Varies Varies determined by #

tables & chairs

Stand C Team members, players, tech's, other officials Stand D Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech officials

matches played Equipment

Activity Description:

GO

For display of Olympic, national, provincial Weightlifting competitions

Referees/ Jury Table
Activity type: (insert x in applicable box)

Referees / Jury Chair
6. Fitness

1. Private Office

2. Admin Office
3. Classroom

4. Staff Room
5. Sports Surface

   



5. Spectator Seating
6. Concourse

El

7. Medical Clinic

8.Other Specify: |"~1

 

3uilt-up Platform 1m high from the base floor
Stair up to platform

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Staff

I

I
Floor personelle

Competitors

lommunications:
(place X in box if required)

Audio Visual
The following audio visual aids will be used:

ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's

Telephone

Scoreboards
Television

x~|
I

PA System

Average hours per week usage

Cable TV Wireless Internet Satelite Communication

rojector Sound Reinforcement
Other Specify:

I

1 ^

Announcer mic plugged in to PA

Other

Specify:

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard |
Movable: (List items)

| Tackboard^]
Tables, Chairs

Shelving[^

Advertising Boarc

Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate coiur nn)

Yes Ceiling Heights: Any special requirements min-13m
X

No Noise: Any special requirements
Is activity noisy

Yes

No
X

If any state clear height

Does activity require quiet Heating & Air Conditioning:

Lighting: Any^special requirements
X X

X

Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned

Is natural daylight needed Above average Intensity Ultra Violet required Dimmer Control
X

X X X

Olympic Backdr Secretary, Director. Jury

Flooring:

Accurate Temp. Control required
If so, give range from to

X

What type of flooring will be required:
Gymnasium sprung Tile
concrete
X

X
X

non-slip

X X

CO

en
Services: (place x in box if required)

Other (Specify under comments)

D
Floor ^ Trough [^ |x~| Local Emergency Power Required

D

@

Water: Electrical Power:

Hot Q^]

Cold £^Deionized ^^Distilled ^] Drainage:

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Competition floor must be a raised platform made of wood, plastic or any solid material at a length of 10,000mm and a minimum width of 10,000mm and height from the base floor of 1000mm Competition floor surface measuring 4m x 4m must covered with a non slippery material
Direct Natural light shall be eliminated from the gymnasium

All lighting shall be placed in order NOT to interfere with competing athletes or referees/judges
Trolley Stretcher must be supplied for medical staff at hand

Weightlifting
28 x 19 m

Analysis of physical facility requirements Project: Olympic Gymnasium 2009 Wrestling Floor

Space Components:
Dimensions
Finishes Misc.

Department

Playing Surfaces
Working Surfaces

Name of Space:

Net Assignable Sq. m

Space Description

Purpose:

To provide a gymnasium floor area for Olympic Wrestling as per the requirements

of the Olympic Games.

To serve as a spectator viewed space and a space where

media may set up for broadcasting live events.

Space Relationships:
a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Seating Requirments
Total spectators

No. of Seats

Located to allow for multiple access points by spectators. Close to warm-up area, equipment storage areas, loading, change rooms, referees rooms, first aid.

Reserved Seats
Presidential stand Stand A a)Federation members
25

J_L

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP

100

b. Specific -

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes |

|

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. officials Stand B Stand C Stand D Press - Journalists & photographers Team members, players, tech's, other officials Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

100
Varies Varies

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

tables & chairs determined by # matches played

Equipment

GO

Activity Description:

Partake in Olympic, national, provincial and community level Wrestling matches

Scorers/Judges

Table

Activity type: (insert x in applicable box)

Scorers/ Judges platform

Scorers / Judqe's Chair 6. Fitness

1. Private Office
2. Admin Office
3. Classroom

Q



5. Spectator Seating 6. Concourse 7. Medical Clinic

 El

Court Announcers/ Control Committee/ Delegates Tables
Playing floor must be covered in Elastic tatami mats (1x2m)

4. Staff Room 5. Sports Surface

 

 
I

Built-up Platform 1m high from the base floor
Stair up to platform

8.0ther Specify: |

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Staff

|

|
Floor personelle

Competitors ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's

| |

6 18

|

Communications:
(place X in box if required)

Audio Visual
The following audio visual aids will be used:

Telephone PA System

Scoreboards
Television

Average hours per week usage

Cable TV
Wireless Internet
Satelite Communication

Projector
Sound Reinforcement
Other Specify:

|
|

|
|

Announcer mic plugged in to PA

Other

Specify:

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard |
Movable: (List items)

| Tackboard^
different sounds for each mat.

Advertising Boards|x | ,-- Scorer's Table &

Tables, Chairs, Built-up platform, 1 Lot drawing notice board, one Gong or Siren with
__^

Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate column)

Ves

Ceiling Heights:

Any special requirements

X

Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy

X

If any state clear height

Does activity require quiet Heating & Air Conditioning: Lighting: Any special requirements
X X

Judges

x

Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned

Is natural daylight needed
Above average Intensity
Dimmer Control
X

x
x

Control Committee
Delegates

Flooring: Accurate Temp. Control required

What type of flooring will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
concrete
X
X

Court Announcers

If so, give range:

18"|to |25"

X X
X

GO

Other - (specify under comments)

non-slip

Other (Specify under comments)
Services: (place x in box if required)

Water: Hot Q Electrical Power:

Cold QDeionized ^Distilled Q Drainage: Floor Q Trough Q Local Emergency Power Required [^

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Competition floor must be a raised Sprung wooden floor platform at a length of 43,000mm
and a minimum width of 18,000mm and height from the base floor of 500mm -1000mm Competition floor surface must be of elastic tatami surface Direct Natural light shall be eliminated from the gymnasium

All lighting shall be placed in order NOT to interfere with competing athletes or referees/judges One information board, on view to everyone from all angles, giving information of the bout One pairing and results board for each category, available to the competitors and officials
placed in a position accessible to everyone

24000_

Option 1 - Octagon

ual Floor
3iTi

Wrestling

48 x 18m

Analysis of physical facility requirements Project: Olympic Gymnasium 2009
Team Change Rooms

Space Components:
Dimensions
age

Department

Changing Rooms
_ Required Surfaces

Name of Space:

Net Assignable Sq.m

Space Description

Purpose:

To provide a changing and showering area for team sports of 20 or less players
untertop

Space Relationships: a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Seating Requirments
Total spectators

no. ot beats

Located to allow for close and easy access to the playing surface Close to warm-up area, easy access to first aid room

Reserved Seats Presidential stand Stand A a)Federation members

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP

b. Specific -

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes |

|

No[T]

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov officials Stand B Stand C Press - Journalists & photographers Team members, players, tech's, other officials

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Stand D

Internat'i referees, & nat'l tech. officials

Equipment

Activity Description:

00

00

Changing into and out of eguipment and uniforms used for play as well as
showering after games.
Item

Benches or Chairs for players Activity type: (insert x in applicable box) Massage Table

1. Private Office 2. Admin Office
3. Classroom




6. Fitness 5. Spectator Seating
6. Concourse

4. Staff Room 5. Sports Surface

  

7. Medical Clinic

8.0ther Specify: [x"~]
preparation for sport

   

Showers

Individual lockers/stalls

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Staff

Competitors Floor personelle ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's

| 20 | n/a

|

Communications:
(place X in box if required)

Audio Visual
The following audio visual aids will be used:

Telephone PA System

Scoreboards
Television ojector

Average hours per week usage

 


Cable TV Wireless Internet
Satelite Communication

Sound Reinforcement Other Specify:



Other

Specify:

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard Q TackboardQ
Movable: (List items)

Shelving|

|

Advertising Boardsf"l

Movable blackboard

,--

Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate colu

Ves Ceiling Heights: Any special requirements min-2.7m
X

No
Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy Does activity require quiet
X

If any state clear height

Heating & Air Conditioning:

Lighting: Any special requirements
X

X
X x

Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned

Is natural daylight needed Above average Intensity Dimmer Control

x

Flooring: Accurate Temp. Control required If so, give range from to
X

What type of flooring will be required:
Gymnasium sprung '"ile
concrete
X X
X

X

non-slip

GO

Other (Specify under comments)
Services: (place x in box if required)

CD

x

Water: Hot [^j Electrical Power:

Cold [^Deionized [^Distilled |

| Drainage: Floor [^ Trough Q] Local Emergency Power Required |x|

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Resilient Flooring - flooring shall be of easily cleaned material (ex. Linoleum, tile)

Ceiling and Door height shall be a minimum height of 2.7 m as per Olympic Basketball requirements
Hangers or Lockers for at minimum 14 competitors
Shower heads must be at a minimum height of 2.5m

Note: When designed
dressing rooms a against one anott

shared showei

quired so two I
) not shower ti

competing

If basketball and/or volleyball is to be
· Ceiling heights and door heigh II be 2.70m .5m height

· Shower heads shall be placed

Team Change Room!

Change Rooms min 50 m2

Scale 1:100

Analysis of physical facility requirements Project: Olympic Gymnasium 2009 Referee Change Rooms Department Changing Rooms

Space Components
Misc

Name of Space:

Net Assignable Sq. m

Required Surfaces

Space Description

Purpose:

To provide a changing and showering area for Officials of any particular game
ypuntertop

Space Relationships: a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Total spectatc

Located to allow for close and easy access to the playing surface

Reserved Seats Presidential stand

Stand A

a)Federation members

I

1

b. Specific

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes |

|

No|7]

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. officials
Stand B Stand C Press - Journalists & photographers Team members, players, tech's, other officials

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Stand D

Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

Equipment

Activity Description:

Changing into and out of official uniforms used for Officiating play in addition to
showering after games.

benches or Chairs for player
Activity type: (insert x in applicable box) Fridge

1. Private Office 2. Admin Office
3. Classroom

4. Staff Room
5. Sports Surface

   

6. Fitness

5. Spectator Seating
6. Concourse

7. Medical Clinic



8.0ther Specify: |x~l
preparation for sport

   

Toilets

iarbage Bins
Individual lockers/stalls

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Staff

Competitors

|

|

Communications:
(place X in box if required)

Audio Visual
he following audio visual aids will be used:

Floor personelle ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's

|

5

|

Telephone PA System

Scoreboards Television Projector
ound Reinforcement

Average hours per week usage

Cable TV
Wireless Internet
Satelite Communication

Other

Specify:

Other

Specify:

jrmshi ngs:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard |
Movable: (List items)

| TackboardJ^

Shelving|~~]

Advertising Boards!"!

znvironmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate column)

Yes

No

Yes Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy Does activity require quiet
X

Ceiling Heights:

Any special requirements

X

If any state clear height

min - 2.7 m

Heating & Air Conditioning:

Lighting: Any special requirements
x

X

Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned

Is natural daylight needed
Above average Intensity
Dimmer Control

X X
X

-Fridge  Table Garbage Bin

 Lockers & Benches
Flooring:

Accurate Temp. Control required If so, give range from to

What type of floorinq will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X
X

 Shower

Tile
concrete

X

non-slip

x

Other (Specify under comments)
Services: (place x in box if required)

x

Water: Hot Q Electrical Power:

Cold |^Deionized ^Distilled Q Drainage: Floor Q Trough ^ Local Emergency Power Required [^

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Resilient Flooring - flooring shall be of easily cleaned material (ex. Linoleum, tile)
Hangers or Lockers for at minimum 5 Officials

There shall be quick and short access to playing floor
from change rooms

Referee Change Room
20 m2 Scale 1:100

Analysis of physical facility requirements

Space Components:
Dimensions

Project:

Olympic Gymnasium 2009
Enteriainment.lndiv. Sport, General Change Room

Department

Changing Rooms
Required Surfaces

Name Of Space:

Net Assignable Sq. m

Space Description

Purpose

To provide a changing and showering area for competitors in individual
competitions in addition to individuals or entertainment squads.

Space Relationships:
a General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Seating Requirments
Total spectators

Mo of Seats

Located to allow for close and easy access to the playing surface
Close to warm-up area, easy access to first aid room

Reserved Seats Presidential stand Stand A a)Federation members

J_L

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP
b. Specific-

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes |

|

No|x~|

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. officials
Stand B Stand C Stand D Press - Journalists & photographers Team members, players, tech's, other officials Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Equipment

Activity Description:

ro

Changing into and out of equipment and uniforms used for play or entertainment
in addition to showering after games.
Benches or Chairs for players

Activity type: (insert x in applicable box)

Table

1. Private Office 2. Admin Office 3. Classroom 4. Staff Room



6. Fitness 5. Spectator Seating
6. Concourse

5. Sports Surface

   






Garbaqe Bins Individual lockers/stalls

7. Medical Clinic

8.0ther Specify: |x~l
preparation for sport or entertainment

rs:

(insert number ii l appropriate boxes)

Staff Floor personelle

Competitors ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's

Communications:
(place X in box if required)

Audio Visual
The following audio visual an

Telephone PA System

Scoreboards

H H

Television rojector
Sound Reinforcement

Average hours per week usage

Cable TV Wireless Internet Satelite Communication Other Specify:

Other

Specify:

6745

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard |
Movable: (List items)

| Tackboard^

Shelving^

Advertising Boards|

|

Garbage Bin

Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate column)

Yes

No
X

Yes Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy Does activity require quiet

No
X

/anities w/ Hot & Cold

Ceiling Heights:

Any special requirements

If any state clear height

Heating & Air Conditioning:

Lighting: Any special requirements
x

X

Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned

Is natural daylight needed Above average Intensity Dimmer Control

X
X X

.ackers

Flooring:

Accurate Temp. Control required
If so, give range from to

X

What type of flooring will be required:
Gymnasium sprung Tile concrete
X X
X

Jenches
X

non-slip

00
Services: (place x in box if required)

Other (Specify under comments)

X

Water: Hot JT] Electrical Power:

Cold [^JDeionized ^^Distilled ^] Drainage: Floor [^ Trough Qj Local Emergency Power Required [7]

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Resilient Flooring - flooring shall be of easily cleaned material (ex. Linoleum, tile)
Lockers shall be standard size lockers

JO!

Entertainment & General #1
Change Rooms 75 m2 Scaie 1:100

Analysis of physical facility requirements
Project: Olympic Gymnasium 2009

Space Components:
Dimensions Storage

Department

Medical
Required Surfaces

Name of Space:

Players First Aid Room

Net Assignable Sq. m

Space Description Purpose: To provide emergency First Aid medical consultation to the Olympic competitors
Wall Bench

Space Relationships:
a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offic
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Seating Requirments

Total spectators Located to allow for close and easy access from changing rooms Should be easily accessed from the floor surface as well
Reserved Seats Presidential stand Stand A a)Federation members

J_L

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP b. Specific Is this space part of a suite? Yes

No[T]
Stand B Stand C

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov officials
Press - Journalists & photographers Team members, players, tech's, other officials

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Stand D

Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

Equipment

Activity Description: Provide emergency First Aid and normal preventative medical consultation.

Activity type: (insert x» i 1. Private Office 2. Admin Office
3. Classroom

applicable box)

Bed

4. Staff Room 5. Sports Surface

    

6. Fitness 5. Spectator Seating
6. Concourse 7. Medical Clinic

   ID
|

-ridge

Coat Rack Privacy Screen Trolley Stretcher Desk
Oxygen cylinder & Defibrilator

8.0ther Specify: fx
Emergency First Aid

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Staff

Competitors

ommunications:
(place X in box if required)

Audio Visual
The following audio visual aids \

Floor personelle

ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's

|

2

|

Telephone
PA System

D =1


Scoreboards Television Projector Sound Reinforcement Other Specify:

Average hours per week usage

|

80

|

Cable TV
Wireless Internet
Satelite Communication

Other

Specify:

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard |
Movable: (List items)

| Tackboard^

Shelving^

Advertising Boards|~~l
-- Ox\

Wardrobe, Privacy Screen, 2 comfortable chairs, coat rack

Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate column)

Yes

No
X

Yes
Noise: Any special requirements

No
X

Ceiling Heights:

Any special requirements

If any state clear height

Is activity noisy Does activity require quiet

·Desk

Heating & Air Conditioning:

Lighting: Any special requirements
X

X

Standard for building is all that is required. Space must be air-conditioned

Is natural daylight needed
Above average Intensity Dimmer Control

X X X

Flooring: Accurate Temp. Control required If so, give range from to
X

ie2
X X

What type of flooring will be required:
Gymnasium sprung

Tile
concrete

X X
X

non-slip
Other (Specify under comments)

en
Services: (place X in box if required)

Waiting Area

Water:
Electrical Power:

Hot [^

Cold [^Deionized ^^Distilled ^] Drainage:

Floor [^

Trough ^]

Local Emergency Power Required

L- Coat Rack

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Resilient Flooring - flooring shall be of easily cleaned material (ex. Linoleum, tile) Privacy Screen shall divide the entire space from the waiting area
Should have access to Natural light

jsily accessed by emergency serv

outside the hail as well
taken there quickly.

s the playing court. Injui

Player First Aid Room

30 m2

Scaie 1:50

Analysis of physical facility requirements
Project: Olympic Gymnasium 2009 General First Aid Room Department Medical

Space Components:
Dimensions

Storage

Name of Space:

Net Assignable Sq. m

Required Surfaces

Space Description
Purpose: To provide emergency First Aid medical consultation for all areas of the building

Space Relationships:
a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offii
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Seating Requirments Total spectators

Located to allow for close and easy access from spectator seating Should be easily accessed from other facility areas in the building.

Reserved Seats Presidential stand
Stand A a)Federation members

J_L

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP
b. Specific Is this space part of a suite?
If yes, then describe its relationships to other;

Yes|~~|
; in the suite.

No[x]
Stand B Stand C Stand D

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. officials

Press - Journalists & photographers Team members, players, tech's, other officials Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

Equipment

Activity Description:
Provide First Aid and normal preventative medical consultation.
Item

Activity type: (insert x in applicable box) 1. Private Office 2. Admin Office 3. Classroom 4. Staff Room 5. Sports Surface

 

6. Fitness
5. Spectator Seating 6. Concourse 7. Medical Clinic



 

  

Fridge

Trolley Stretcher Desk
Oxygen cylinder & Defibrilator

8.Other Specify: [x""|
General emergency First Aid

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)
Communications:
(place X in box if required)

Staff

I

11

Competitors

Audio Visual
The following audio visual aids will be used:

Floor personelle ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's [
Average hours per week usage

Telephone PA System Cable TV Wireless Internet Satelite Communication Other Specify:

Scoreboards

 


Television
3rojector Sound Reinforcement

Other

Specify:

urnishi ngs:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard |
Movable: (List items)

| TackboardQ]

Shelving^

Advertising Boards|

|

Wardrobe, Privacy Screen, 2 comfortable chairs, coat rack

brilator
Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate column)

Yes

No
X

Yes Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy

No
X

Ceiling Heights:

Any special requirements

If any state clear height

Does activity require quiet
Heating & Air Conditioning:

Lighting: Any special requirements
X

X X X

Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned

Is natural daylight needed Above average Intensity Dimmer Control

Desk

X

Flooring:

Accurate Temp. Control required
If so, give range from to

X

What type of flooring will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X

Tile
concrete

X

X
X

non-slip

Other (Specify under comments)
Services: (place x in box if required)

X

Water:
Electrical Power:

Hot [^

Cold [7]Deionized ^^Distilled Q] Drainage:

Floor [^

Trough |"~|

j

3000

Local Emergency Power Required

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Resilient Flooring - flooring shall be of easily cleaned material (ex. Linoleum, tile) Should have access to Natural light (a window)

Note: For First Aid and normal preventative rnedicai consultation.
Should be easily accessed from other facility areas in venue.

General First Aid Room Small
10.5 m2

-sf
Scale 1:50

Analysis of physical facility requirements Project: Olympic Gymnasium 2009 Doping Control Station Department Medical

Space Components:
Dimensions

Name of Space:

Net Assignable Sq. m

Required Surfaces

Space Description

Purpose:

For the controled testing of atheletes for use of performance enhancing drugs

Space Relationships: a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Seating Requirments Total spectators Reserved Seats
Presidential stand

No. of Seats

Located as close to the competition area as possible. There should not be visibility of competitors being escorted to the station and should not have to walk
across the competition venue in front of spectators.
. Specific -

J_L

Stand A

a)Federation members

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes

No [7]

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. officials
Stand B

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Stand C Stand D

Press - Journalists & photographers Team members, players, tech's, other officials

Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

Equipment

Activity Description:

And Furniture

00

To take both urine and blood samples from competitors to send off to a lab for
testing.
Item Bed

Activity type: (insert x iri 1. Private Office 2. Admin Office
3. Classroom

applicable box)

4. Staff Room

   

6. Fitness 5. Spectator Seating
6. Concourse

7. Medical Clinic

   El
|

Adjustable Medical chairs

5. Sports Surface



8.0ther Specify: |x
Sample taking

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Competitors Floor personelle ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's

| |

5 5

| |

Communications:
(place X in box if required)

Audio Visual
The following audio visual ale

Telephone PA System

Scoreboards Television rojector Sound Reinforcement

Average hours per week usage

Cable TV Wireless Internet
Satelite Communication

Other

Specify:

Other

Specify:

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard Q
Movable: (List items)

rdQ]

Shelving^

Advertising Boards|""|

Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate column)

Yes Ceiling Heights: Any special requirements
If any state clear height

No
X

Yes
Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy

No
X

Area & Shower

Does activity require quiet

Heating & Air Conditioning: Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned
X

Lighting: Any special requirements Is natural daylight needed Above average Intensity Dimmer Control

X X X

iroage

X

i-Desk Fridge?

Flooring:

Accurate Temp. Control required

X

What type of flooring will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X

If so, give range from

to

Tile
concrete

X
X X

I
seat(s)
-Fridge

non-slip

CD
Services: (place x in box if required)

Other (Specify under comments)

X

-Cupboard above

Water: Electrical Power:

Hot [^

Cold |x^JDeionized ^^Distilled Q] Drainage:

Floor [^]

Trough ^ |

Secretary / Writing Desks
.10567

Local Emergency Power Required

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Resilient Flooring - flooring shall be of easily cleaned material (ex. Linoleum, tile) Must be a controlled setting Atheletes may not have the opportunity to switch samples or anything of the sort

Doping Control £
Scale 1:100

Analysis of physical facility requirements

Space Components:
Utilities

Finishes

Misc.

Project:

Olympic Gymnasium 2009 Federation VIP Office

Department

Offices
Required Surfaces

Name of Space:

Net Assignable Sq. m

Space Description

Purpose:

Luxury room for Federation President, Secretary General, and Secretary General
Emeritus .

Space Relationships: a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

ting Requirments

'osition

To!

spectat

Shall be located next to a meeting room suitable for at least 10 people and have access to viewing of a game without having to go through regular admission
procedures
b. Specific 

Reserved Seats

XI

Presidential stand Stand A a)Federation members

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes |

|

No|7]

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. officials Stand B Press - Journalists & photographers Stand C Team members, players, tech's, other officials

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Stand D Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

Equipment

Activity Description:

And Furniture

en

o

To be able to watch the game in action on a TV along with the ability to review passed competition previously recorded. In addition conduct the duties relating tc
His/her federation and its relation to the Olympic Games
Activity type: (insert x in applicable box)

__

omfortable desk chair
Fridge

1. Private Office 2. Admin Office
3. Classroom

El

6. Fitness

 
 

5. Spectator Seating
6. Concourse

 

'offee table

4. Staff Room

7. Medical Clinic

 
|

5. Sports Surface

8.0ther Specify: |

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Federation/Staff

| 3

Competitors
Floor personelle ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's |

|
|

Communications:
(place X in box if required)

Audio Visual
The following audio visual aids will be i

Telephone
PA System

E E E
E

Scoreboards Television Projector

D

Average hours per week usage

Cable TV
Wireless Internet

Sound Reinforcement Other Specify;

Satelite Communication Other Specify:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard |
Movable: (List items)

| TackboardQ]

Shelving^]

Advertising Boards!""]

Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate coiu nn)

Yes

No
X

Ceiling Heights:

Any special requirements

Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy Does activity require quiet

X

If any state clear height

Heating & Air Conditioning: Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned
X

Lighting: Any special requirements
Is natural daylight needed

X X
X



nting Desk
Dhone

Above average Intensity
Dimmer Control
X

Flooring:

Accurate Temp. Control required
If so, give range from to

X

What type of flooring will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X
X

Tile
concrete

X
X

non-slip

en
Services: (place x in box if required)

Other (Specify under comments)

Water: Hot ^] Electrical Power:

Cold Q]Deionized [^Distilled ^] Drainage: Floor ^ Trough [^ Local Emergency Power Required |

Fridge--,

1

[

1

Additional Requirements or Comments:

May be placed high up in the gymnasium so as to also have a view of the game if needed
Natural Light would be perferred
,

Note: Adjacent to a Meeting Room suitable for 10 persons
Furniture must be of better quality

Sports Federation VIP Office
22 m2

Scale 1:50

Analysis of physical facility requirements

Space Components
torage

Project:

Olympic Gymnasium 2009

Department

Offices
Required Surfaces

Name of Space:

Ten Person Meeting Room

Net Assignable Sq.m

Space Description

Purpose:

To hold meetings within the particular Federation

Space Relationships:

a. General -

How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas

Shall be located next to the Federation VIP Office in addition to other offices. Access to viewing of a game without having to go through regular admission
procedures .

Reserved Seats Presidential stand

Stand A a)Federation members

b. Specific -

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes I

1

No

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. officials Stand B Press - Journalists & photographers Stand C Team members, players, tech's, other officials

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Stand D Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

quipment And Furniture

Activity Description:

en

Meeting and conducting the duties pertaining to the Federation and its involvement
with the Olympic Games

Activity type: (insert x in applicable box)

1. Private Office 2. Admin Office
3. Classroom


  

6. Fitness

5. Spectator Seating
6. Concourse

 



4. Staff Room 5. Sports Surface

7. Medical Clinic



8.Other Specify: |~H

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Federation/Staff

|10

|

Competitors

I

I

Communications:
(place X in box if required)

Audio Visual
The following audio visual aids will be used:

Floor personelle ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's

|

|

Telephone

Scoreboards Television
Projector

PA System

Average hours per week usage

I 80 |

Cable TV
Wireless Internet

Sound Reinforcement



Satelite Communication Other Specify:

Other

Specify:

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard |
Movable: (List items)

| TackboardQ]

Shelving^

Advertising Boards|~~|

Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate column)

Yes Ceiling Heights: Any special requirements
If any state clear height

No
X

Yes Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy Does activity require quiet

No
X

Fridge

Heating & Air Conditioning:

Lighting: Any special requirements
X

X X

Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned

Is natural daylight needed
Above average Intensity Dimmer Control
X

X

-Wall Mounted TV's

Waist Height Storage Cabinets

Flooring: Accurate Temp. Control required If so, give range from to
X

What type of floorinq will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X X X
X

Tile
concrete

Re-Configu abie_ Meeting Tables

non-slip

en
Services: (place x in box if required)

Other (Specify under comments)

Water:
Electrical Power:

Hot Q

Cold QDeionized ^Distilled Q Drainage:

Floor Q

Trough Q

Local Emergency Power Required

Additional Requirements or Comments:

May be placed high up in the gymnasium so as to also have a view of the game if needed
Natural Light would be perferred

J.

7000

Note: Adjacent to Federation VIP Office

10 Person Meeting Room
41 m2

Scale 1:50

Analysis of physical facility requirements Project: Olympic Gymnasium 2009 Federation Offices
Department Offices

Space Components

Name of Space:

Net Assignable Sq. m

tequired Surfaces

Space Description

Purpose:

To provide office space for the Sports Federations using the building

Space Relationships: a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

ating Requirments

mo. or beat

--
Reserved Seats
Presidential stand Stand A aJFederation members
.

n

Shall be located in close relationship to the other federation offices within the
buildinq

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP

b. Specific -

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes |

|

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. officials
Stand B Press - Journalists & photographers Stand C Team members, players, tech's, other officials Stand D Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite

Activity Description:

And Furniture

en

Meeting and conducting the duties pertaining to the Federation and its involvement
with the Olympic Games ___
Item

)es/c chair
Activity type: (insert x in applicable box)

Meeting Chairs
idge

1. Private Office 2. Admin Office
3. Classroom

 El

6. Fitness

5. Spectator Seating
6. Concourse

4. Staff Room

 


  
|

Storage Cabinets

/Vail Mounted TV's
°hotocopier

7. Medical Clinic



5. Sports Surface

8.0ther Specify: |

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Federation/Staff

I 6

Competitors Floor personelle ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's |

| |

Communications:
(place X in box if required)

Audiovisual
The following audio visual aids will be used:

Telephone PA System

Scoreboards

Television
Projector

Average hours per week usage

E

Cable TV
Wireless Internet

Sound Reinforcement

Satelite Communication Other Specify:

Other

Specify:

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard |
Movable: (List items)

| Tackboard^]

Shelving^]

Advertising Boards!""]

environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate coiur nn)

Yes

No
X

Yes

Ceiling Heights:

Any special requirements

Noise: Any special requirements
Is activity noisy Does activity require quiet

X

If any state clear height

Heating & Air Conditioning:

Lighting: Any special requirements
X

X X

Office Meeting Area

Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned

Is natural daylight needed
Above average Intensity Dimmer Control
X

X

Flooring:

Wall Mounted TV

Accurate "emp. Control required
If so give range from to

X

What type of floorinq will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X X

Tile
concrete

X

non-slip

X

en en
Services: (place X in box if required)

Other (Specify under comments)

Photo Copier
Waist Height Storage Cabinets

Water: Hot Q Electrical Power:

Cold ^Deionized ^Distilled Q Drainage: Floor Q Trough Q Local Emergency Power Required Q

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Flooring may be specified as of a resilient type

Natural Light would be perferred

Note: Must accomodate 6 people and have a meeting area with ability to watch live and review events on TV.

Federation offices
47 m2 Scale 1:50

Analysis of physical facility requirements

Space Components:
Department Offices

Utilities

Project: Olympic Gymnasium 2009 Name of Space: Federation Commissioners Office
Space Description

Net Assignable Sq.m

Required Surfaces

Purpose:

To provide a private office space for the Federation commissioner

Space Relationships:

a. General -

How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Shall be located in close relationship to the other federation offices within the
building .

Reserved Seats

Presidential stand

Stand A a)Federation members

b. Specific-

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. officials
Stand B

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Stand C Team members, players, tech's, other officials Stand D Intemafl referees, & nat'l tech officials

Press - Journalists & photographers

quipment

Activity Description:

And Furniture

en CD

Meeting and conducting the duties pertaining to the Federation and its involvement
with the Olympic Games ,

Activity type: (insert x In applicable box)

1. Private Office 2. Admin Office
3. Classroom

El 

6. Fitness

5. Spectator Seating
6. Concourse

4. Staff Room

5. Sports Surface

  

7. Medical Clinic

   
|

8.Other Specify: |

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Federation/Staff

I 1

Competitors Floor personelle ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's

I |

I |

Communications:
(place X in box if required)

Audio Visual
The following audio visual aic

Telephone

coreboards Television
Projector

PA System

D

Average hours per week usage

I 80 I

Cable TV
Wireless Internet

Sound Reinforcement

Satelite Communication Other Specify:

Other

Specify;

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard |
Movable: (List items)

| Tackboard^

Shelving^]

Advertising Boards|

|

Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate column)

Yes Ceiling Heights: Any special requirements If any state clear height

No
x

Yes Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy Does activity require quiet

No
x

FndgeX
X

Heating & Air Conditioning: Standard for building is all that is required. Space must be air-conditioned
X

Lighting: Any^special requirements Is natural daylight needed Above average Intensity Dimmer Control
X

X

Flooring:

Accurate Temp. Control required If so, give range from to

x

What type of flooring will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X X

Tile
concrete

X X

·--

Wall Mounted TV

non-slip

en
Services: (place x in box if required)

Other (Specify under comments)

Water:
Electrical Power:

Hot Q

Cold QDeiomzed [^Distilled Q Drainage:

Floor Q

Trough Q]

Local Emergency Power Required

I

Additional Requirements or Comments:
Flooring may be specified as of a resilient type

Natural Light would be perferred

Note: Must accomodate 6 people and have a meeting area

with ability to watch live and review events on TV.

Federation Commissioners Office
12 m2

,
Scale 1:50

Analysis of physical facility requirements

Space Components:

Dirr
Department Offices Required Surfaces

"IJtiHtie!

Project:

Olympic Gymnasium 2009 Federation Services Office

Name of Space:

Net Assignable Sq. m

Space Description

Purpose:

To provide a private office space staff assisting the sports federations involved

Space Relationships:

a. General -

How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Shall be located in close relationship to the other federation offices within the
building ,

Reserved Seats

Presidential stand Stand A a)Federation members

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP

b. Specific -

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes |

|

No

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov official
Stand B Press - Journalists & photographers Stand C Team members, players, tech's, other officials

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Stand D

Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

Equipment
And Furniture

Activity Description:

en oo

Meeting and conducting the duties pertaining to the the installation and servicing of the various advertising signage and courtside signage in and around the building

Activity type: (insert x in applicable box)

1. Private Office 2. Admin Office
3. Classroom

 ID

6. Fitness

5. Spectator Seating
6. Concourse

4. Staff Room

5. Sports Surface

  

  


7. Medical Clinic

8.0ther Specify: Q

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Federation/Staff

| 5

Competitors Floor personelle ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's

| |

| |

Communications:
(place X in box if required)

Audio Visual
he following audio visual aids will be i

Telephone PA System

D
U 

Scoreboards Television Projector
Sound Reinforcement



Average hours per week usage

Cable TV
Wireless Internet

  

Satelite Communication

Other

Specify:

Other

Specify:

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard Q TackboardQ
Movable: (List items)

Shelving!""!

Advertising Boards!""!

environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate column)

Ves

Yes
X

Ceiling Heights:

Any special requirements

Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy Does activity require quiet

X

If any state clear height

Heating & Air Conditioning: Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned
X

Lighting: Any special requirements

x

Is natural dayliqht needed Above average Intensity
Dimmer Control
x

x
x

Flooring:

Accurate Temp. Control required
If so, give range from to

X

What type of flooring will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X X

Tile
concrete

X
X

non-slip

en CD
Services: (place x in box if required)

Other (Specify under comments)

Water:
Electrical Power:

Hot Q]

Cold Qoeionized ^Distilled Q Drainage:

Floor Q

Trough Q

Local Emergency Power Required

Additional Requirements or Comments: Flooring may be specified as of a resilient type Natural Light would be perferred
,-

Note: For staff that the installatic signage and

sports federation in ie various advertising

Federation Services Office
23 m2 Scale 1:50

Analysis of physical facility requirements

Space Components
Store

TtiifieT

Project:

Olympic Gymnasium 2009
LOC(Local Organising Committee) Control Office

Department Area Sq. m

Offices
Required Surfaces

Name Of Space:

Space Description

Purpose:

To provide office space for staff in charge of coordination of all operations in the
venue. ___

Space Relationships: a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Seating Requirments

no. ot beats

total spectators
Reserved Seats Presidential stand Stand A a)Federation members

Shall be located centrally off of the main entrance and keeping in mind similar
applicability for post Olympic use

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP

b. Specific -

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes |

|

No [^

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. officials
Stand B Stand C Press - Journalists & photographers Team members, players, tech's, other officials

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Stand D

Intemat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

Equipment

Activity Description:

o

Conducting the duties pertaining to the the coordination and running of the building
during the Olympic Games

Activity type: (insert x in applicable box)

Desk

Vail mounted TV

1. Private Office
2. Admin Office
3. Classroom

 El

6. Fitness 5. Spectator Seating
6. Concourse

 

meeting chairs coffee table storage cabinet

4. Staff Room
5. Sports Surface

  



Mdge_

7. Medical Clinic


|

8.0ther Specify: |

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Federation/Staff

|14

Competitors

:ommunications:
(place X in box if required)

Audio Visual
he following audio visual aids will be used:

Floor personelle ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's £
Average hours per week usage

Telephone PA System

Scoreboards

I] I]

Television
Projector

Cable TV Wireless Internet Satelite Communication Other Specify:

Sound Reinforcement Other Specify:

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard Q TackboardQ
Movable: (List items)

Shelving^

Advertising Boards|~|

Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropnate column)

Yes Ceiling Heights: Any special requirements If any state clear height

No
X

fes Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy Does activity require quiet

No
X

Heating & Air Conditioning:

Lighting: Any special requirements
X

X

Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned

Is natural daylight needed Above average Intensity Dimmer Control
X

X X

Flooring:

Accurate Temp. Control required
If so, give range from to

X

What type of floorinq will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X

Tile
concrete non-slip

X
X
X

Other (Specify under comments)
Services: (place x in box if required)

Water:
Electrical Power:

Hot ^]

Cold Q^Deionized ^]Distilled Q] Drainage:

Floor ^

Trough [^

Waist Height

Local Emergency Power Required

Storage Cabinets

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Flooring may be specified as a resilient type Natural Light would be perferred

Small Meeting Area

\iole

iates all of the venues various

LOG (Local Organising C
Control Office
Scale 1:100

Analysis of physical facility requirements Project: Olympic Gymnasium 2009
Mixed Zone Department Area Sq. m Media

Space Components:
Storage Finishes Misc.

Name of Space:

Required Surfaces

Space Description Purpose: For players and coaches to meet Media after the event

Space Relationships:
a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Seating Requirments Total spectators
Reserved Seats

Shall be between areas where players leave the court to the changing rooms

Presidential stand Stand A
b. Specific 

a)Federation members b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes

No [7]
Stand B

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. officials
Press - Journalists & photographers

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Stand C
Stand D

Team members, players, tech's, other officials
Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech officials

Equipment Activity Description: For TV, Radio and Print Media to interview the athelete and coaches informally
after the event during the Olympic Games Item Activity type: (insert x in applicable box)
Movable Barriers Olympic Backdrop sufficient so journalists have 80m*2

CD

And Furniture

1. Private Office 2. Admin Office 3. Classroom 4. Staff Room

5. Sports Surface

    

6. Fitness 5. Spectator Seating 6. Concourse 7. Medical Clinic

8.0ther Specify: \x"~\Media Facilities

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Federation/Staff
Media

CD

Competitors

ommunications:

Audio Visual
he following audio visual aids will be i

I 200 I

Floor personelle ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's
Average hours per week usage

[

(place X in box if required)

Telephone
PA System

Scoreboards

\~80l

Television

Cable TV
Wireless Internet

i]

Projector Sound Reinforcement

Satelite Communication Other Specify:



Other

Specifyj

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard Q] TackboardQ
Movable: (List items)

Shelv ngQ

Advertising Boards|

|

To Chanc
Environmental Characteristics (place x m appropriate coiu nn)

Rooms
No Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy Does activity require quiet
X
x

Ffcv

Yes

No
X

Ceiling Heights:

Any special requirements

If any state clear height

Raclic

Heating & Air Conditioning: Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned
X X

Lighting: Any special requirements Is natural daylight needed Above average Intensity Dimmer Control

X X

X
X

Written

Flooring: Accurate Temp Control required If so, give range from to
X

What type of flooring will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X

Written

Tile
concrete

X
X X

non-slip

Other (Specify under comments)

X

CO
Services: (place x in box if required)

ater:
lectrical Power:

Hot Q]

Cold QDeionized ^Distilled Q Drainage:

Floor Q

Trough |

|
Written

Local Emergency Power Required

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Important for teams to follow this pahtway after games and training sessions at the venue
Flooring may be specified as a resilient type

Walls should be made with with sound control in mind
Walls should contain the Olympic backdrop Lighting should be sufficient and use spotlights for telvision broadcasting

Media Area shall be large enough to accommodate 200 jounalists

1
/

\ Sports

80 m2

Scale 1:100

Analysis of physical facility requirements

Space Components:
Dimen

"sloT

lishes

Misc.

Project:

Olympic Gymnasium 2009
Communication Centre

Department Area Sq. m

Media
Required Surfaces

Name of Space:

Space Description

Purpose:

For telephone and electronic transmission for media and their home base

Space Relationships: a General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Seating Requirments
Total spectators

no. or beats

Shall be located close to all other Media areas, easily accessed from Press
Conference room and Media workroom

Reserved Seats Presidential stand Stand A a)Federation members

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP
b. Specific 

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes |

|

No|x~|

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. officials Stand B Press - Journalists & photographers Stand C Team members, players, tech's, other officials Stand D Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Equipment

Activity Description:

And Furniture

For media to access and use for business purposes. To transmit information via
telephone, fax and internet

Activity type: (insert x in applicable box)

Desks
Telephones

1. Private Office
2. Admin Office
3. Classroom

4. Staff Room 5. Sports Surface

    

6. Fitness

nternet Access connection

5. Spectator Seating
6. Concourse

7. Medical Clinic

8.0ther Specify: |x~|Media Facilities

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Federation/Staff
Media

Competitors

Communications:
(place X in box if required)

Audio Visual
The following audio visual aids will be used:

Hoi

Floor personelle ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's [
Average hours per week usage

Telephone PA System

Scoreboards Television
Projector Sound Reinforcement




Cable TV Wireless Internet Satelite Communication

 

Other

Specifyj

Other

Specify:

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard |
Movable: (List items)

| Tackboard[^

Shelving^

Advertising Boardsj

|

Environmental Characteristics (place x m appropriate coiur nn)

Yes

No
X

Ceiling Heights:

Any special requirements

Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy Does activity require quiet

X

If any state clear height

X

Heating & Air Conditioning:

Lighting: Any special requirements
X X

X
X

Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned

Is natural daylight needed
Above average Intensity Dimmer Control

x
x

f
 D

Storage Cioset|l//

Flooring:

Accurate Temp. Control required
If so, give range from to

X

What type of flooring will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X X X

Tile
concrete

  

non-sli£

X X

en en
Services: (place x in box if required)

Other (Specify under comments)

Water:
Electrical Power:

Hot ^]

Cold ^^Deionized ^^Distilled Q] Drainage:

Floor ^]

Trough ^

DD

Local Emergency Power Required
/

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Flooring may be specified as a resilient type

Note: Easily anc
press cor

essible from the press tribune, the

3/n and the media workroom
onic tra laptop

* 10

* Us

Communication Centre
50m2 Scale 1:100

Analysis of physical facility requirements

Space Components
Utilities

lishes

Misc.

Project:

Olympic Gymnasium 2009
Press Conference Room

Department

Media Required Surfaces

Name Of Space:

Area Sq. m

Space Description

Purpose:

To provide an area for press conferences for the Preliminaries of Olympic Events

Raised Podium

Space Relationships:

a. General -

How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Seating Re

irments

Total spectators

Itshould be separated from the Media Workroom and other areas creating
disturbing noises .

Reserved Seats Presidential stand Stand A a)Federation members

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP

b. Specific -

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes Q]

No

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. officials
Stand B Stand C Press - Journalists & photographers Team members, players, tech's, other officials

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite

Stand D

Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

Equipment

Activity Description:

And Furniture

Conducting press conferences after events in a controled setting
during the Olympic Games __

Activity type: (insert x in applicable box)

Desk
)lympic Backdrop

1. Private Office 2. Admin Office
3. Classroom

 

6. Fitness
5. Spectator Seating
6. Concourse


^]

Podium Stair
Sound system

microphones for podium

4. Staff Room

5. Sports Surface

  

7. Medical Clinic

8.Other Specify: [x""|Med/a Facilities

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Federation/Staff
Media

Competitors

lommunications:
(place X in box if required)

Audiovisual
The following audio visual aids will be used:

I 106 I

Floor personelle ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's [
Average hours per week usage

Telephone PA System

Scoreboards Television Projector Sound Reinforcement

 

Cable TV
Wireless Internet Satelite Communication Other Specify:


Specify:

Other

i box if required)

Fixed: blackboard Q Tackboard ^
Movable: (List items)

Shelving|

|

Advertising Boards[|

Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate coiur nn)

Yes Ceiling Heights: Any special requirements If any state clear height

No
X

Yes Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy Does activity require quiet
X
X

-Chair Storage

Heating & Air Conditioning:

Lighting: Any special requirements
X X

X
X X

Standard for building is all that is required. Space must be air-conditioned

Is natural daylight needed Above average Intensity
Dimmer Control
X

Flooring:

Accurate Temp. Control required
If so, give range from to

X

What type of floorinq will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X

Tile
concrete

X
X X X

H B 8 H B: f ]] fi fll (]! Ql
'odium

-Chair Storage

non-slip Other (Specify under comments)
Services: (place x in box if required)

. , 1 0' Ql
1

Q D

0

1 0.
U

3

3

Water:
Electrical Power:

Hot ^]

Cold ^^Deionized ^^Distilled [^ Drainage:

Floor Qj

Trough jQ

Local Emergency Power Required

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Podium should be lit with minimum 1200 lux by using additional spotlights
Flooring may be specified as a resilient type

Walls should be made with with sound control in mind

Space is required to have stationary TV Cameras set up to record the press conference
Room should be soundproof

Sound System should be professional and consiste of several loud speakers and 4-6 mic's

Scale 1:100
m-

Analysis of physical facility requirements

Space Components:
Dimensions
ige

Project:

Olympic Gymnasium 2009
Security Centre

Department

Support
Required Surfaces

Name of Space:

Area Sq. m

Space Description

Purpose:

To provide a room with all necessary security technology and monitoring equipment

Space Relationships: a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

eating Requirments spectatc

Shall be located near the main control point of the building

Reserved Seats Presidential stand
Stand A a)Federation members

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP
b. Specific

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes

No [7]

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. official:
Stand B Press - Journalists & photographers Stand C Team members, players, tech's, other officials Stand D Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech officials

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Equipment

Activity Description:

And Furniture

00

To maintian a level of security over the entire venue space and enable quick
assistance when needed

Activity type: (insert x in applicable box)

Chair

1. Private Office 2. Admin Office
3. Classroom




6. Fitness
5. Spectator Seating


Q

Nail mounted tv monitors (as many as needed)

4. Staff Room

5. Sports Surface

  

6. Concourse 7. Medical Clinic

Q] Q

8.0ther Specify: fx~~\Support Services

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

lommunications:

Audio Visual
he following audio visual aids will be used:

Federation/Staff Media

Competitors

(place X in box if required)

Floor personelle ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's

|

|

Telephone

Scoreboards Television Projector ound Reinforcement

PA System

Average hours per week usage

Cable TV
Wireless Internet Satelite Communication

Other

Specify:

Other

Specify:

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

ed: blackboard Q TackboardQ
Movable: (List items)

ShelvingQ

Advertising Boards|~~|

environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate coiu nn)

/es Ceiling Heights: Any special requirements
X

Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy Does activity require quiet

X

If any state clear height

X

Heating & Air Conditioning:

Lighting: Any special requirements
X
x

x
X X

Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned

Is natural daylight needed
Above average Intensity

Dimmer Control

Flooring:

Accurate Temp. Control required
If so, give range from to

X

What type of floorinq will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X
X

Tile
concrete
X

X

non-slip

X
X

Other (Specify under comments)

CD
Services: (place x in box if required)

nounted

Water:

Hot Q

Cold QDeionized ^Distilled Q Drainage:

Floor Q

Trough Q

Electrical Power:
Additional Requirements or Comments: Flooring may be of any resilient material

Local Emergency Power Required

[7]

_4Q00_

The Security Centre shall be a secure and lockable room for the security manager

Note:

finical equipment for the

camera feeds on site

Security Centre 19 m2 Scale 1:50

Analysis of physical facility requirements Project: Olympic Gymnasium 2009
Hospitality Area

Space Components
Dimensions Stor; Utilities

lishes

Misc.

Department Area Sq. m

Support
Required Surfaces

Name Of Space:

Space Description

Purpose:

For VIP accomodation 1 hour before, during, and 1hour after the event

Space Relationships: a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas

Seating Requirments Total spectators

no. oi beat;

Shall be located close to the VIP seats, and Catering room

Reserved Seats
Presidential stand

Stand A

a)Federation members

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP

b. Specific -

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes |

|

No [F]

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. officials Stand B Stand C Stand D Press - Journalists & photographers Team members, players, tech's, other officials Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Equipment

Activity Description:

And Furniture

To accommodate catering for 300 guests during Preliminaries and 500 during
Final rounds

Activity type: (insert x in applicable box)

Tables

1. Private Office 2. Admin Office
3. Classroom

4. Staff Room 5. Sports Surface

    

6. Fitness

5. Spectator Seating

6. Concourse 7. Medical Clinic

£] 

8.0ther Specify: |x~|Support Services

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Federation/Staff Media

13-5001

Competitors

|

lommunications:
(place X in box if required)

Audio Visual
The following audio visual aids v

Floor personelle ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's [
Average hours per week usage

Telephone PA System

Scoreboards Television Projector

Cable TV Wireless Internet

Sound Reinforcement Other Specifyj

   

Satelite Communication
Other Specify:

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard |
Movable: (List items)

| Tackboard^]

Shelv

Advertising Boards||

Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate column)

Ves

No

No Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy Does activity require quiet
X

Ceiling Heights:

Any special requirements

X

If any state clear height

·review additional comments at bottom

X

X

Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned

Is natural daylight needed
Above average Intensity
Dimmer Control

x

X

x

Flooring:
x

What type of floorinq will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X
X

If so, give range from

to

Tile
concrete

X
X

non-slip

Other (Specify under comments)
Services: (place x in box if required)

x

Water: Hot Q Electrical Power:

Cold QDeionized QDistilled Q Drainage: Floor [_] Trough Q Local Emergency Power Required Q

Additional Requirements or Comments:

*Ceiling Ht. may be that of a Basketball court for ease in converting to a sports hall for Post Olympic use
Flooring may be specified as a resilient type

Natural Daylight and views are desireable but not required
Note: Not necessarily needed to be one large open area

Note: VIP He

r Federation and Locai
te 300peop!e

Organi

Scale: 1:350 mdi

Analysis of physical facility requirements
Project: Olympic Gymnasium 2009 Department Support
36

Space Components;
Dimensions

Storage

Name Of Space:

Catering Room

Area Sq. m

Required Surfaces

Space Description
Purpose: For preparation of food to be served in the Hospitality area
Types

Preparation Island

Space Relationships:
a General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas

Seating Requirments Total spectators Reserved Seats
Presidential stand Stand A a)Federation members

J_L

Shall be located close to the Hospitality Areas

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP

b. Specific -

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes

No |x

|

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov. officials
Stand B Press - Journalists & photographers

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Stand C

Team members, players, tech's, other officials

Stand D

Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

Equipment

Activity Description: To accommodate the preparation of food, catering from 300 to 500 guests during

Activity type: (insert x in applicable box) 1. Private Office 2. Admin Office 3. Classroom 4. Staff Room 5. Sports Surface

Garbage Bin
Refridgerator Floor to Sealing Shelving in Kitchen storage

    

6. Fitness 5. Spectator Seating 6. Concourse 7. Medical Clinic

8.0ther Specify: \>T~\Support Services

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Communications:

Audio Visual
The following audio visual aids will be used:

Federation/Staff Media

\4to6\

Competitors

(place X in box if required)

Floor personelle ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's
Average hours per week usage

[
| 80 \

Telephone PA System Cable TV
Wireless Internet Satelite Communication

Scoreboards
Television Drojector

ound Reinforcement Other Specify:

Other

Specify:

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard |
Movable: (List items)

| Tackboard[^

Shelv ngj

|

Advertising Boards^J

2-Frid
environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate coiu

Yes

No
X

Yes Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy Does activity require quiet
X
x

Ceiling Heights:

Any special requirements

If any state clear height

Heating & Air Conditioning:

Lighting: Any special requirements
X

X
X
X

Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned

Is natural daylight needed
Above average Intensity Dimmer Control

X

Kitcher

Storage
Flooring:

Accurate Temp. Control required
If so, give range from to

X

What type of flooring will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X
X X

"ile
concrete

non-slip^

Other (Specify under comments)

X

00
Services: (place x in box if required)

Water:
Electrical Power:

Hot ^|

Cold 1

|Deionized [^Distilled Q] Drainage:

Floor ^

Trough J_J

f~~
Coun
--180" Swing

Local Emergency Power Required

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Flooring may be specified as a resilient type easily cleaned material

To Hospitality Area

Note: As close as possible to Hospitality areas where the catering
can he prepared and then served in the Hospitality areas

Catering Room 36 m2

Scale 1:50

Analysis of physical facility requirements
Project: Olympic Gymnasium 2009 Accreditation Centre
Department Support

Space Components:

Name Of Space:

Area Sq. m

Required Surfaces

Space Description

Purpose:

To provide a secure space to accredit Olympic family members and workers

Space Relationships: a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Seating Requirments Total spectators

No. of Seats

Comments

Shall be close to the entry of the building for accreditation prior to full access to
the buildinq and event space

Reserved Seats
Presidential stand Stand A a)Federation members

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP
b. Specific 

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes |

|

No [7]

c) Organizers' guests, local spons gov officials
Stand B Press - Journalists & photographers Stand C Team members, players, tech's, other officials

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Stand D

Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

Equipment
And Furniture

Activity Description:

To validate the Olympic family members and workers and provide them with valid
passes for access to the venue

Activity type: (insert x ii 1

applicable box)

1. Private Office
2. Admin Office
3. Classroom

4. Staff Room 5. Sports Surface

   


6. Fitness 5. Spectator Seating

Comfortable arm-chairs
Photo Copier Storaae cabinet

6. Concourse
7. Medical Clinic

Q]

8.Other Specify: |x~|Support Services

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

communications:

Audio Visual
The following audio visual aids will be used:

Federation/Staff Media Floor personelle

Competitors

(place X in box if required)

ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's

Telephone

Scoreboards Television
Projector



PA System


 

Average hours per week usage

Cable TV
Wireless Internet
Satelite Communication

Sound Reinforcement

Other

Specify:

Other

Specify:

Furnishings:

c in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard |
Movable: (List items)

| TackboardQj]

Shelving^

Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate coiur

Yes

No
X

Yes Noise: Any special requirements

No
X

Ceiling Heights:

Any special requirements

If any state clear height

Is activity noisy

Does activity require quiet
Heating & Air Conditioning: Lighting: Any special requirements
x

X

X

Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned

Is natural daylight needed
Above average Intensity Dimmer Control

X X
X

Storage Cabinet
Flooring:

Accurate Temp. Control required
If so, give range from to

X

What type of floorinq will be required:
Gymnasium sprung Tile
concrete
x
X
X X

non-slip

Other (Specify under comments)

X

en
Services: (place x in box if required)

Water:
Electrical Power:

Hot Q

Cold QDeionized ^Distilled Q Drainage:

Floor Q

Trough Q

Local Emergency Power Required

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Flooring may be specified as a resilient type easily cleaned material

Note: The venue accreditation office mainly deals with the validation and day pass issues
for both the Olympic family members and workers.

Accreditation Centre 94 m2

Scale 1:100

Analysis of physical facility requirements Project: Olympic Gymnasium 2009 Volunteer Centre
Department Area Sq. m
Support

Space Components:
Dimensions

Storage

Name Of Space:

Required Surfaces

Space Description Purpose: To provide a secure space to register and deliver tasks to Olympics volunteers
Types

Space Relationships:
a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Seating Requirments
Total spectators

No. of Seats

Shall be close to the office administration area and other meeting rooms

Reserved Seats
Presidential stand

J_L

Stand A

a)Federation members b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP

I

5

b. Specific -

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes

No [>T]

c) Organizers' guests, local spons. gov officials
Stand B Press - Journalists & photographers Stand C Team members, players, tech's, other officials Stand D Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite

Equipment

Activity Description:

a)

A room where 18 volunteers at a time can register each day and get tasks

Activity type: (insert xn i

applicable box)

1. Private Office
2. Admin Office
3. Classroom

  
 

6. Fitness
5. Spectator Seating

Comfortable arm-chairs Wall mounted TV
Storage cabinet

6. Concourse
7. Medical Clinic

4. Staff Room 5. Sports Surface

8.0ther Specify: \>T~\Support Services

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

ommumcations:

Audio Visual
The following audio visual aids will be used:

Federation/Staff Media

Competitors Floor personelle ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's

| | 18

(place X in box if required)

Telephone

Scoreboards
Television Projector Sound Reinforcement

PA System

 


Average hours per week usage

Cable TV
Wireless Internet Satelite Communication

Other

Specify.

Other

Specify:

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard |
Movable: (List items)

| Tackboard^

Shelving^]

Advertising Boards[~l

Environmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate column)

Ves Ceiling Heights: Any special requirements

No
X

Noise: Any special requirements

X

If any state clear height

Is activity noisy
Does activity require quiet
X

Heating & Air Conditioning:

Lighting: Any special requirements
X

X
X

Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned

Is natural daylight needed
Above average Intensity Dimmer Control
X

X

Flooring:

Accurate Temp. Control required If so, give range from to

X

What type of flooring will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X X x
X

Tile
concrete

non-slip

Other (Specify under comments)
Services: (place x in box if required)

X

Water: Hot |^j Electrical Power:

Cold ^^Deionized ^^Distilled ^] Drainage: Floor ^ Trough Qj Local Emergency Power Required j|

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Flooring may be specified as a resilient type easily cleaned material

.

Note: A room where volunteers a tasks, it shall have tables a

lister en tats ana

jy and get

Volunteer Centre
47 rrr

Scale 1:50

Analysis of physical facility requirements
Project: Olympic Gymna slum 2009

Name of Space:

Commercial Partner Storage

Area Sq. m

Department

'

Support

100

Space Description
Purpose:

iHoSw should mis space relate to genera, areas in the bui,ding? e9: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Total spectators

Reserved Seats

hp Inratpd in the storage areas of the building with secured access

Presidential stand

Stand A a)Federation members

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP

c) Organizers' guests, local spons gov. officials

b Specific -

Is this space part of a suite?

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

es I

Stand B Press - Journalists & photographers

Stand C Team members, players, tech's, other officials Stand D Internat'l referees, & nat'l tech officials

Activity Description:

00

J

er eauioment. Additional secured storage for remaining
3/so be a minimum of 10
Activity type: (insert x in applicable box)

the federation apparel supplier and is also used for the

1. Private Office

Q

6. Fitness 5. Spectator Seating

|j 

2. Admin Office
3. Classroom


Q]

6. Concourse
7. Medical Clinic

Q


4. Staff Room
5. Sports Surface


I I

8.0ther Specify: lx~]Support Services

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)

Communications: (place X in box if required)

Audio Visual The following audio visual aids will be used

Federation/Staff

\

1

I

Competitors

I

I

Media

I

I

Floor personelle ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's | 18 \
Average hours per week usage I 80 I

Telephone

c

Scoreboards Television
Projector

PA System

Cable TV
Wireless Internet

B 

Sound Reinforcement



Satelite Communication



Other

Specify:

jrnishinqs:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard |
Movable: (List items)

| Tackboard^]

Shelving[^

Advertising Boards|~]

=nvironmental Characteristics (place x in appropriate column)

/es

No
X

Yes

Ceiling Heights:

Any special requirements

Noise: Any special requirements

X

If any state clear height

Is activity noisy
Does activity require quiet
X

Heating & Air Conditioning:

Lighting: Any special requirements
x

X

Standard for building is all that is required.
Space must be air-conditioned

Is natural daylight needed Above average Intensity
Dimmer Control
X

X X

Flooring: Accurate Temp. Control required If so, give range from to
X

What type of floorinq will be required:
Gymnasium sprung Tile
concrete
X X

J J
X

non-slip

X

J CD
Services: (place x in box if required)

Other (Specify under comments)

Water:
Electrical Power:

Hot Q

Cold ^Deionized [^Distilled Q] Drainage:

Floor Q

Trough [""]

Local Emergency Power Required

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Note: The Comma

he event and have display

stands in the Venu

3/ supplier and is also used for

if 1Q0m2 for other remaining

Commercial Partner Storage
100 m2

^<$> ·$>
Scale 1:100

Analysis of physical facility requirements

Space Components:
Department
Area Sq. m

Project:

Olympic Gymnasium 2009 Signage Storage Room

Support
100
Required Surfaces

Name of Space:

Space Description

Purpose:

To provide space for sign storage for the event courtside signage and and other
advertising material

Types

Space Relationships: a. General How should this space relate to general areas in the building? eg: offices,
teaching areas, loading dock, storage areas.

Seating Requirments
Total spectators

No. of Seats

Comments

Shall be located close to other storage areas, loading and unloading and have
direct access to the main event gymnasium space

Reserved Seats Presidential stand Stand A a)Federation members

J_L

b) Federation guests, sponsors, VIP
b. Specific -

Is this space part of a suite?

Yes

No [7]

c) Organizers' guests, local spons gov. officials
Stand B Press - Journalists & photographers Stand C Team members, players, tech's, other officials

If yes, then describe its relationships to other spaces in the suite.

Stand D

Intemat'l referees, & nat'l tech. officials

Equipment

00

Activity Description:

o

Loading and unloading and storage of rotating courside signage

Wide pull-up Doors

For forklift access

Activity type: (insert x in applicable box)

1. Private Office
2. Admin Office 3. Classroom

4. Staff Room 5. Sports Surface

   


6. Fitness 5. Spectator Seating 6. Concourse 7. Medical Clinic

8.0ther Specify: pT"|Support Services

Users:

(insert number in appropriate boxes)
lommunications:

Audio Visual
The following audio visual aids will be used:

Federation/Staff Media

Competitors

(place X in box if required)

i--i

Floor personelle

ex:Ref,Doctor,Scorer's

|

18

\

Telephone

Scoreboards
Television Projector



PA System



Average hours per week usage

Cable TV
Wireless Internet Satelite Communication

Sound Reinforcement

 

Other

Specify:

Other

Specify:

Furnishings:

(place x in box if required)

Fixed: blackboard Q Tackboa rd^
Movable: (List items)

ShelvingQ

Advertising

To Main Gymnasium

environmental Characteristics (place x In appropriate column)

Ves

No
X

Yes Noise: Any special requirements Is activity noisy

No
X

Ceiling Heights:

Any special requirements

If any state clear height

Does activity require quiet Heating & Air Conditioning: Standard for building is all that is required. Space must be air-conditioned
X X

X

Roll - up door for
Lighting: Any special requirements
X

forklift access

Is natural daylight needed
Above average Intensity Dimmer Control

X
X X

Storage Area
Flooring:

Accurate Temp. Control required
If so, give range from to

x

What type of floorinq will be required:
Gymnasium sprung
X

Tile
concrete
X

X

Roll - up door for
forklift access

non-slip

X

00
Services: (place x in box if required)

Other (Specify under comments)

Water:
Electrical Power:

Hot Q

Cold QDeionized [^Distilled Q Drainage:

Floor Q

Trough |~|
To Loading/

Local Emergency Power Required

Additional Requirements or Comments:

Unloading

Note: Large room required for the storage of the courtside signage (rotating signage) and
other advertising materials. * Locate close to loading/unloading area for trucks

· Wide doors for forklifts to enter with easy access between storage and court

Signage Storage Room 100 m2

Scale 1:100


fflo -fflo  ffl o

D CD 3 Q.

-- --il-ffl*-

o

fi) CD


Basketball
Volleyball Court 38 x 25.5m
Badminton

fflo fflo ffln

S
Table Tennis

Handball 38 x 25m

g
48 x 25m

48 x 26m

42 x 25m

<

CD GO

o'
m « ?

O)
O

D
i i

CO

--

--

H

a° i
C3


3o CD

C3

>
Boxing 37.9 x 19.8m

Judo

Wrestling

Tae Kwon Do 43x 18m

Weightlifting
28 x 19 m

Fencing (Preliminary Round)
50 x 40 m

43 x 24m

48x 18m

55"

Sports Surfaces Analysis. This diagram is an account of the full sports floor space for the eleven sports considered throughout this thesis. With this diagram we begin to see the potential overlap that may be permitted to occur successfully within the same sports surface area within a gymnasium.

Sport > Preliminaries
> Quarter-Finals

fotal # of Events per Day per Surface during Olympic Time Frame

Notes & Legends

10!

11

12! 13!

14

15

16

|>
>
> Finals Occur on Each da\

Preliminaries & Quarter-Finals |
Quarters-Semis & Finals

|>

Semi-Finals & Finals

CD

a

m
** Semi-Finals and Finals Held in Other Bldg

g;
CD

41j 41i 40] 43i 39

40J41}

I
T--t"
·
I I I I

i

Judo

"35! 34j"34i 36: 34

34|"33l'" :""+"
' ' I.---'-

tt
15 Minutes Between Match's

O
<

38i 38! 381 38!
-u--*---j.-

i

!

Tae Kwon Do

3
o"
C/)
o

**AII matches took place in one Gymnasium - the Beijing PKU Gymnasium

~~?h~ere~Is~one Main 'table forthe finals to take place
** In Beijing BIT Gymnasium

CD

a
** In Beijing Capital Gyrnna_s[um_ "*~No~ifmes"dverfap therefore can take place in same venue

Volleyball

14] 29| 38! 42]_ 38] I f. * -u-- s + 4-

34
--+.._-4--+._..4

"~i ___L

! i

! ! _L__._i

! _L___

Weightlifting

--4

+

4

**TypIcaTduration of a session with 1~2 ^i"ftefs_]s_ap_p_rox_-_^_hours_
Numbers in boxes represent number of lifters

** Blank Day represents a_"REST_DAY"_

5
>

J

L

Wrestling

15i 15i 20j 11i 11j 14| 15j 20i ] "2Qr2oTlqri8T"T8r2iT"23r28T ]"" '"i"2r"T2T"2or"ioT"Tor"ii"j"T2J"2iT"""|

4-

1

Si.

Scheduling Matrix. Used to create pairings of Olympic gymnasium sports, able to be played in the two week time frame of the Games. Shows the rationale behind the choice of hosting a Taekwondo and preliminaries of Basketball and Volleyball event, in addition to other combinations. Matrix based on info, from (en.beijing2008.cn) Beijing 2008 Olympics

Appendix F: Table - Future Lower Don Lands Demographic Needs

Toronto & East York District
Community (CC) & Recreation Centre's (RC)
Olymp ic Sports Sports & Recreation Program
Community Programs

Fencing
1 . Adam Beck CC
2 . Balmy Beach CC
1
1 1 1
1

3 . Beaches RC 4 . Bob Abate CRC 5 . Brown CC 6 . Earl Beatty CC
7 . East York CC

Handbl Judo
.... ....

1

8 . Fairmount Park CC 9 . Frankland CC 10 . Gordon A. Brown MS 11 . Hillcrest CC
12 . Holy Family
--

1
1

--

Teanblis TaeKwonD Voleyba
1
1 1 1

1
1
1 1
1

1

13 . Humewood CS
14 . Jimmie Simpson RC
1 1

1

15 . John Innes CRC *16 . Main Square CRC
17 . Mary McCormick RC 18 . Masaryk - Cowan CRC

1

Weightlfn Wrestling Archey HBoaclkey S r
1
1
1
....

1

1

1
1

"T

1

1

1 1

1

....

...

1
1 1 1
1

1
1 1 1
1

1
1 1 1
1

1
1 1
1 1 1
1 1

19 . Matty Eckler CRC
20 . Maurice Cody CC

1 1

21 . Parkdale CRC
22 . Regent Park North RC

1
1

23 . Regent Park South CC *24 . Riverdale Farm
25 . S.H. Armstrong CRC 26 . Scadding Court CC

1

27 . Secord CC 28 . St.Lawerence CRC
*29 . Stan Wadlow Clubhouse 30 . Terry Fox CC
1

1 1

1
1
... ...

31 . Trinity Community RC 32 . Wallace Emerson CC 33 . Wellesley CC
*34 . Withrow Clubhouse
1

1
1
....

1
.... ....

1

1
... ...

1

S/ondcer- Kat (Dvarnicoeus)Yg Balet Mvs/c Gymnastic
1 1 1
1 1

1

1

1 1

1

1
1

1

1
1

1

1
1

1

1

1

1
1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

"i "i ' f
1

1

1 1
1

1

1
1

1
1 1

1

1

1

1

1

_J

_J

1

1

....

1

1

1
1

1

1

1

....

1

1 1

1 1

1

1

1
1

1

1

1

1

1

"1
12

1 1

1
.... ....

1
...

1
1

1

~~i ~1

1

(CWlaeriscghft/Rom) TpneC7/a
1
1

1
1

1
1

3

1

__.

1
1

1

1

1

1 1
1

1

1

1

1 1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1 1

1 1

--

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

Popular Sports Totals

13 22

0

0

0

0

4

1

0

0

1/ 10 11

9 19 22 12

8 1/

12

9

Note: * Community & Recreation Centres with an (*) denote that they do not contain a gymnasium

]]ist most popular sport/program

Information Gathered from Toronto & East York Fun Guide
www.citvoftoronto

^]2nd most popular sport/program ^]3rd most popular sport/program

Note: The Demographic that is targeted for the Future Lower Don Lands Community has been set out to represent a diverse neighbourhood much like the city of Toronto. Therefore this table represents the demographic district of Toronto and East York.

Toronto and East York District recreational program matrix, portrayed to show the most popular recreational sports.

187

References List
Archigram (1999). In Cook P., Archigram (Group) (Eds.), (Rev. ed. ed.). New York: Princeton Architectural
Press.

Ashby, W. R. (1963, 1956). An introduction to cybernetics. New York: Science Editions.

Babiak, T. (2008, August 28). Let's Talk About Funding; Grown-up, non-partisan Debate Needs to Happen
Needs to Happen. Edmonton Journal, pp. D1

Baldwin, J. (1996). BuckyWorks : Buckminster fuller's ideas for today. New York: John Wiley.
Trustees of the British Museum, (n.d.) Sport in Ancient Greece. Retrieved October 24, 2008, from http://www.britishmuseum.org Buckminster fuller: Anthology for the new millennium(2002). In Zung T. T. K. (Ed.), . New York: St. Martin's
Press.

Doxiadis, C. A. (1972). Architectural space in ancient greece. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. Hight, C. (2008). Architectural principles in the age of cybernetics. New York: Routledge.
International Olympic Committee. (2008). Official Website of the Olympic Movement. Retrieved October

16, 2008, from http://www.olympic.org/uk/index_uk.asp John, G, Sheard, R & Vickery, B. (2007). Stadia: a design and development guide (4th ed.). Oxford,
Burlington, MA: Architectural Press.

Kansai International Public Relations Promotion Office. (1997). Measures in Japanese Architecture.
Retrieved November 16, 2008, from http://www.kansai.gr.jp/culture_e/build/measure.htm Kieran, S. (2004). In Timberlake J. (Ed.), Refabricating architecture: How manufacturing methodologies
are poised to transform building construction. Toronto: McGraw-Hill.

Larsson, Nils (2004). Integrated Design Process. Retrieved March 03, 2009, from http://www.iisbe.org/

down/gbc2005/Other_presentations/IDP_overview.pdf Leong, Y.T. (2005). A systems language: architecture, engineering and construction. In Leong, Y.T., & Lasker, G.E. (Ed.) Architecture engineering and construction of built envirionments. Windsor,
Ont.: International Institute for Advanced Studies in Systems Research and Cybernetics.

Lesniewski, L, Krygiel, E & Berkebile, B (2006). Report on integrated practice: Roadmap for integration. Retrieved March 01, 2008, from http://www.bnim.com/newsite/pdfs/ bim/060601-AIABIMWhitePaper.pdf Marks, R. W. (1960) Dymaxion world of Buckminster Fuller. Mathews, S. (2007). From agit-prop to free space: The architecture of Cedric Price. London: Black Dog
Pub. Ltd.

Munsey & Suppes. (2005). Ballparks. Retrieved February 29, 2008, from http://www.ballparks.com

Odland, K. (2008, October 30). Hughes makes plea for more Olympic funding for athletes. Nanaimo Daily
News, pp. B5

188

Papanek, V. J. (1983). Design for human scale. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold Co. Papanek, V. J. (1997). Design for the real world: Human ecology and social change (2nd ed., completely
rev. ed.). London: Thames and Hudson.

Petersen, D. C. (2001). In Urban Land Institute. (Ed.), Developing sports, convention, and performing arts
centers (3rd ed. ed.). Washington, DC: ULI-the Urban Land Institute. Preuss, H. (2004). The economics of staging the Olympics: A comparison of the games, 1972-2008.
Northampton, MA: E. Elgar.

Reed, William G. & Gordon, Elliot B. (2000). Integrated design and building process: what research and methodologies are needed?. Building Research & Information, 28 (5), 325-337. Retrieved March

02, 2009, from http://www.informaworld.com/10.1080/096132100418483
Rogers Stadium Limited Partnership. (2009). Rogers Centre. Retrieved February 29, 2008, from http://
www.rogerscentre.com

Romano, D. G. (1993). Athletics and mathematics in archaic Corinth: the origins of the Greek stadion.
Philadelphia: Philosophical Society.

Sasaki, N. (1984). In Hutchins, D.C. (Ed.), The Japanese Approach to Product Quality: Its Applicability to
the West. New York: Pergamon Press.

Sheard, R. (2005). In Powell R., Bingham-Hall P. (Eds.), The stadium: Architecture for the new global
culture. Singapore: Periplus.

Skinner, S. (2006). Sacred geometry: Deciphering the code. New York: Sterling Pub. The official site of the London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games. (2008). Olympic Stadium. Retrieved
November 4, 2008, from http://www.london2012.com/venues/olympic-stadium.php Tilly, A.R., Dreyfuss, H (1993). The measure of man and woman: Human factors in design (1993). In Tilley
A. R., Henry Dreyfuss Associates. (Eds.), . New York: Whitney Library of Design.

Tzonis, A. (2004). In Giannise P. (Ed.), Classical greek architecture: The construction of the modern.
Paris: Flammarion.

Van Gigch, J. P. (1974). Applied general systems theory. New York: Harper & Row. Vitruvius Pollio. (1960). In Morgan M. H. (Ed.), Vitruvius: The ten books on architecture. New York, N.Y.:
Dover Publications.

Wallechinsky, D. (2000). The complete book of the summer Olympics: Sydney 2000 edition. Woodstock:
Overlook Press.

Waterfront Toronto (2008). Public Meeting # 1 July 23rd, 2008 MWATeam. Retrieved February 12, 2009,

from http:// www.waterfrontoronto.ca/dynamic.php?first=43fa75b221 b08&second=463786
8526923&third=45abd9e029036

Wiener, N. (1961). Cybernetics: Or, control and communication in the animal and the machine. (2d ed.
ed.). New York: MIT Press.

189

