Smart grid technologies, renewables, energy storage devices and electric vehicles are going to
characterize the next generation distribution systems. It is important to note that inclusion of electric
vehicles and renewables, inherently due to their natural power profile, result in distribution systems
having a peaky load profile with lower asset utilization factors. Optimal planning and operation of
distribution systems are important aspects and should consider this changing paradigm.
This thesis aims to develop new solutions for optimal planning and operation of distribution systems
considering these new technologies and their implications. The thesis specifically aims to use new
techniques such as complementarity in conjunction with classical optimization techniques to
develop new algorithms for optimal planning and operation of distribution systems. The proposed
work includes the following. Two new distribution planning algorithms are proposed that include
the installation and optimal sizing of Battery Energy Storage System units in addition to traditional
assets, such as feeders and transformers. It incorporates plan and asset lifetimes as a means of
establishing the minimum total annualized costs of new and replacement assets, operation and
maintenance, and customer interruptions. For a fair comparison, all costs reflect the current year and
are annualized over a specific study period. Even though the second technique has the same base as
the first method, it is a multi-objective algorithm that uses fuzzy optimization technique to handle
multiple contradicting objectives that cannot be combined into a single objective as they are in
different units. This method has been developed due to the lack of certainty in how to calculate
customer interruption cost in literature. It was proven in both methods that Battery Energy Storage
System could be a more economical option compared to expensive underground feeders. Then in
order to realize Smart Radial Distribution System of the future, a real-time optimal reconfiguration
algorithm is proposed, which uses a classical nonlinear optimization technique and guarantees an
optimal solution in the least time. The method optimizes the system loss and is based upon a
complementarity technique that transforms a set of discontinuous solution spaces into a single
continuously differentiable solution space, thus enabling the use of classical nonlinear optimization
techniques without resorting to heuristics. The method is tested on 33-bus and 69-bus systems and
the results are better or matching the other methods available in literature while it is significantly
faster.
