Dynamic magnetic resonance imaging requires rapid data acquisition to provide an appropriate
combination of spatial and temporal resolution, and volumetric coverage for clinical studies. In the
most challenging clinical situations, conventional dynamic MR scanners are often incapable of
simultaneously providing images with sufficient temporal resolution and high spatial resolution.
In practice, clinicians are often forced to compromise between these parameters, often resulting in
sub-optimal performance.

Cardiac MRI is the most challenging and inspiring dynamic MRI application. In cardiac MRI, the
main challenge is the sensitivity of reconstruction methods to large inter frame motion. The
reconstructions often suffer from temporal blurring and motion related artifacts at high
acceleration factors.

In this dissertation, three novel approaches are proposed specifically designed to minimize the
sensitivity of the reconstructions to inter frame motion. First, a compressed sensing (CS) based
image reconstruction method in conjunction with spiral sampling is developed for the
reconstruction of dynamic MRI data from highly accelerated / under-sampled Fourier
measurements. In the second algorithm, the problem of motion artifacts including respiratory
motion and cardiac motion in compressed sensing reconstructions is addressed. A motion
estimation/motion compensation algorithm based on a modified search that aids block matching
and results in improved residual reconstruction is incorporated into the CS reconstruction for
dynamic MRI. In the third algorithm, a novel formulation for the joint estimation of the
deformation and the dynamic images in cardiac cine MR imaging is introduced. The motion
estimation algorithm estimates the deformation by registering the dynamic data to a reference
dataset that is free of respiratory motion, which is derived from the measurements themselves. A
variable splitting framework is used to minimize the objective function, and thus derive the
deformation and the dynamic images.

The validation of the proposed algorithms is illustrated using a numerical phantom and in-vivo
cine MRI data to show the feasibility in precisely recovering cardiac MRI data from extensively
under-sampled data.
