Visible Light Communication (VLC) has emerged as an attractive alternative to radio frequency (RF) communication, due to cost-effectiveness and being license free. It has also proved its applicability in automotive applications, as an alternative and/or a complement to the traditional RF-based communications. We investigate the suitability of VLC in Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) and discuss its advantages in terms of safety enhancement and improved efficiency of the ITS. In this thesis, a VLC-based Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) system in practical environments, considering both Line-of-Sight (LOS) and Non-Line-of-Sight (NLOS) paths are presented. The thesis investigates robust communication between a Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs) based VLC emitter and Photodiodes (PDs) based VLC receiver.
For consideration of a V2V communication system, we consider transmitter on vehicle headlights and receivers on taillight making 2 _ 2 Multiple-Input-Multiple-Output (MIMO) communication link. A closed-form expression of the Channel Impulse Response (CIR) is derived and the effect of various channel parameters is analyzed. Optical-Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (O-OFDM) with adaptive modulation schemes is proposed for system improvement. Its performance is evaluated in terms of Inter Symbol Interference (ISI) mitigation, and data rate improvement. Moreover, the effect of sunlight on the V2V-VLC Two denoising schemes are proposed and evaluated as a solution to combat the effect of the solar irradiance on the VLC signal. Firstly, we use a differential receiver for denoising purposes followed by k-Nearest Neighbour (kNN) based adaptive _ltering algorithm, which is a supervised Machine Learning (MLE) technique. The shadowing effect is also studied. Moreover, an application of VLC in  Foglet based ITS is described. The simulation validation of the VLC-based V2V system is performed under various environmental conditions and scenarios. Obtained results emphasize the suitability of VLC technology for automobile applications,.
