    Intersection sight distance(ISD) is an important design element. Each intersection has a potential for several different types of vehicular conflicts that can be greatly reduced through the provision of proper sight distance. Current guidelines do not adequately address sight distance requirements for intersections located on horizontal curves alone or horizontal curves combined with vertical alignments. In many practical situations, however, sight distance is required to be checked for an existing or proposed three-dimensional(3D) intersection alignments. In this thesis, models were developed to check sight (2001) were considered on 3D alignment: (1)Departure from stop-control minor-road and (2) Left-turns from major-road. For stop-control intersections, several cases were addressed. These include Case 1(a): Intersection and approaching vehicle (object) lie on the curve, Case 2: Intersection lies on the tangent and object lies on the curve. For both cases (1) and (2), obstruction may lie inside or outside the horizontal curve and the intersection and object can be anywhere with respect to the vertical alignment. In many practical situations, however, sight distance is required to be checked for an existing or proposed three-dimensional(3D) intersection alignments. In this thesis, models were developed to check sight (2001) were considered on 3D alignment: (1)Departure from stop-control minor-road and (2) Left-turns from major-road. For stop-control intersections, several cases were addressed. These include Case 1(a): Intersection and approaching vehicle (object) lie on the curve, Case 2: Intersection lies on the tangent and object lies on the curve. For both cases (1) and (2), obstruction may lie inside or outside the horizontal curve and the intersection and object can be anywhere with respect to the vertical alignment. Design aids for required minimum lateral clearance (from the minor and major roads) are presented for different radii of intersections located on horizontal curves, guidelines are presented for offsetting opposing left-turn lanes to provide unobstructed required sight distance. Applications of the methodologies are illustrated using numerical examples.
