This thesis is a practical project which consists of a guide and controlled vocabulary for cataloguing photographic jewellery.  Although photographic jewellery has been around for over a century, there currently is no standard guide or controlled vocabulary with which to catalogue such items.  Twenty-one institutions and private collectors were contacted in regards to their current cataloguing structure.  Using their information, alongside museum registration methods and pre-existing regulations, a guide and vocabulary list has been created and can be implemented on current and future photographic jewellery collections.  The accompanying essay takes into account the history, uses, and preservation concerns of photographic jewellery.  The research, observations, and conclusions are derived from the collection within the Art Gallery of Ontario, the publications listed within the Literature Survey, and from numerous research sources in order to provide a resource for those interested in the subject of photographic jewellery, and the necessity of cataloguing them.This thesis is a practical project which consists of a guide and controlled vocabulary for cataloguing photographic jewellery. Although photographic jewellery has been around for over a century, there currently is no standard guide or controlled vocabulary with which to catalogue such items.  Twenty-one institutions and private collectors were contacted in regards to their current cataloguing structure.  Using their information, alongside museum registration methods and pre-existing regulations, a guide and vocabulary list has been created and can be implemented on current and future photographic jewellery collections.  The accompanying essay takes into account the history, uses, and preservation concerns of photographic jewellery.  The research, observations, and conclusions are derived from the collection within the Art Gallery of Ontario, the publications listed within the Literature Survey, and from numerous research sources in order to provide a resource for those interested in the subject of photographic jewellery, and the necessity of cataloguing them.
