The performance of energy recovery ventilation (ERV) units is analyzed for high rise residential buildings in the Toronto climate. ERV units are scrutinized by their ability to recover heating and cooling energy throughout the year. The rated effectiveness of ERV units is well documented through applicable Standards. Several factors are identified which have the potential to influence the impact of ERVs under actual operation conditions, including infiltration rate, ERV leakage flows, temperature set points, and operation schemes. EnergyPlus is used to represent a typical residential suite, through which the impacts of the parameters are studied. Performance of the ERV model is validated through comparison to collected temperature and humidity data from an operating ERV unit in the GTA. Results indicate that leakage flows within the ERV represent the highest potential contributor to ERV performance. Economizer control strategies are determined as a viable option for improving performance during warmer seasons.The performance of energy recovery ventilation (ERV) units is analyzed for high rise residential buildings
in the Toronto climate. ERV units are scrutinized by their ability to recover heating and cooling energy
throughout the year. The rated effectiveness of ERV units is well documented through applicable
Standards. Several factors are identified which have the potential to influence the impact of ERVs under
actual operation conditions, including infiltration rate, ERV leakage flows, temperature set points, and
operation schemes. EnergyPlus is used to represent a typical residential suite, through which the
impacts of the parameters are studied. Performance of the ERV model is validated through comparison
to collected temperature and humidity data from an operating ERV unit in the GTA. Results indicate
that leakage flows within the ERV represent the highest potential contributor to ERV performance.
Economizer control strategies are determined as a viable option for improving performance during
warmer seasons.
