Most synthetic water-soluble polymers from industrial effluents are discarded into the aqueous environment. Due to their water solubility they can reach conventional sewage disposal systems and contaminate water resources as they are not amenable to biodegradation. Therefore, the possibility of rendering these materials to biologically manageable  chemical compounds is a challenging task.

The applications of advanced oxidation technologies (AOTs) for treating wastewater containing recalcitrant and inhibitory organics have risen drastically during the past few decades. AOTs mediate fast degradation or decomposition of the target organic compounds by producing free radical species.

In this study, the photooxidative degradation of water-soluble polymers in wastewater is studied using different methods of AOTs. The experimental design, statistical analysis, and optimization of different processes of AOTs are investigated employing various methods of response surface methodology (RSM). Using RSM, the effects of different process parameters on the response function are determined. Also, a detailed mechanistic kinetic model is developed along with photoreactor design and modeling for a laboratory-scale batch recirculating photoreactor.Most synthetic water-soluble polymers from industrial effluents are discarded into the aqueous environment. Due to their water solubility they can reach conventional sewage disposal systems and contaminate water resources as they are not amenable to biodegradation. Therefore, the possibility of rendering these materials to biologically managable chemical compounds is a challenging task.
The applications of advanced oxidation technologies (AOTs) for treating wastewater containing recalcitrant and inhibitory organics have risen drastically during the past few decades. AOTs mediate fast degradation or decomposition of the target organic compounds by producing free radical species.
In this study, the photooxidative degradation of water-soluble polymers in wastewater is studied using different methods of AOTs. The experimental design, statistical analysis, and optimization of different processes of AOTs are investigated employing various methods of response surface methodology (RSM). Using RSM, the effects of different process parameters on the response function are determined. Also, a detailed mechanistic kinetic model is developed along with photoreactor design and modeling for a laboratory-scale batch recirculating photoreactor
