First Nations, Inuit and Métis youth in Canada report higher rates of mental health (i.e.,
depression, anxiety, addiction and suicide) issues than the non-Aboriginal population of youth,
which impacts their ability to achieve their educational goals. Understanding mental health from
an Aboriginal worldview and through culturally safe strategies designed to translate mental
health information to Aboriginal people is lacking. The objectives of the present study were to
develop, implement and evaluate a knowledge translation (KT) strategy to enhance wellbeing
knowledge and self-efficacy in coping with mental health issues among Aboriginal postsecondary
students using a community-based approach. The Tool Development Phase involved
focus groups and interviews with Aboriginal post-secondary students (n=9) and community
members (n=3) to develop a KT activity. The KT Phase involved a pre/post design where
participants (n=4) were asked about their mental health knowledge and self-efficacy in
improving their wellbeing prior to and after the KT activity. All students participated in an
individual interview one month later about their knowledge and the helpfulness of activity. Key
informants (n=4) were interviewed during a Follow-Up and Debriefing phase regarding the
community-based approach. Mental health was defined wholistically, as related to community
and as being impacted by identity, stigma, cultural connection, intergenerational trauma, and a
clash between Aboriginal and positivist Western worldviews. KT preferences included
incorporating traditional ceremonies; covering particular topics such as resources, traditional
teachings and coping strategies; and incorporating active participation. The KT activity increased
knowledge and self-efficacy related to mental health and some knowledge was retained and used
at one-month follow-up. As well, participants appreciated the sense of community that the
activity created and provided feedback regarding what could be changed (e.g., more active
participation). Key informants thought the project addressed some community needs and that it
was built on relationships. This study will contribute to increasing the wellbeing of Aboriginal
students by expanding upon their mental health knowledge, and sense of self-efficacy in coping
with their own mental health issues, with the aim of addressing mental health barriers to the
completion of post-secondary education among Aboriginal students.
