the past several decades, the scope of decision-making in the public domain has
changed from a focus on unilateral regulatory verdicts to a more comprehensive process
that engages all stakeholders. Consequently, there has been a distinct increase in public
participation in the environmental decision-making process. While the potential benefits of
public engagement are substantial in terms of identifying synergies between public and
industry stakeholders that encourage project development, this participation does not
come without its challenges. To meet global energy demands and fulfill ambitious targets
for greenhouse gas reduction, renewable energy has received increased attention as a
feasible alternative to conventional sources of energy. However, current literature on
renewable energy, particularly on wind power, highlights potential social barriers to
renewable energy investment. This study investigates the role of public participation by
reviewing two case studies of the Ontario wind power generation market to identify the
facilitators and constrainers that affected public input into wind project development in
Ontario and recommends a participatory framework in the hope of improving public
engagement in the wind project development decision-making process. The recommended
framework in this research requires all stakeholders to reconsider their current roles in
the decision-making process. The public should engage in project planning and monitor the
decision-making processes to ensure that their concerns have been addressed. Developers
should address public concerns through a consensus building process initiated early in
their planning process. Federal and provincial governments have to reclaim their role of
ongoing leadership and provide better criteria for implementation and evaluation of the
public participation processes. Finally, the process requires a third party who is not only an
intermediary, but also plays the role of a knowledge-broker to connect with stakeholders,
share and exchange knowledge, and work on overcoming barriers. The knowledge-broker
helps to fulfill the main requirement of the collaborative decision-making, which is effective
communication.
