The main goal of this research is to introduce novel series of biodegradable
nanocomposites that closely mimic the characteristics of real bone such as mechanical
and thermal properties. These nanocomposites are composed of cotton-sourced cellulose
microcrystals (MCC), hydroxyapatite nanoparticles (HA) and Poly L-Lactic Acid
(PLLA). A novel fabrication route is used to manufacture MA and MH series of
nanocomposites. MA series was developed to find an optimum range for weight fraction
of each constituent required for design of the MH series. Evaluation of the thermal
properties of MA series showed that increasing of weight ratio of MCC and HA from 0 to
21 Wt% increased the crystallinity up to 38%. Compression test results of them revealed
that increasing the weight fraction of MCC or HA from 0 to 21Wt% enhanced the
compressive yield stress from 0.127 to 2.2 MPa and the Young’s modulus from 6.6 to 38
MPa. The cytotoxicity assay results showed there was no sign of toxic material affecting
on viability of cells. The MH series was designed and fabricated by selecting a narrower
range of weight fraction of the constituents. A design of experiments was used to alter the
composition of the constituents to assess their contributions and their effect onto the
mechanical properties and biodegradation behaviour of the MH series of the
nanocomposites. The weight ratio of MCC to HA, the concentration of PLLA, and the
porogen content were chosen as varying factors. A model that accurately predicts the
optimum parameter setting was created. Analysis of variance statistical analysis showed
that the ratio of MCC to HA was the most influential factor affecting the compressive
yield and the mass loss, while the porogen content was the most detrimental factor
affecting the Young’s modulus of MH series of nanocomposites had no significant effect
on their rate of the mass loss. The nanocomposites with highest weight ratio 4 of MCC to
HA, showed maximum mechanical strength and the lowest water absorption and the
lowest mass loss. It was found two series of nanocomposites was comparable to
trabecular bone from a compositional, structural, thermal, mechanical point of view.
