The objective of this project is to determine the total annual energy summary in terms of cost and Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emission of 16 buildings at Ryerson University (RU). In addition, the Deep Lake Water Cooling (DLWC) feasibility analysis of RU is another objective of this project in terms of total energy consumption and amount of gas emission reduction. The total audit area of RU was 86% of the total campus area. Building energy simulation program, Carrier HAP (Hourly Analysis Program), has been used to make an integrated evaluation of building energy consumption. An energy simulation involves hour-by-hour calculations for all 8,760 hours in a year. 
  In this project, an energy audit was conducted for the 16 existing buildings to establish the base case model, "Ryerson University", to determine its annual energy consumption across all usage. There are two sources of energy used at RU. Electricity uses for lighting, plug load, miscellaneous and cooling, and remote steam is used for cooling and heating. For the base case model, total energy consumption was 251 TJ. To reduce the total energy consumption of the base case model, HVAC systems were investigated to analyze their energy-based performance and impact on the GHG emission. There is no Heat Recovery Ventilation (HRV) system coming from the investigation of HVAC system. The sensitivity analysis was conducted using HRV system with air system. By using HRV system with air system, total of 5.6% energy would be saved for cooling and 76% energy would be saved for heating of RU. The energy intensity was determined to be 1.04 GJ/m² only for 16 buildings of RU and comparatively it is lower than other universities in Canada which have a range of 1.64 GJ/m² to 2.26 GJ/m². 
  In the DLWC system, cool lake water at 4°C was used for building air conditioning. To reduce the cooling energy costs, DLWC system was considered as an alternative chilled water source. The Rogers Business Building (RBB) already has DLWC system. For DLWC system, chilled water was served by Enwave to the RBB. According to base case analysis of the RBB with conventional chillers, the electricity consumption was 924594 kWh for RBB due to chillers. With the implementation of DLWC system for the rest of the 15 buildings, total energy saving due to cooling would be 89.2% and GHG emission reduction would be 89% for CO₂, 70% for NOx and 70.4% for SOx due to elimination of chillers.
