The purpose of this research was: to explore the organizational learning capabilities of the ISO
14001 standard and environmental management systems software (EMS-based software); to
investigate whether EMS-based software has the necessary features to assist organizations with
the implementation and maintenance of their environmental management system/standard; and to
gain an understanding as to the functionality of the standard and software based on the
experience of users. In order to achieve the objectives of this study, a questionnaire was used to
survey individuals within organizations in Canada and the United States of America that were
registered to the ISO 14001:2004 standard and that used EMS-based software. The results of this
study suggest that the ISO 14001:2004 standard may have certain capabilities that may have the
effect of enhancing organizational learning. The results also highlight some of the strengths as
well as challenges users may have regarding the requirements/elements of the standard. The
study also provides preliminary insights and observations as to the functionality, performance
and learning capabilities of EMS-based software. However, due to the low response rate, and the
use of non-probability sampling, generalizations of the results of this study will have to be made
with caution. Nevertheless, this study furthers organizational learning-oriented research and
understanding concerning standards and software in a preliminary and practical way in certain
respects. First, the study provides scholars and organizations with a broader view regarding the
application of the standard and software to environmental management - that is, as a means to
improve learning - which arguably could enable them to better understand and improve the
processes of learning within organizations. This could translate to an improvement in an
organization’s competitive advantage and an improvement in environmental performance and
thus enhanced environmental protection. Second, the study offers insights regarding possible
improvements that could be made to the standard and software, which would be of benefit to the
organizations that use the standard and software and to the developers of EMS-based software.
Finally, the study contributes to the relatively limited available research on the learning
capabilities associated with and functionality of environmental management standards and
software.
