To tackle the current drawbacks with metallic implants used in direct skeletal attachment,
novel bioactive glasses are considered as implant coatings in order to reduce bacterial infections
and promote bone cell growth. Silica-based and borate-based glasses, with increasing amounts of
titanium dioxide at the expense of either silica (for the silica-based glasses) or borate (for the
borate-based glasses), respectively, were synthesized and characterized to determine the
parameters that define a glass capable of inhibiting bacterial growth, stimulating cell
proliferation and offering mechanical stability when enameled into a surgical alloy. The effect of
substituting the glass backbone with titanium dioxide, in both glass series, is also investigated
with respect to its effect on both biocompatibility and mechanical properties of the resultant
glass/implant constructs. 

Borate-based glasses exhibited greater processing windows compared to the silica-based
glasses, making them more desirable for coating applications. They also exhibited superior
performance in terms of their in vitro bioactivity and biocompatibility, over their silica-based
counterparts, due to their higher solubility and greater ability to inhibit S. epidermidis and E. coli
bacteria. Specifically, glass BRT0 (control borate-based glass, with no titanium incorporated)
exhibited an inhibition zone against S. epidermidis of 17.5 mm and a mass loss of 40% after 30
days, with BRT3 (borate-based glass, with 15 mol% titanium incorporated) exhibiting an
inhibition zone against S. epidermidis of 7.6 mm and a mass loss of 34% after 30 days.
Furthermore, borate-based glasses with greater titanium dioxide contents exhibited superior
mechanical properties (e.g. bulk hardness, and critical strain energy release rates), which could
be attributed to their more closely matched coefficients of thermal expansion with the titanium
alloy substrate, Ti6Al4V, to which they were adhered. The critical strain energy release rates in
mode I for the silica-based coating/substrate system ranged from 6.2 J/m2 (for SRT0, control
silica-based glass with no titanium) to 12.08 J/m2 (for SRT3), whereas for the borate-based
systems they ranged from 10.86 J/m2 (for BRT0) to 18.5 J/m2 (for BRT3), with the increase for
the borate-based glasses being attributed to the presence of compressive residual stresses in the
coating after application.
