By the beginning of the twenty-first century in the West, the notion of
government-appointed bodies mandated for censoring cinematic content had fallen
considerably out of fashion as institutional censorship was largely curtailed. Barring
widely shared concerns regarding the exposure of underage children to material deemed
inappropriate, newly rebranded “classification” boards have acted to limit the extent to
which they themselves can prohibit images from entering the public market, shifting their
emphasis away from censorship and toward consumer edification and greater
consideration of artistic merit and authorial intent. Such reform brought the policies of
censorship boards in Britain, Canada, and Australia into closer alignment with the goals
and processes of the Motion Picture Association of America’s ratings system. Can we
then assume that cinematic censorship is effectively a thing of the past? Does the
impetus to regulate and police film content continue silently to exist? Analysis of
controversies surrounding particular films throughout and in the wake of this shift
suggests that, while no longer practiced explicitly by governmental institutions, film
censorship continues to operate through less immediately recognizable forms of cultural
marginalization and restraint. Classification status drastically affects the number of
platforms through which a film can be accessed and thus works, as censorship does, to
restrict films from audiences. When market demands place external restraints upon film
content, familiar processes of cinematic censorship can be reframed as operating within
(as opposed to upon) the institutional structures and practices of cultural production.

This two-part study will examine, first, the process by which certain postmillennial
cinematic artworks, such as Catherine Breillat’s Fat Girl (2001) and Gaspar
Noé’s Irreversible (2002), spurred reform in the policies of classification boards by
highlighting the rigidity of classification criteria and, secondly, cases in which, following
the shift from moral to covert censorship, artistically serious films such as Vincent
Gallo’s The Brown Bunny (2003) and Abel Ferrara’s Welcome to New York (2014) have
been suppressed or constrained for their challenging subject matter, most notably for their
aggressive presentation of sexuality. The main objective will be determining: 1) how the
shift from censorship to classification corresponded to the aesthetic strategies of a
handful of boundary-pushing films; and 2) how cinematic censorship, in the absence of
traditional institutional enforcement, continues to operate in the interactions between
alternative networks of disciplinary power and discursive practice.
