The photographs from the Abu Ghraib scandal are horrific, but they are also understandable.
Simply put, the Abu Ghraib photos are purposeful compositions that highlight victory over the
enemy Other in war. The photos illustrate sexual and racial violence, founded upon postcolonial
narratives, but this is only a starting point for their significance. I address how meaning is made for
the U.S. military personnel who took photographs of naked Iraqi detainees at Abu Ghraib, by
looking backward to soldiers’ photography from WWI and II, and by considering soldiers’ online
sharing of photographs in the present, examining roughly fifty photos total. The relationships
between photographic materiality, emotional and gestural communication, and the production of
cultural memory, disseminated via networked circulation, all shape how soldiers’ wartime
photographs come to be regarded. Employing an interdisciplinary approach, this research draws
upon war photography; visual culture and communication; sociology of groups and ritual; sociology
of emotion; combat histories; memory studies; and online photo sharing practices. In so
considering, the Abu Ghraib photos are not unique, and are instead grouped within
the greater concept of the “war trophy.” I expand on this concept by defining “war trophy
photography” as the entwined practices of war photography and trophy collection, rooted in ritual
and group solidification. Staged to depict the violent conquering of the enemy, I argue that war
trophy photography recognizes war efforts through the construction of a visual record, one that
reproduces relations of dominance and submission. I call this representation “commemorative
violence,” a central concept I develop to define the war trophy photograph. In addition to grounding
the Abu Ghraib photos historically, I review their visual semiotic, cultural significance, such as with
the “Doing a Lynndie” meme, which features civilians gesturing in thumbs-up toward a
downtrodden individual, copying the same gesture as often used in the images from Abu Ghraib,
and the now defunct site “Now That’s Fucked Up,” which briefly allowed soldiers in 2005 to trade
gruesome war trophy pictures for pornography. The conclusion reflects on war trophy photography
with the topical consideration of drones, ultimately suggesting that drone warfare photos are
expressionless because of the overt absence of people.
