Today, Internet of Things (IoT) is a major paradigm shift that will mark an epoch in communication
technology such that every physical object can be connected to the Internet. With
the advent of 5G communications, IoT is in urgent need of optimized architectures that
can efficiently support wide ranging heterogeneous multi-objective requirements of communication,
hardware and security aspects. The optimization challenges are rooted in the
technology and how the information is acquired and manipulated by this technology. My research
in this thesis provides a description of compelling challenges faced by IoT and how to
mitigate these challenges by designing resource-aware communication protocols, resource-
constrained device hardware with low computing power and low-powered computational
security enhancements. This thesis lays the foundation for optimizing these challenging IoT
paradigms by introducing a novel Delta-Diagram based synthesizing model. The Delta-
Diagram provides a road-map linking the behavioral and structural domains of a given IoT
paradigm to generate respective optimizer domain parameters, which can be utilized by any
optimizer framework. The fundamental part of the communication synthesizer is a mathematical
model, developed to obtain the best possible routing paths and communication
parameters among things. The ultimate aim of the entire synthesis process is to devise
a design automation tool for IoT, which exploits the interrelations between different layer
functionalities. This thesis also proposes a novel cross-layer Grey wolf optimizer for IoT,
which outperforms some of the contemporary optimizer algorithms such as Particle Swarm,
Genetic Algorithm, Differential Evolution optimizers in solving unimodal, multi-modal and
composition benchmark problems. The purpose of this optimizer is to accurately capture
both the high heterogeneity of the IoT and the impact of the Internet as part of delta diagram
synthesis enabled network architecture. In addition, the Grey wolf optimizer for IoT plays
a crucial role in design exploration of system on chip architecture for IoT device hardware.
The results generated by the optimizer yielded the most optimum feasible solutions in the
design space exploration process of the IoT.
