Design of Air Cushion Vehicles Using Artificial Intelligence: Expert System and Genetic Algorithm

by

Tae-Cheol Jung, B.Eng Ryerson University Toronto, 2002

A thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Applied Science in the program of Mechanical Engineering

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2003 © Tae-Cheol Jung 2003

PROPERTYOF ^

r y e r s o n UNiVERSlT/ LIBRARY

UMI N um ber; EC 53446

INFORMATION TO USERS

The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted. Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations and photographs, print bleed-through, substandard margins, and improper alignment can adversely affect reproduction. In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript and there are missing pages, th ese will be noted. Also, if unauthorized copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI
UMI Microform EC 53446 C opyright2009by ProQ uest LLC All rights reserved. This microform edition is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United S tates Code.

ProQ uest LLC 789 East Eisenhow er Parkway P.O. Box 1346 Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION

I hereby declare that I am the sole author o f this thesis.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose o f scholarly research. i

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request o f other institutions or individuals for the purpose o f scholarly research.

1 1

BORROWER'S PAGE

Ryerson University requires the signatures o f all persons using or photocopying this thesis. Please sign below, and give address and date.

Ill

ABSTRACT

In the thesis, initial design o f an Air Cushion Vehicle (ACV) is performed with the expert system and its skirt system is further optimized with the genetic algorithm. Both the expert system and genetic algorithm are advanced computerized design techniques o f artificial intelligence. Those techniues are specifically developed for the ACVs with programming codes in this thesis. Then the main objective is to show the successful implementation o f those techniques in the design o f ACVs. The thesis work is divided into two parts. In the first part, the general configuration o f ACVs, including the overall dimensions, weight distribution, parametric properties, and several subsystems, is studied and designed by the expert system as an initial design phase. In the second part o f the thesis, the skirt system o f ACVs is further optimized. In particular, the properties o f the bag and finger skirt are optimized for improved ride quality and stability by the genetic algorithm. For the validation o f these two artificial intelligence techniques, the CCG (Canadian Coast Guard) 37 ton WabanAki and U.S. Navy's 150 ton LCAC (Landing Craft Air Cushion) are selected for the tests. The results o f the tests proved that the expert system was successfully implemented and was a powerful tool for the initial design o f ACVs. Furthermore, the genetic algorithm optimized the skirt system with significantly improved ride quality and stability. It was also shown that the skirt mass was an important design factor in the heave response o f the bag and finger skirt. Hence, this thesis work opened the new possibility o f designing ACVs with artificial intelligence techniques.

IV

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The author would like to acknowledge Dr. Joon Chung for his constant help and guidance. He is the one who introduced the interesting and fascinating topic to the author and furthermore showed generosity for the use o f his valuable literatures and resources. Without his great advice and intuition, this thesis would not be successful. The author also would like to thank professors in Ryerson University. Valuable lessons and insight about the mechanical system and its control could be achieved through their lectures. Moreover when the author faced difficulty understanding and analyzing thesis work, they provided assistance without any hesitation. Their great support was greatly appreciated. Finally, my family and friends have provided a constant encouragement and inspiration whenever the author was experiencing a difficult time. They deserve my gratitude without any doubt.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

A uthors declaration Borrower's page Abstract Acknowledgements Table o f Contents List o f Tables List o f Figures Nomenclature

ii iii iv
V

vi ix
X

xiii

1. IN T RO D U C TIO N
1. 1 Background o f Air Cushion Vehicle 1.2 Background o f Expert System 1.3 Background o f Genetic Algorithm 1.4 Objectives

1
1 7 11 16

2. IN IT IA L D ESIGN O F ACVs W IT H E X P E R T SYSTEM 2.1 Overview o f Initial Design Process 2.2 Code Development for Expert System with MATLAB 2.3 Implementation o f Expert System 2.4 Input Parameters 2.5 Determination o f Principal Dimensions

19 19 22 25 31 33

VI

2.6 Main Subsystem Design 2.7 Tests o f Expert System 2.8 Discussion and Recommendation

41 48 52

3. O PT IM IZ A T IO N O F SK IR T SYSTEM W ITH GA 3.1 Overview o f Skirt Optimization with GA 3.2 Code Development for GA and Skirt System with MATLAB 3.3 Model o f the Bag and Finger Skirt 3.4 The Linearized Equations o f Motion 3.5 Parameter Estimation 3.6 Implementation o f GA 3.7 Results o f Experiments 3.7.1 Optimization o f Waban-Aki Skirt 3.7.2 Optimization o f LCAC Skirt 3.7.3 Effect o f various skirt masses on optimization

54 54 57 61 69 74 77 89 89 94 98

4. CO N CLU SIO N S

103

R EFE R E N C E S

106

APPENDIX A. Codes for Linearized Equations o f Motion o f a Bag and Finger Skirt System APPENDIX B. Codes for Parameter Estimation

112

118

Vll

APPENDIX C. Codes for Genetic Algorithm APPENDIX D. Codes for Expert System APPENDIX E. CCG WABAN-AKI APPENDIX F. LCAC

123 135 143 144

Vlll

LIST OF TABLES

2.1 Sample data set for ACVs 2.2 Weight distribution o f ACVs in SWBS 2.3 Results o f expert system on Waban-Aki 2.4 Results o f expert system on LCAC 3.1 Sample individual with binary coding 3.2 Parameters used in the GA on skirt optimization problem 3.3 Properties o f the original and optimized skirt system in Waban-Aki 3.4 Properties o f the original and optimized skirt system in LCAC 3.5 Second peak magnitude and percentage o f reduction for each system

33 35 48 49 78 88 90 96 102

IX

LIST OF FIGURES

1.1 Development o f skirts in ACV 1.2 Basic concept o f the bag and finger skirt 1.3 Elements o f the bag and finger skirt 1.4 Structures o f the finger element 1.5 Structure o f expert system 1.6 Infeasible region in the search space 1.7 Multiple local optimums 1.8 Flow chart o f simple genetic algorithm 2.1 Initial design process for ACVs 2.2 Expert system for initial design o f ACVs 2.3 Flow chart o f program codes for expert system 2.4 Forward-chaining and backward-chaining mechanisms 2.5 Rule-based knowledge representation 2.6 Frame-based knowledge representation 2.7 General procedure for knowledge acquisition 2.8 Input parameters on expert system 2.9 Approximated curve in the relation o f craft's weight and length 2.10 Approximated curve in the relation o f craft's weight and width 2.11 Approximated curve in the relation o f craft's weight and total power 2.12 Design progress with determination o f principal dimensions 2.13 Lift fan selection process

2 3 4 5 10 12 13 15 20 21 24 26 27 28 29 32 34 34 39 40 44

2.14 Design progress with main subsystem design 3.1 Design restrictions for ACVs 3.2 Design parameters to be optimized 3.3 Overall process o f the GA on skirt optimization 3.4 Flow chart o f program codes for the G A and skirt system 3.5 Two dimensional section of the bag and finger skirt 3.6 Parameters used for the skirt geometry 3.7 Parameters used for the finger geometry 3.8 Parameter estimation 3.9 Frequency response curve for original skirt system 3.10 Constraint conditions in penalty function 3.11 Single point crossover 3.12 Two point crossover 3.13 Random crossover 3.14 Single bit mutation 3.15 Two bit mutation 3.16 Overall performance o f the GA on Waban-Aki skirt optimization 3.17 Frequency response curves for the original and optimized skirts o f Waban-Aki 3.18 Phase shift curves for the original and optimized skirts o f Waban-Aki 3.19 Physical shapes o f the original and optimized skirts o f Waban-Aki 3.20 Overall performance o f the GA on LCAC skirt optimization 3.21 Frequency response curves for the original and optimized skirts o f LCAC

47 54 55 56 60 62 65 65 76 79 81 83 84 85 86 87 89 93

93 94 95 97

XI

3.22 Phase shift curves for the original and optimized skirts o f LCAC 3.23 Physical shapes o f the original and optimized skirts o f LCAC 3.24 Frequency response curves for different skirt mass condition on Waban-Aki 3.25 Phase shift curves for different skirt mass condition on Waban-Aki 3.26 Frequency response curves for different skirt mass condition on LCAC 3.27 Phase shift curves for different skirt mass condition on LCAC

97 98 99

100 100

101

XII

NOM ENCLATURE

A Ah B Bh Be Bf b C c Ch Cc D Db Ds g Hb Hf he he hf hg

System dynamic matrix Effective area o f bag to cushion feed hole orifices. m" System input matrix Width o f the vehicle base, m Width o f the cushion footprint, m Finger width, m Inner bag chord length, m System output matrix Outer bag chord length, m Pneumatic capacitance o f bag volume Pneumatic capacitance o f cushion volume Fan maximum diameter, m Length defining craft base geometry, m Specific diameter o f fan Gravitational acceleration, m/s^ Length defining craft base geometry, m Total pressure rise across fan. Pa Height o f craft base, m Hover gap, distance from the ground to the finger tips, m Effective cushion leak height, m Height o f ground measure from datum, m

X lll

hs Is L\,L 2 ,L-i,L4 Lh Lc Ld L ki

Height o f skirt, m Moment o f inertia about center o f skirt mass, kg-m^ Lengths defining geometry o f finger and inner bag, m Length o f vehicle base, m Length o f cushion footprint, m Length defining craft base geometry, m Distance from center o f mass o f the skirt to inner bag joint, m Length o f model, m Length o f outer b a g , m Total peripheral length o f skirt, m Total mass o f craft including skirt, kg Mass o f skirt, kg Specific speed o f fan Fan rotational speed, rpm Total power, kW Bag pressure. Pa Cushion pressure. Pa Flow rate, mVs Volume flow from cushion to atmosphere, m^/s Volume flow fi-om fan to bag, m^/s Volume flow from bag to cushion, m^/s Non conservative forces acting on skirt due to bag and cushion pressures

Lm Lob Lp Me Ms Ns n P Ph Pc Q
Qa Qb Qc

XIV

Ri Sc

Generalized coordinates Cushion footprint area, System input vector Volume o f bag, m^ Volume o f cushion, m^ Total craft weight Structure weight Propulsion weight Electrical weight Command surveillance weight Auxiliary system weight Outfit and furnishing weight Armament/Equipments weight Empty craft weight Load weight Lift system weight Lateral skirt deflection, m System variable and system output Lift system efficiency

u
Vh Vc

w
Wx W2 W2 W4 Ws We Wj We We W,s Xs XV

n i

Total fan efficiency

XV

1. INTRODUCTION

1.1 B ackground of A ir Cushion Vehicle Air Cushion Vehicle (ACV) is one o f the advanced marine vehicles that provide versatile utilization and superior performance. It is a unique transportation vehicle based on air cushion support. Since ACVs have shown the ability to operate over rough surfaces such as water, ice, forest, and other terrains, they have been developed for practical application in a relatively short period o f time. The early concept about ACVs was started from Sir Christopher Cockerell's experiment in England, 1955 [1]. Then many forms o f design and construction were continuously developed for better performance and real world application. As an amphibious vehicle, ACVs not only offer excellent performance on rough surfaces, but also provide the high speed that other conventional marine vehicles could not easily achieve. These unique abilities have attracted many researchers, military agencies as well as commercial transport companies. For example, in North America, the U.S. Navy's 150 ton landing crafts (LCAC) are now in service where other vehicles are difficult to operate such as on-water operations and in amphibious assault warfare. Canada also utilized ACVs (CCG Waban-Aki) for search-and-rescue missions, navigational aids, and ice-breaking service. Besides, many commercial and sport/utility ACVs have been manufactured and provided the services in many countries. The skirt system is one o f the important components consisted in ACVs. Thus the effort to develop a good skirt system had been started from the early time o f ACV history. A good skirt should provide excellent performance in terms o f power consumption, ride

quality, stability, maneuverability, and so on. Figure 1.1 describes the development o f skirt in ACVs. The shapes o f skirt o f early ACVs were as simple as the plenum or periph-

AIR FLOW HARD STRUCTURE

AIR FLOW

JET

<SIM PLE PLENUM>

<SIM PLE PERIPHERAL JET>

A IR FL O W HARD STRUCTURE

AIR FLOW

/
^

FLEXIBLE C l/ID T % SKIRT JET

<SKIRTED PLENUM> A IR FL O W

<SKIRTED PERIPHERAL JET>

y

FLEXIBLE SKIRT

FEED HOLE

<M OD IFIED PLENUM (SKIRTED )>

Figure 1.1: Development o f skirts in ACV (Mantle P.J., 1980)

eral jet forms. However, through further development, they could be shaped in the form o f the bag and finger skirt. The bag and finger skirt, as the most updated and advanced shape, provides the outstanding performance [2]. First o f all, it has shown a quite significant reduction in the power requirement for the lift. Secondly, the hover-gap, which is the gap between the bottom o f the skirt and the ground, o f vehicles has been maintained reasonably well, so that it has shown real amphibious characteristics. Furthermore the maneuverability and stability have been greatly improved in comparison with the earlier skirt models. Finally, the skirt elements have become easily replaceable due to the use o f detachable finger elements.

VEfflCLEHARDSIRUClDRE

CUSHION FEED ORIFICES

BAG

ANTIBOUNCE WEB

BAG 10 CUSHION FEED ORIFICES

Figure 1.2: Basic concept o f the bag and finger skirt (Sullivan et al, 1994) The air flow paths and pressures in a typical bag and finger skirt system are described as follows. The air for cushion lift is provided by centrifugal or mixed-flow

fans. The lift fan system thus provides the required pressure to support the vehicle, and accommodates the changes in cushion volume as the vehicle passes over various terrains. The fans deliver air directly into a plenum chamber o f which the bag volume forms a part. In most craft, the front and side bags form a single volume with only the rear bag being separately fed. From these bags, air passes through a number o f orifices located on the bottom portion o f the bag as depicted in Figure 1.2 to the main cushion. Once in the cushion the air pressure should be sufficient to support the craft. From the finger the flow exits to the atmosphere through the hover-gap. The cushion equilibrium flow Qi, is determined by the nature o f the surface over which the vehicle operates. Also, the equilibrium value o f the bag pressure pbe is determined from the considerations o f vehicle responsiveness and stability. The size o f the feed orifices located in bottom portion o f the bag is then chosen to obtain the required pressure ratio, pi/pc [3]. Figure 1.3 depicts the air flow paths and pressures in the bag and finger skirt for ACVs.

VEHICLE HARD STRUCTURE

OUTER BAG AIR FLOW TO BAG

INNER BAG AIR FLOW FROM BAG TO CUSHION FINGER

AIR ESCAPE FROM CUSHION TO ATMOSPHERE

Figure 1.3: Elements o f the bag and finger skirt (Chung J., 1997)

The bag and finger skirt is mainly composed o f the bag section and finger section. There are bags underneath o f the vehicle's hard structure. These develop different pressure to help vehicle's stability. The bag acts as a filter for long wavelength disturbances by changing its shape in response to changes in both bag and cushion pressures induced by vehicle motion. The fingers provide the continuous surface seal by keeping the effective hover-gap to a minimum in the presence o f short wavelength disturbances. The structure o f finger element is illustrated in Figure 1.4 and this can be easily replaceable due to wear with use.

Figure 1.4: Structures o f the finger element (Chung J., 1997) Along the development o f such an incredible shape o f skirt, advanced material must also be involved in order to sustain all the frictions and forces applied on it. The wide choices for its material were developed ranging from chain mail to glass-reinforced plastics, sheet rubber, etc. In the end, elastomer-coated fabrics proved to be the most advanced and successful material for the skirt o f ACVs [4]. Although the bag and finger skirt provides such an incredible performance as described earlier, its behavior is still not completely understood and it is not free o f

problems. One such problem is its tendency to produce a rough ride and another is its susceptibility to an instability known as skirt bounce. The skirt bounce is the dynamic instability o f the skirt-cushion system under the interaction o f pressure flow variation and skirt deformation. It becomes a particular problem when the skirt oscillation frequency excites the natural frequency in heave o f the craft. Those problems will be minimized with the optimized skirt geometry and system properties in the later part o f the thesis. Then the optimized bag and finger skirt will eventually produce improved ride quality and stability.

1.2 B ackground of E xpert System An expert system is defined [5] as "A high performance problem solving computer program, capable o f simulating human expertise in a narrow domain''. It is also referred as computer software which can perform human reasoning and judging for the specific areas such as engineering design, control system, biology experiment, and many other domains. In general, human experts store the specific knowledge and facts in computer's memory, and set the logical relationship in the particular domain. Then the expert system is used by beginners for that domain or experts o f different fields. Expert system has been used in a wide area o f applications related to design, interpretation, prediction, planning, monitoring, and control systems. One example o f a design application, the marine propeller, was designed based on the expert system [6]. It initially starts with the known facts such as performance o f ship and specified mission, and then it designs the dimensions and other characteristics o f propeller for the given goal. Beside the marine propeller design, initial design o f aircraft and UAV (Unmanned Aerial Vehicle) [7,8] were also carried out by the expert system. Control system based on the expert system can interpret the current situation o f a system and predict the possible outcomes, and then it controls the problems with the necessary acts and it continuously monitors the system. As an example o f such a system, an automated instructor assistant, called Minerva-DCA, has been utilized at the U.S. Navy's Surface Warfare Officer School in Newport, Rhode Island [9]. Expert system can also be used for handling o f medical problems. For instance, it was applied to make a decision in treatment selection for congenital heart disease [10]. Furthermore, the specific program codes for the design o f ACVs were developed with expert system [11]. Beside the above examples, expert

system has been used for many other applications such as repair, debugging, instruction, diagnosis, decision making process and so on. Humans become experts in a certain narrow area after they are educated for a long time and achieve a great deal o f experience in the real world. Once they become experts, they are capable o f providing high efficiency so that they can solve problems in a fast and reliable manner. Moreover they can start problem solving activity from vague data with limited known resources. Thus human experts are especially able to provide great help on problems which require complicated procedures and fall into newly explored domains. However they do have drawbacks due to limitations on the amount they can learn. Knowledge covers a wide range and its amount is huge, so that humans can learn only a certain portion o f it. Hence, they need to co-operate with each other to thoroughly satisfy certain requirements in a given domain. On the other hand, expert systems are built based on the behaviors o f human experts in order to overcome the difficulties human experts face in reality. Expert systems are capable o f providing availability. Availability is that the systems could be utilized under any situation even if human experts are not presented. Thus this characteristic o f expert system is suitable for emergency cases or hazardous environments where humans cannot directly be present. Another aspect o f expert systems is a combined knowledge. Once all the knowledge is stored in computer's memory from human experts o f all fields, then the system can handle any problem by itself as long as the stored knowledge is related to the problem. This characteristic can save a tremendous time consumption and effort that human experts should spend in order to solve the problems. There are however some disadvantages o f expert systems. It is hard for them to start from vague data.

Furthermore it is not easy to build the complete knowledge about a particular domain. Hence it is generally recommended to use expert systems in order to help humans and their decision making processes. Expert system is consisted o f three main components such as an inference engine, a knowledge base, and a working memory [5]. An inference engine performs the analysis and interpretation o f given problems and solves them with the stored facts and specific knowledge in knowledge base. Inference engine also records the status o f system or the errors occurred at every step o f solving procedure in working memory. The working memory could also be used as the module for a reasoning explanation [12]. Among these three components, the knowledge base is the most important and essential part o f expert system. The reason is that expert system is built based on the structure o f knowledge base and it spends most o f time in searching the solution. Hence the right method for knowledge base structure could produce high efficiency in computation. The procedure that expert system pursues for the final goal is described as follows. At starting point, users describe the problem in computer's language with the given initial conditions or known facts related to that problem. Then inference engine will produce more data or estimations based on those inputs. At that moment, it will also search the solution path or particular knowledge stored in knowledge base. The working memory saves all the procedures and paths which inference engine uses. Finally expert system obtains the result or solution for the problems and shows how it reaches the final step with the short explanations. The overall flow or procedure o f how expert system performs and interacts with users in specific domain is described in Figure 1.5.

f
Expert System

C ollection ollectio o f facts and knowledge

Input

V

V

Sp ecification or initial condition requirement

O

Inference Engine

Knowledge Base

Result or solution

Explanation

Figure 1.5: Structure o f expert system

10

1.3 B ackground of Genetic A lgorithm In nature, all species have to go through an evolution process in order to fit the given environment. Evolutionary process means any change or modification in their genes so that they can have a better chance to survive for the given environment. For the past several hundred years, it has clearly been seen that strong species mostly survive compared to weaker ones. The term, strong, here indicates how reliable or suitable their genes are for a particular environment. Since there have been many changes in the environment, modifications in the genes o f species have also been made through the various forms o f evolutionary process. Then, the last survivor in the given environment can be seen as the one, who possesses the best genes as well as experiences the most advanced form o f evolution process. Genetic algorithms are built on this natural evolution process in order to find the best solution for the given environment or problem condition. Genetic algorithm (GA) is the search algorithm based on the mechanics o f natural selection and natural genetics [13]. Since the G A is a powerful and broadly applicable stochastic search and optimization technique, the attention to the GA has grown rapidly by many researchers and designers. GA was developed originally as a technique o f function optimization derived from the principles o f evolutionary theory. In recent years it has been found very useful for problem solving in the fields such as biology, computer science, engineering, etc. For example, it was used to find the optimized dimensions o f aircraft structure for specified missions [14]. Wing airfoil was also developed based on the GA technique for specific characteristics including desired lift, moment, and drag properties [15]. Furthermore it was used in biology application to predict the protein

11

tertiary structure and interpret the electrical spiking behavior o f neurons. It has been applied to computer science including parallelizing and scheduling programs on multi computers, distributed database design, and others [16]. Airline fleet assignment and optimization o f an air cushion vehicle's bag and finger skirt were also performed using the GA technique [17,18]. Using the GA technique provides unique advantages compared to other conventional techniques. For example, most engineering optimization problems have unevaluated and infeasible regions. Some points evaluated from the search techniques can correspond to these unrealizable regions [19]. These points should be avoided during the search process and the optimal solution point must be within the feasible region for the realistic application. This could be done by the GA optimization. Figure 1.6 describes the possible regions in which the solution point might be found by search techniques.

Search Space

Physically Accessible Region Infeasible Region

Figure 1.6: Infeasible region in the search space The search space may also have a large number o f local optimums. The conventional search methods such as calculus-based, enumerative, and random techniques can be trapped in one o f these local optimums which is not desirable. This

12

problem can be prevented using the GA technique. Figure 1.7 shows several local optimums in the domain.

F(x)

A

Local Optimums

Figure 1.7: Multiple local optimums The GA has its own characteristics, which are different from other conventional search techniques in some principles [13,20]. 1) It works with a coding o f the parameter set, not the parameters themselves. 2) It searches from a population o f points, not a single point. 3) It uses payoff (objective function) information, not derivatives or other auxiliary knowledge. 4) It uses probability transition rules, not deterministic rules. 5) It uses commonly bit operators which require much less memory and are computationally more efficient. The GA starts from generating random initial population which is consisted o f potential solution points. In this step the evaluation o f each individual in the population is also included with objective function [21]. Then the initial population is going through

13

the first genetic operator, selection process. The purpose o f this operator is to give more chances o f survival for strong individuals and to die off the weakest ones. After this process, the population enters the crossover operator. Crossover operator is performed to build the new individuals. This process can be compared to the natural evolution process generating new children from the parents. Crossover process is the main and essential part o f genetic algorithm because it can produce better genes for the given environment or problems being optimized. Finally, the mutation operator follows the crossover. The main role o f mutation process is to provide the diversity in the population. Without the mutation, it is hard to reach the solution point which is located far from the current direction o f search. It insures that the probability o f reaching any point in the search space never go to zero [22]. This operator also prevents the premature convergence of the GA to one o f the local optimal solutions. Once all the main operators are performed on the initial population, new population is developed. This new population is genetically superior to the previous one and has better chance to survive for the given environment. Then this whole procedure will be continued until the satisfaction is met or it reaches the maximum number of generations which is pre-set by user. The above description o f the GA is a simple general flow o f the optimization procedure. This algorithm can be built with more advanced components such as elitist replacement, remainder stochastic sampling method, penalty function, etc. They are actually used in this thesis work for better performance o f optimization process, and their descriptions will be addressed in the later chapter. Figure 1.8 shows the general flow chart o f simple GA.

14

Generation o f Initial Population and Its Evaluation by Objective Function

Selection Process

Crossover Process

Mutation Process

New Population

No Stopping Condition

Yes

Solution

Figure 1.8: Flow chart o f simple genetic algorithm

15

1.4 O bjectives The main objectives o f this thesis are to build the expert system for initial design o f AC Vs and to find the optimal properties o f bag and finger skirt for better ride quality and stability using the genetic algorithm. Hence the work presented in this thesis is divided into two parts. It should be noticed that optimization o f skirt system with the GA is more emphasized than initial design o f AC Vs by the expert system. The reason is that the expert system needs a tremendous amount o f database and resources related to ACVs, so that it requires long term research to complete the system. This system should continuously be studied, up-dated, and built. Hence only the initial stage o f designing is simply carried out by the limited level o f expert system. However the skirt optimization by the GA is processed in depth. The motivation for the expert system is to help beginners who want to design ACVs and to provide an opportunity for human experts to approach different design concepts without spending too much time and effort. It is really difficult for new designers to know where they should start from and how to proceed toward the final goal. Thus the expert system guides and advises them toward the goal they want to achieve. Furthermore this expert system can also help the real experts with showing the results o f various configurations and systems, so that they can understand the different approaches and concepts which they cannot directly demonstrate due to a lack o f time and financial affordability. Expert systems will start to design ACVs with the given desired initial conditions such as craft weight and maximum velocity inputted by users. Then it will decide the overall dimensions and other properties o f ACVs according to the knowledge base stored in computer's memory. Finally the expert system will find the general

16

configurations and characteristics o f the subsystems. For the knowledge base, various works o f literature, statistical data, common trends from historical examples, etc. are collected and summarized. Further details about the procedures o f how the expert system establishes the initial design o f ACVs and the knowledge base will be addressed in the following chapter. For the validation o f program codes and their successful

implementation, the results o f the experiments will be eompared with the existing vehicles. In the second part o f the thesis, the bag and finger skirt is optimized with the GA technique for better ride quality and stability. Design variables o f the bag and finger skirt will be the dimensions o f the bag and finger, and pressure ratio o f the bag and cushion areas. The mathematical model for the skirt system will be studied and it will be linearized at the equilibrium conditions. The ride quality can be defined from the amplitude o f craft heave frequency response. Typical ACV's heave amplitude response for small ground input as a function o f frequency shows a characteristic double-peak with the lower frequency peak being associated with the craft mass and the higher frequency peak associated with the skirt mass [23]. This second peak is very large due to the large motion o f the skirt interacting with the non-linear characteristics o f flow escape between the bottom o f the fingers and the ground. This large resonance peak is undesirable since its frequency is very close to the range o f 25 rad/s to 50 rad/s where most people feel the maximum sensitivity for the vertical vibration [2,24]. Thus for better ride quality, the second peak o f frequency response curve should be outside o f this frequency range and its magnitude must also be reduced as much as possible. This condition will improve comfortable ride.

17

The optimized bag and finger skirt must produce the proper eigenvalues o f system matrix for the stability o f vehicles. Instability o f ACVs is also coming from the skirt bounce. Skirt bounce is the dynamic instability of the skirt-cushion system under the interaction o f pressure flow variation and skirt deformation. The current method o f suppression o f skirt bounce is to use an element known as anti-bounce web (shown in Fig. 1.2) that interferes with the ability of the skirt to filter out surface irregularities. In order to reduce skirt bounce without using anti-bounce web, a higher pressure ratio is necessary, but it will also increase the lift power requirement for the system. Thus Mantle [4] suggests the proper pressure ratio between the bag and cushion ranging from 1.0 to 1.6 in order to minimize the instability from skirt bounce. Hence, the GA will find the best dimensions o f skirt and pressure ratio by examining the frequency response curve, system matrix, and pressure ratio o f the bag and cushion predicted by linearized equations. For the validation o f expert system and GA on the design o f ACVs, the CCG (Canadian Coast Guard) 37 ton Waban-Aki and U.S. Navy's 150 ton LCAC (Landing Craft Air Cushion) are selected and compared with the experimental results. All program codes including the expert system, genetic algorithm, and simulations for behavior of vehicles are developed in the MATLAB software. The tests, validation, and debug for the codes have also been done to produce the accurate and fair results for the thesis work. Details o f these programmings are presented in this thesis and some o f them are shown in appendices.

18

2. INITIAL DESIGN OF ACVs WITH EXPERT SYSTEM

2.1 Overview of Initial Design Process
Initial design process for ACVs by the expert system is described in this chapter. Since the-complicated processes and many trade-offs among the several subsystems involve in the design process, some o f design procedures are simplified and limited in order to avoid the complexity in this work. Hence the subsystems o f ACVs are designed in a limited range such that it only includes the lift system, propulsion system, and skirt and cushion system. The design procedure is commonly separated into the two categories such as "Determination o f principal dimensions" and "Main subsystem design". In the section o f "Determination o f principal dimensions", the expert system will find the main dimensions o f vehicle such as craft length and craft width with the given craft total weight. Then it will analyze the detailed weight distribution o f vehicle with relations and facts stored in the knowledge base. At last, it will perform the parametric study. In the section o f "Main subsystem design", three main subsystems will be designed with the expert system. The expert system will decide the properties and performance o f these subsystems according to the knowledge base containing facts and equations. Those facts and equations are acquired from the literatures, statistical data, common trends, and the collection o f manufactured ACV data sheets. In knowledge acquisition process, more than 70 existing ACV data sheets are collected in order to obtain the valid relationship among the several elements and design factors. Figure 2.1 illustrates the initial design process for ACVs and Figure 2.2 describes the expert system for initial design o f ACVs.

19

Initial Condition/Requirmcnt

ACV Purpose ? ACV S p ee d ? ACV Total weight ?

Expert System

Lift Fan E fficien cy ? Craft Length ? Lift Fan Pressure C oefL ? Craft W idth ? Lift Fan F lo w C o e ff. ? W eight D istribution ? Lift Fan T y p e? Total P ow er Installed ? E fficien cy o f Air P rop eller ? N om inal A irgap ? Type o f Air Propeller ? C ushion Pressure ? Transport E fficien cy ? e tc. Type o f Propulsion Engine ? Type o f Skirt System ? etc. Principal D im ensions

Figure 2.1: Initial design process for ACVs

20

Expert System for Initai Design of Air Cushion Vehicle

Inference Engine: Forward Chaining

V
Purpose

Knowledge Base

& Total craft weight Maximum Speed

CZ>

Component I : Craft Overall D im ensions

Component 2: Craft W eight Distribution

Component 3: Parametric Study

Knowledge Acquisition: ACV Literatures, Statistical data. Com m on trend. Actual ACV data sheets, etc.

Component 4: Lift System D esign

Component 5: Propulsion System D esign

Component 6: Skirt and Cushion System D esign

V
Results: Initial Configuration o f ACV including General dim ensions and Estimated Charateristics o f Subsystems

Figure 2.2: Expert system for initial design o f ACVs

21

2.2 Code Developm ent for E xpert System w ith MATLAB The codes were developed in MATLAB in order to implement the expert system for initial design of ACVs. Since the design process for ACVs is quite complex, the codes were developed as the main source and other calling sources. Thus the user needs to run only the main source code in the MATLAB software with the given constraint conditions. Then it will produce the initial configuration of ACVs with other calling source codes. The followings are the list o f codes built and applied for the initial design o f ACVs.

M ain Source Code ES.m C alling Source Codes inferenceenginel .m Inference engine related to the design process, "Determination o f Principal Dimensions" Inference engine related to the design process, "Main Subsystem Design" Initial condition and requirement are inputted Results are recoded in this file Vehicles are categorized by its speed limit Knowledge base component related to "Overall Dimensions" Knowledge base component related to "Weight Distribution" Knowledge base component related to "Parametric Study" Expert system is initiated and inference engines are activated

inference_engine2.m

in p u tfile.m o u tp u tflle.m speedcategory.m OD.m

WD.m

PS.m

22

LS.m

Knowledge base component related to "Lift System Design" Knowledge base component related to "Propulsion System Design" Knowledge base component related to " Skirt and Cushion System Design"

ProS.m

SCS.m

Other Source Code
ACV Database.xls Over 70 ACVs Data sets are stored and Correlations are acquired

As mentioned earlier, the codes for Expert System have not been built for complete initial design process o f ACVs, but they still provide the rough estimations and general configurations related to the vehicle's main parameters and subsystems. These codes show possibility o f the Expert System on initial design o f ACVs. The more detailed and complete codes will be developed in future research work as a long term project. The second part o f the thesis work which is about the skirt optimization with the GA will present more complicated and satisfactory codes, and their capability is much more sophisticated and fully satisfies the expected level o f development in terms o f completeness. The following sections will describe each component o f expert system. Figure 2.3 illustrates the flow chart for the interaction o f these program codes.

23

Inputs (initial conditions) are read and recorded

'
input_file.m /

7

Expert System
Por

Forward Chaining M echanism. Rule-Based K nowledge Structure, Frame-Based Knowledge Struture

Inputs are passed down to inference engine I & 2

Initial Design of Air Cushion Vehicle

in fe re n c ee n g in e I .m

infcrenceengineZ .m

V eh icles are categorized by its speed limit

speed_category.m

LS.m

Lift system is designed

Craft's overall length é id width are determined

OD.m

ProS.m

Propulsion system is designed

\f
W eight distribution for! subcom ponents o f vehitle is decided WD.m SCS.m Skirt and Cushion system is designed

Properties o f main parameters for vehicle are determ ined

PS.m

\hr
Computer's Working M emory ACy_Database.xls All the results are saved in this place

&
Literature. Statistical Data, Com m on Trends

I
output_file.m Initial configuration o f vehicle is recorded in this file

Figure 2.3: Flow chart o f program codes for expert system

24

2.3 Implementation of Expert System
In order to successfully implement the expert system, the three main components o f system need to be defined and constructed in a specific way for the initial design o f ACVs. In this section, those components specifically built for the initial design o f ACVs are described. Inference engine is the heart o f expert system since it controls all the important functions. It is capable o f extracting the reasoning from how it reaches the goal, and it controls the flow o f problem solving procedures. Moreover it can directly interfere with the decision making steps and simulate the results. Thus the inference engine could be considered as a human brain, because it can artificially do what humans do for the problem solving activity. There are two common methods available for inference engine to search the rules and to determine the solutions. They are the Forward-Chaining and Backward-Chaining. The forward-chaining is the mechanism that starts to solve the problem with the known facts or given conditions. Then it searches forward for the solutions or final goals. The backward-chaining is the mechanism that starts to search from the final goal and conclusion. Then it determines whether a conclusion or final solution is valid or not, when it goes through every sub structures o f problem solving activity. In this thesis, the forward-chaining is utilized to apply the inference engine. The reason is that the overall design process starts from the initial conditions inputted by users and final solution is obtained through the problem solving activity. Hence the forwardchaining mechanism is more appropriate for initial design process o f ACVs. Figure 2.4 describes a simple example o f two mechanisms o f inference engine.

25

Forward Chaining

Initial D im ensions

Main structural D im ensions

Performance Characteristics

D esired shape

Backward Chaining

Figure 2.4: Forward-chaining and backward-chaining mechanisms Knowledge should be stored in a form that computer can access, understand, and use for the problem solving activity. This could be done by specific structures of knowledge base. The most common structures o f knowledge base are the Rule-based system and the Frame-based system [7,25,26]. In the rule-based knowledge representation a component, called `rule interpreter', examines the problem condition and executes the proper action according to the matching rules which stored in a component called `rule memory'. Those two components are the essential parts o f rule-based knowledge representation and they work together. The rules are basically consisted o f two main parts: /F a n d THEN. In the statement o f /F p art, some conditions are written and they should be satisfied by the rule interpreter in order to carry on the action specified in the statement o f THEN part. For example, the condition could be set like "if the vehicle is a truck" for the /F p a rt and the action specified in the THEN part will be "then the number o f wheels is four". If there is more than one rule that satisfy the condition, then the rule interpreter selects only one o f them and executes it. There are several ways how to determine the right one among some choices such as methods o f

26

refractoriness^ recency^ and specificity^ [5]. Figure 2.5 illustrates the Rule-based structure and fire in the figure means the execution o f the action.

IF statement
If the v eh icle is a truck

THEN statement

c =
Fire

>

'

Then the number o f w h eels is four

C on dition

A ction

Figure 2.5: Rule-based knowledge representation In Frame-base knowledge representation, knowledge is represented in data structures called frames. Frames are created based on the mechanism o f hierarchical structure and all the important information previously decided is passed down to the end o f decision process. In other words, the frame at the top level o f structure is considered as superclass, while the frame at the bottom level o f structure is called as subclass. Thus the relationship among elements basically lies on vertical bonding. Since frame-based system uses the structural representation, they are very useful and powerful in applications that require the logical reasoning and procedures from the initial step to the final goal for the problem solving. However it is usually difficult and complicated to construct such knowledge system based on the frame itself. On the other hand, rule-based system is easier to implement and has powerful algorithm in each problem solving step. Hence in the thesis it uses a combined rule-based and frame-based knowledge structure in order to represent the system in a structural point as well as in a sub-structural point. This particular structure represents knowledge efficiently. Figure 2.6 shows a simple example p f Frame-Based Knowledge Representation.

27

V eh icle

A u tom ob ile

Airplane

Ship

C om m ercial

M ilitary

U tility

f
Turbo-Jet Turbo-fan Turbo-prop

Figure 2.6: Frame-based knowledge representation Another important feature o f expert system is the knowledge acquisition [27,28]. It is often considered as the bottleneck, because knowledge itself has not been defined clearly and many difficulties rise when knowledge engineers try to obtain and construct it. Here the knowledge engineers are the ones whose expertise is about the knowledge construction and interpretation. Thus, this is the component o f expert system which delays the most o f time in building the system and is identified as the major obstacle. General questions are the most typical method o f getting knowledge from human experts. This method is usually applied at the beginning o f knowledge acquisition process. The knowledge engineers usually start from the simple and general questions in order to provide the opportunity for experts to understand the topic and characteristics o f problem. Then they move to more specific types o f questions related to the topic. Focused discussions are another method o f knowledge acquisition. They are used for deeper and

28

more specific questions than the general questions. Figure 2.7 describes the general procedure for knowledge acquisition.

Knowledge Engineers

Experts

G eneral Q u estio n s

F ocu sed D isc u ssio n s

D irect O bservation

T eachback

Sim ulation

Figure 2.7; General procedure for knowledge acquisition Observation is the technique that obtains the specific knowledge through the direct monitoring during the performance o f experts. This method is required the knowledge engineers to spend the time with experts. Thus the more involved the knowledge engineers become, the better knowledge they could produce. The knowledge engineers might get the answers during the observation which they could not obtain during the general questions or focused discussions. Teachback is another technique for knowledge acquisition. When the knowledge engineers have completed the general questions, focused discussions, and observation, then they teach the experts what they have learned during those knowledge acquisition methods. The purpose o f this technique is to verify the knowledge the knowledge engineers obtained and not to miss any

29

important information during the previous knowledge acquisition steps. There are also several other methodologies available such as questionnaire, feedback, and statistical analysis [29]. In this thesis work, statistical analysis o f past data sets on ACVs was mainly used to build the knowledge base. The general guidance and advice from the experts also contributed to the knowledge base. The more details about this statistical analysis and general guidance applied in this thesis will be explained in the following sections.

30

2.4 Input Parameters
The users need to specify the initial conditions and requirements for the initial design o f ACVs, before the expert system initiates the design process. In this thesis, those input parameters are limited to the vehicle's purpose, maximum speed, and total weight. The purpose o f ACV is generally categorized into the three branches such as commercial purpose, military purpose, and sport/utility purpose.

1. The commercial purpose is to deliver a given number o f passengers or amount o f cargo between two specified points at highest possible transport efficiency considering the lowest cost and best profit. 2. The military purpose needs the similar requirement to commercial transport but applies different speed and travel time consumed. 3. The sport and utility purpose, transport efficiency is not so important factor but a simple structure and less effort for the vehicle maintenance are preferred. The cases o f public services such as ice breaking and search-and-rescue are also included in utility purpose.

The next input parameter is vehicle's maximum speed. This parameter helps to define the speed category according to knowledge base. Each ACV can be categorized into the three different speed ranges such as low speed, medium speed, and high speed. This speed range is defined [4] as follows. The low speed range is from 0 m/s to 13.4 m/s, while the high speed range is from 44.7 m/s to the higher speed. The medium range is the speed between low and high speed categories.

31

Once the users specify the purpose and maximum speed of the vehicle, then they need to input the total vehicle weight. The total vehicle weight is very important and essential element o f initial design process, because the expert system starts to design based on this given condition and seeks further the main dimensions such as craft length and craft width. Then all the characteristics o f subsystems of ACVs are established from these main dimensions. Figure 2.8 depicts the initiation o f expert system with input parameters.

In p u t P a r a m e t e r s

I

F r a m e - B a s e d K n o w le d g e R e p r e s e n ta tio n

A ir C u s h io n V e h ic le

P u rp o se

C o m m e r c ia l

S p o r t/U tility

S p e e d C a te g o r) (m /se c )

Low Speed 0 ^ V m < l3 .4

M e d iu m S p e e d 1 3 .4 ^ V m < 4 4 .7

H ig h S p e e d 4 4 .7 ^ V m

V e h i c l e 's t o ta l w e ig h t ( K g )

W

R u le - B a s e d K n o w le d g e R e p r e s e n ta tio n

Figure 2.8: Input parameters on expert system

32

2.5 Determination of Principal Dimensions
Expert system starts to design the initial configuration o f ACVs by obtaining the craft overall dimensions from the knowledge base. For thé overall dimensions o f vehicle, the knowledge base contains several data sheets o f ACVs which describe the properties or general characteristics. Then inference engine tries to find common trends or common design rules from this knowledge base set. Thus once user inputs the total craft weight, then expert system obtains the matching overall dimensions o f craft from the common trends in the data sheets o f ACVs manufactured in the past. The following table shows a sample data set for ACVs collected during the research period o f time.

Table 2.1 : Sample data set for ACVs
Name Saint* Michel Baroudeur Adoc4 Adoc 38 Garonne Canair 300 Canair 500 AH560P AH560U A H II60 BBV 6 GH-2006 CCGH 045 CCGH Siyay Mariah 425 Hovertrck Shuttle SAH2200 LCAC Odyssey Explorer Slider Builder Ackerman 1. Ackerman 1. Ackerman 1. Ackennan 1 Ackerman 1. ACV D. ACV D. Airlift H. Airlift H. Airlift H. BBV H. Bntish H.C. British H.C. GKN W.A. Mariah H. Neoteric Scat H. Slingsby Textron Pacific H Pacific H. Pacific H Purpose Public Ser. Public Ser. Public Ser. SpoM/Util. Public Ser. Sport/Util. Sport/Util. Comm. Sport/Util. Comm. Sport/Util. Comm. Public Ser. Public Ser. Sport/Util. Sport/lltil. Comm. Comm. Military Comm. Comm. Sport,Util. Power Plant 37kW 37kW 37kW 37kW 63kW 1 Piston engine 1 Piston engine 2 Piston engines, 77kW 2 Piston engines, 77kW 2 Diesel engines, 330kW 99kW 4 Gas turbine, 1 l334kW 1 Gas turbine, 896kW 4 Diesel engines. 28l8kW Yamaha Vmax 600cc Fuji EC50PM-02, 39kW 2 Diesel engines Diesel cingine, 238kW 4 Gas turbines, 11930kW Diesel engine, 22lkW Toyota 4L V8, l94kW Twin cylinder, 34kW Length(m) 5.9 3.7 4.6 3.6 7.0 3.8 5.0 6.1 6.1 12.2 5.3 56.4 14.7 28.5 4.2 4.2 7.1 10.6 26.8 10.5 7.3 3.5 Beam(m) 2.3 2.2 2.3 1.8 3.0 2.2 2.2 4.0 4.0 6.0 2.5 27.9 7.7 12.0 2.0 2.5 4.0 4.2 14.3 4.5 3.5 1.9 Mc(kg) 600 200 200 200 1100 182 237 830 759 n/a 495 195000 8500 70000 320 200 850 n/a 149500 3750 1600 265 Vcru(m/s) 13.9 III 13.9 III 16.7 9.7 III 15.3 15.3 19.6 12.9 25.8 20.6 23.2 n/a 15.6 12.9 16.5 20.6 19.6 18.5 19 4 Vmax(m/s) n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 12.5 13.3 16.4 16.4 28.4 n/a 30.9 30.9 30.9 22.2 20.0 15.5 20.6 20.6 n/a n/a n/a Payl.(kg) 600 n/a n/a n/a 500 182 295 550 650 3000 600 3000 n/a 25000 480 272 600 2200 60000 2400 1200 200

33

The expert system will find the matching craft's length and width from the knowledge base after users input the total craft weight. For better estimation o f these two parameters, more than 70 data sheets o f existing ACVs manufactured in the past are researched and summarized. In Figure 2.9 and Figure 2.10, small dots represent the data set for each ACV collected. The author found the correlation among those dots and produced the curves with power approximation. The horizontal axis of each figure is logscaled due to a wide range o f craft's weights.

Weight VS. Length
60

100

1000 W e ig h t (kg)

10000

100000

1000000

Figure 2.9: Approximated curve in the relation o f craft's weight and length

Weight VS. Width
30 25

15

100

1000
W e ig h t (kg)

10000

100000

1000000

Figure 2.10: Approximated curve in the relation o f craft's weight and width

34

The second step o f design process is to decide the general weight distribution within the given total craft weight. Since weight distribution is very difficult to define in the consistent outline, there are many different guidelines available in each country. In this thesis, the weight distribution rule is referred in the tenninology o f the U.S. Navy Ship Work Breakdown Structure (SWBS) [1,4]. The weight o f ACVs is generally separated into the two different parts. They are the Light ship part and Load part. In Light ship part, there are mainly seven different elements consisted. They.are the Structure group. Propulsion group. Electrical group. Command and Surveillance group. Auxiliary System group. Outfit and Furnishings group, and Armament group. In Load part, there are also several groups presented such as crew and provisions, stores and fresh water, disposable payload, and fuel. Thus the total craft weight is the sum o f the weights from the seven groups in Light ship part and from the four groups in Load part. Table 2.2 shows the typical weight distribution o f ACVs in SWBS.

Table 2.2: Weight distribution o f ACVs in SWBS ACV W eight D istribution Light ship Structure Propulsion Electrical Command and Surveillance Auxiliary System Outfit and Furnishings Armament/Equipments The following equations for weight distribution are formulated based on the past trends and common design rules [4]. Load Crew and Provisions Stores and Fresh water Disposable payload Fuel

35

1) Structural weight
fV, 0.28 O.OW"^ Pc

w " W '" ^(0.0064/> c / Æ ) ' ' '

where V5

is cushion density in N/m^,

Pc is cushion pressure in N/m^, s is cushion area in (= length x width ) ,

W is total vehicle weight in tons.

2) Propulsion System weight
W W 1 ^ = -^ ( 3 .2 8 F )(---------------------------------- ) W P 550Transport _ Efficiency

(2.4)

where P is total power (kW), V is maximum velocity (m/s),

i î l = 1 .2 5 .P

V P /0.7457

3) Electrical System weight

5 ^ = 0.00034» ' ' " + ^
w

fv ''^

(2-5)

36

4) Command and Surveillance weight (2.6) fV W''^ W

5) Auxiliary System weight H ^ :E l = 0 .0 0 2 W '" + ^ (2.7)

fF

IF"'

where -- = 0.044 + (from total lift system) W IF"-'

6) Outfit and Furnishings weight

^

W

= 0 .0 0 3 1 F " '+ - ^
IF " '

(2.8)

7) Armament/Equipments W, ^ 0.50 W ~ IF " ' (2.9)

8) Load weight

W , = W- W, = W- ( W^ + W^ + W, + W, + l V , + W , + f V ^ )

(2 . 10)

In the parametric study, the expert system will perform the computation o f main parameters with the given relationships. The relationships are from the equations established in many literatures and statistical data, and they are stored in the knowledge base components. The purpose o f this computation is to find the general characteristics o f

37

ACVs within the given main dimensions and weight, so that the design can further be developed from the known characteristics. The subsystem components can also be built based on this parametric study. The first parameter being analyzed is the cushion pressure. It is obtainable from the relationship o f the vehicle's total weight and its cushion area. The cushion area can be computed from the cushion length and width. In this thesis, the length and width o f craft are approximated to the cushion length and width, even though the overall dimensions are slightly larger than the cushion dimensions o f vehicle. The following equation describes general relationship o f the cushion pressure and main dimensions of ACV.
W Pc = --------- -- ------Length X Width

(2.11) ^ '

where Pc is the cushion pressure in Pa, W;,,,^i is the total craft weight in N. The next parameter is the cushion flow which passes through the skirt and escapes out to the atmosphere. It is important to determine the proper amount o f air flow, since too much o f air flow costs more than enough in lift power system. In computation o f cushion flow, the true leakage area beneath the skirt and the effect o f stability and vehicle's performance due to the flow should be carefully studied in order to obtain the proper amount o f cushion flow. The complexity o f skirt motion is also one o f the factors that give difficulty in determining the proper cushion flow. However for the initial stage o f designing ACVs, it could be referred from the past data available. It shows the relationship o f the nominal air gap with the vehicle's gross weight [4]. h L 0.014 1/3 i\ A W ) (2.12)

38

where h is the air gap in m, L is the vehicle's cushion length in m. The power requirement is another important parameter for the calculation and design o f lift and thrust systems o f the vehicle. This parameter is related to many factors o f vehicle's characteristics such as craft size, speed, stability, performance aspect, and so on. However, the relationship o f total power and total weight could be obtainable from the past trend and statistical data. Since the trend for total power requirement is useful only for the initial design stage, it is necessary to find the accurate value when the design process is further developed for various missions. Figure 2.11 shows the relationship o f total power and craft's total weight. The power approximation is again applied to obtain the correlation. The x-axis is also log-scaled for a wide range o f weights.

Weight VS. Total Power
25000 20000 15000
0.

10000 5000

0
1

10

100

1000
W e ig h t (Kg)

10000

100000

1000000

Figure 2.11 : Approximated curve in the relation o f craft's weight and total power The next one is the transport efficiency that is the ratio o f work done by the vehicle in moving the overall weight at a given speed and the total power requirement. The transport efficiency is given by the following equation.

39

Transport

Efficiency (5 5 0 P /0.7457)

(2.13)

where V max is maximum speed in m/s, P is total power in kW. In this section, the main dimensions were obtained, and the weight distribution and parametric study were performed. Now it will move on the second category "Main Subsystem Design" in the following section. All the values computed in this section will be passed down to the "Main Subsystem Design" category due to the characteristic o f frame-base knowledge representation. Figure 2.12 describes the design process performed up to here with input parameters.

In itial C o n d itio n /R e q u ir e m e n t

P u r p o s e o f v e h ic le M a x im u m s p e e d o f v e h ic le T o ta l w e ig h t o f v e h ic le

P rin c ip a l D im e n s io n s I n f e r e n c e E n g in e I C r a f t L e n g th C r a f t W id th W e ig h t D is tr ib u tio n s C u s h io n P r e s s u r e N o m in a l A irg a p T o ta l P o w e r In sta lle d T ra n s p o rt E f f ic ie n c y K n o w le d g e B a se C om ponent I C o m p o n e n t2 C o m p o n e n ts

R e c o rd e d in W o rk in g M e m o ry

Figure 2.12: Design progress with determination o f principal dimensions

40

2.6 M ain Subsystem Design Lift system in ACVs is very important and essential part of the overall design process, because the vehicles are supported by the air produced from the lift system. In other words, the dynamics, stability, and maneuverability o f the vehicles are mainly characterized by the lift system and its properties. The lift system for the best characteristics o f vehicle including stability and ride quality should provide the sufficient cushion pressure in order to support the vehicle over the various obstacles. It should also generate enough flow to reduce the drag and to create the better maneuverability. All these properties o f the system are largely decided by the natures o f selected fan. Hence in lift system design, the expert system will mainly focus on selection process o f the proper fan which satisfies the given characteristics o f ACVs. Lift fan should be able to produce the sufficient pressure rise in order to compensate the dynamic losses through the various sections in lift system and to generate the required cushion pressure. Once the total pressure across the fan is known, then the total fan efficiency can be computed with the flow rate and power supplied to the fan. Finally the lift system efficiency is obtainable from the cushion pressure, total fan pressure, and total fan efficiency. H fQ 7,=--

(2.14)

Pc

(2.15)

where rj, is total fan efficiency, H f is pressure rise across the fan, Q is flow rate.

41

p is power supplied to the fan, /// is lift system efficiency, Pc is cushion pressure. The selection for fan should be made based on the above properties as well as the economic consideration. This means that the fan should produce the sufficient pressure and flow rate at minimum power consumption. Some parameters need to be estimated for the selection process o f proper fan. They are the coefficients o f pressure and flow. Pressure Coefficient; (2.16)

pn-D ^ Flow Coefficient: ^ = where P is pressure rise in the fan, p is air density, n is fan rotational speed, D is fan maximum diameter.

(2 .,7 ,

Then the specific speed and specific diameter for fan can further be established from the pressure and flow coefficients. Specific Speed:

Specific Diameter: ,1/4
Ü 7T "

(2.19)
Q'
/ii/2

42

They are in non-dimensional form and describe the fan property with respect to unit pressure and unit flow. From the past experience and statistical data, the empirical relationship [4 ] between specific speed and specific diameter could be established in the following form.

£)5 = 0.90 + -- Ns
Moreover, the total fan efficiency is also written in the function o f specific speed. Tj, = 0 .8 5 -0 .0 2 N s

(2.20)

(2.21)

Fan can be designed and built to the required specification by the specialist and suppliers, or commercially available kinds can also be utilized directly. There are three common fans manufactured such as the Centrifugal fan. Axial flow fan, and Mixed flow fan. A centrifugal fan provides the high pressure at small flow rates, while axial flow fan generates a large flow but relatively low pressure. The character o f mixed flow fan is somewhat in middle o f centrifugal fan and axial flow fan. Then the specific speed [4] guides for the selection o f proper fan such that if it is less than three, centrifugal fan is appropriate. Otherwise axial flow fan is generally chosen. A mixed flow fan can be selected for the range close to three o f specific speed. The noise level, weight, size o f fan and engine are also important factors when the lift system is designed. The following figure describes the fan selection process.

43

L ift Fan S e le c tio n P ro cess

1.

G iven D esired Fan EfTiciency

<

80 %

2.

E stim ation o f S p ec ific Speed

^

From the relation: n. = 0 .8 5 - 0 .0 2 N s

3 . E stim ation o f S p e c if ic Diam eter

^

From the relation: D s = 0 .9 0 + 2 /N s

4.

E stim ation o f P ressure C o e ffic ien t From the relation: N s = < |) 5. E stim ation o f F low C o e ffic ien t / \\j

Ds = v|/`'` ^/<))*''

I fN s < 3 6 . S e le c tio n o f fan type If N s = 3 IfN s > 3

======> ======> ======>

Centrifugal Fan M ixed F low Fan Axial F low Fan

Expert System produces the lift fan type with desired e ffic ie n c y . Other detailed sp ec ific a tio n s are also generated. Lift system should be built with satisfying all these parameters. These parem eters give various su ggestion s for the c h o ice o f Lift system com ponents depending on the vehicle's characteristics such as siz e , w eight, sp eed, etc.

Figure 2.13: Lift fan selection process The propulsion system has been developed in several forms since the early development years o f ACVs. Many different methods have been applied for the propulsion system such as water propulsion, track and wheel systems, etc. However most o f them except air propellers and gas turbine system have failed to implement due to a lack o f efficiency. The propulsion system is designed with the consideration o f efficiency, reliability, weight, and economic point o f view. The combination o f air propellers and gas turbine system satisfies the above considerations in somewhat more than other propulsion systems. Thus air propellers and gas turbine system have currently become the most

44

widely used in ACV's propulsion system. A good propulsion system should be able to demonstrate some characteristics with respect to its primary functions [1]. First o f all, it should propel the vehicle at the desired speeds at proper thrust generation. Secondly it is required to provide the necessar>' acceleration and deceleration for the desired maneuverability and safety purposes. The propulsion system could also participate in the directional control by generating the necessary thrust vectoring. In this thesis work, the expert system will focus on the design o f propulsion system with combination o f air propellers and gas turbine system. For air propellers, the efficiency is usually achieved more than 55 percent. The maximum efficiency, however, can go up to more than 65 percent with the proper vehicle's speed. For gas tubine system, it has several unique advantages. For example, there is no need to build the separate energy source, since the engine is already installed for the lift system. Thus the propulsion unit and lift system unit can share the same power source. The alternative choice for propulsion engine can be made with a diesel engine. Diesel engine is more appropriate for smaller ACVs because it generally produces less power than gas turbine system. The skirt determines the vehicle's dynamic responses on rough sea condition or over other terrains. The cushion system provides the adequate cushion pressure in order to lift the vehicle over the obstacles and irregular surfaces. Hence the design o f skirt and cushion system should be carried out for the desired characteristics o f vehicle's responses. The main functions o f skirt and cushion system is to provide the sufficient cushion pressure so that it can raise the vehicle above the certain height, depending on the obstacles. The system also contributes to the stiffness and damping o f the air cushion so

45

that it can act like a suspension system and help the dynamic responses of vehicle. Finally the skirt and cushion system improve the dynamic stability in pitch, roll, and heave motions o f vehicle. In order to design the skirt and cushion system, it is necessary to analyze the forces acting on the skirt with the fluid interaction caused by lift fan system. Since this process is quite complicated, the actual analysis for the skirt and cushion system design will be omitted in this work, but it will be applied in the second part o f the thesis that is the optimization of skirt system with GA. In this section, main subsystems have been designed with expert system. Among three subsystems such as lift system, propulsion system, and skirt and cushion system, design o f lift system is mainly focused and other systems are simply selected with most commonly used components in the real world. Hence other subsystems will be improved in later development o f expert system with more detailed specifications. Figure 2.14 shows the design o f main subsystem.

46

Initial Condition/Requiremen^
Purpose o f vehicle Maximum sp eed o f veh icle Total weight o f vehicle

Principal D im ensions Inference Engine I Craft Length Craft Width W eight Distributions Cushion Pressure Nom inal Airgap Total Power Installed Transport E fficien cy K now ledge B ase C om ponent I C om p onent! C om p onent]

Recorded in W orking M emorv

Main Subsystem D esign K now ledge B ase Com ponent4 C om p onents Com ponentô

\

Inference Engine!'

Lift Fan E fficien cy Lift Fan S p ecific Speed Lift Fan S p ecific Diam eter Lift Fan Pressure C oefficien t Lift Fan F low C oefficien t Lift Fan Type Air P ropeller Max. E fficien cy Air Propeller Type Propulsion Engine Type Skirt Type

Recorded in W orking M em ory

Results

Figure 2.14: Design progress with main subsystem design

47

2.7 Tests of E x p ert System The program codes for expert system on initial design o f ACVs has been built and tested in this thesis. The results are compared with the existing vehicles, the CCG Waban-Aki and U.S. Navy's LCAC. The given design parameters such as vehicle total weight, maximum speed, and purpose o f the vehicle are inputted in order to initiate the expert system. Then expert system produces the general information including the vehicle's initial parameters and weight distributions. It furthermore establishes the initial configuration o f several subsystems o f the vehicles based on the design components introduced in earlier section. The following tables are the results o f tests from expert system on the two different ACVs, the CCG Waban-Aki and LCAC.

Table 2.3: Results o f expert system on Waban-Aki W aban-A ki In p u t P aram eters Craft Mass (Kg) Purpose Maximum Speed (m/s) G eneral Inform ation Speed Category Craft Length (m) Craft Width (m) Cushion Pressure (Pa) Nominal Airgap Total Power (kW) Transport Efficiency W eight D istribution Structural (Kg) Propulsion System (Kg) Electrical System (Kg) Command and Surveillance (Kg) Auxiliary (Kg) Outfit and Furnishings (Kg) Armament/Equipments (Kg) 36,740 Utility 25.8 Expert Svstem Medium 21.6 10.2 1,637 0.0041 2,442 3.11 8,582 4,626 682 865 3,457 1,140 5,526

Original Svstem Medium 21.0 8.6 n/a n/a 1,760 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a

48

Light ship Weight (Kg) Load Weight (Kg) Lift System Fan Efficiency Specific Speed Specific Diameter Pressure Coefficient Flow Coefficient Fan Type Propulsion System Max. Efficiency o f Air Propeller Type o f Propeller Propulsion Engine S kirt and Cushion System Skirt Type

24,878 11,862

24,290 12,450 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Centrifugal n/a Shrouded Gas Turbine Bag - Finger

0.8 2.5 1.7 0.0554 0.0814 Centrifugal
0.65 Shrouded Gas Turbine Bag - Finger

Table 2.4: Results o f expert system on LCAC LCAC In p u t Param eters Craft Mass (Kg) Purpose Maximum Speed (m/s) G eneral Inform ation Speed Category Craft Length (m) Craft Width (m) Cushion Pressure (Pa) Nominal Airgap Total Power (kW) Transport Efficiency W eight D istribution Structural (Kg) Propulsion System (Kg) Electrical System (Kg) Command and Surveillance (Kg) Auxiliary (Kg) Outfit and Furnishings (Kg) Armament/Equipments (Kg) Light ship Weight (Kg) Load Weight (Kg) L ift System 150,000 Military 20.6 Expert Svstem Medium 34.6 15.9 2,684 0.0026 8,268 2.99 43,250 12,029 1,849 ^2,103 12,465 4,367 14,116 90,179 59,821

Original Svstem Medium 27.0 14.0 n/a n/a 11,600 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 95,569 54,431

49

Fan Efficiency Specific Speed Specific Diameter Pressure Coefficient Flow Coefficient Fan Type Propulsion System Max. Efficiency o f Air Propeller Type o f Propeller Propulsion Engine S k irt and Cushion System Skirt Type

0.8 2.5 1.7 0.0554 0.0814 Centrifugal
0.65 Shrouded Gas Turbine Bag - Finger

n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Centrifugal n/a Shrouded Gas Turbine Bag - Finger

As seen in tables, the errors between the original system and expert system for craft length and width in Waban-Aki are found as 2.9 % and 18.6 %, respectively. The errors o f these parameters in LCAC are computed as 28.1 % and 13.6 %, respectively. Thus some parameters are found close to the original dimensions, while the other parameters are somewhat different from the original values. The improvement for these errors is recommended in the following section 2.8. Nevertheless overall estimations provide the helpful guideline for beginners in an initial design phase by showing the rough idea about the initial shape and configurations. These dimensions could be re generated in more accurate values with more collected data sets. In the case o f total power installed, the values predicted from expert system are different compared to the original system as much as 38.9 %. As explained in the previous section, the total power can be calculated for the specific missions or purposes in preliminary design phase. Hence the total power found from expert system needs to be accurately corrected when the design process is further developed. However expert system still predicted the total power that may give some estimation and idea for designers in an initial design stage.

50

Once the general information was created for Waban-Aki and LCAC, the weight distribution was made for these ACVs. As expected, the structural weight is the heaviest component in the total weight distribution. Moreover a component o f load weight takes almost 35 % o f total vehicle's weight. This percentage for load weight is reasonable and easily found in several ACVs manufactured in the past. The error made in load weight between the original system and expert system was 4.7 % and 9.9 % for Waban-Aki and LCAC, respectively. Hence the expert system produced reasonably close value to the original load weight for both ACVs. For the design o f lift system, the expert system computed the fan efficiency, specific speed, specific diameter, pressure coefficient, and flow coefficient based on the general trend and design rules. Then within those parameters, it selected the specific type o f lift fan. The centrifugal fan was chosen by expert system in this test. This type o f fan is also utilized for real manufactured Waban-Aki and LCAC vehicles. Hence the expert system produced the precise choice for the lift fan as what human experts would do in the real world. The propulsion system was also designed with the expert system and compared with the existing ACVs. However the choices for propulsor and engine were simply selected as an air propeller and gas turbine. The detailed specification could be designed based on the characteristics of ACVs such as mission, purposes, available system and components, financial affordability, environmental restrictions, and so forth. The efficiency o f propulsion system was set according to the general trend and recommendation. For the design o f skirt and cushion system, bag and finger skirt was again simply selected by expert system because it is currently the most updated and advanced form o f skirt system.

51

2.8 Discussion and Recommendation
Expert system designed the initial configuration o f ACVs within the given constraints. Some o f parameters showed somewhat different values from the original values, but they still provided the useful guideline and estimation for initial design phase. In order to make them more accurate, more data sets need to be collected and design rules should be updated with newly developed ACVs. Overall performance o f expert system is reasonably satisfactory, and it helps designers in an initial design stage with showing the rough configurations o f vehicle. In order to build more detailed and complete expert system for the initial design o f ACVs, some recommendations are described as follows.

1. It showed the strong correlation for small and medium size vehicles in overall dimension estimations (in the estimation o f craft length and width with respect to total craft weight), while weak relationship was revealed for large size vehicles. Hence ACV database for large size vehicles needs to be reinforced with more collected data sets. 2. In vehicle's weight distribution, the main weight components can be divided into more specified subcomponents so that it can make it easier for designers to build such systems with well distributed weight restrictions. It will also reduce the errors in weight estimations. 3. For parametric study, a few selected parameters carried out for the estimation in order to depict the characteristics o f vehicles. The more parameters need to be studied in order to describe the complete nature o f vehicles.

52

4. In lift system design, it performed the simple fan characteristics and type o f lift fan. In later development, the database related to commercial lift fan manufacturers and their specifications can be collected and implemented to the selection process of lift fan with detailed description and availability. 5. In propulsion system design, the dimensions, type, design speed, static thrust, and material o f air propellers can be further developed with expert system in future research work for complete propulsion system.

6 . Skirt and cushion system design was simply selected as a bag and finger skirt in
this thesis work. For recommendation for improved design, it is necessary to determine the detailed dimensions and specification o f the bag and finger skirt. For example, finger length, number o f fingers, number of orifices used for air flow paths, dimensions o f bag section, and material are such elements. They could also be optimized for better performance o f the vehicles. This is done with the GA technique in next chapter. 7. In the codes o f expert system, the module o f explanation may be built and implemented so that users can have better understanding about how the solutions are produced.

53

3. OPTIMIZATION OF SKIRT SYSTEM WITH GA

3.1 Overview of Skirt Optimization with GA
The skirt system o f ACVs is optimized with the GA for improved ride quality and stability as second part o f the thesis work. The specific program codes have been written to implement the GA for skirt optimization. The procedure is described as follows. At the beginning o f optimization process, design constraints or initial conditions are inputted in order to initiate the performance. The given design restrictions are the total vehicle mass and the dimensions o f ACV hard structure; andH ^. These parameters

should be fixed during the optimization process. Figure 3.1 shows the parameters for the

V ehicle's M ass. M^

i
r
» · `

a i '' . .f
L '-- L l

n

- -

Craft Length,

Craft Width.

Bag

V eh icle Hard Structure

Finger

Figure 3.1: Design restrictions for ACVs

54

design restrictions. Then the GA produces more estimated parameters based on the given design restrictions in order to obtain the vehicle's characteristics such as system matrix, frequency response curves, and other important properties. The linearized equations o f motion at equilibrium point are used for prediction o f vehicle's behavior. After that, the GA is implemented to optimize the skirt system for improved ride quality and stability. The targeted parameters to be optimized for better performance o f the vehicle are the dimensions o f outer bag and inner bag, and the pressure ratio of bag and cushion; L\, L 2 , L 3 , L 4 , Lob, and pi/pc- Figure 3.2 illustrates these parameters. Then the GA will produce the best values for these parameters with its main components. For the validation o f test results, two existing ACVs are demonstrated for skirt optimization. Figure 3.3 describes the overall process o f the GA on skirt optimization.

Figure 3.2: Design parameters to be optimized

55

Input P a ra m e te rs

D esig n R e stric tio n s

M g, Lp. Be. Db. H b

< G e n e tic A Ig o rith m >

< P a ra m e te r E stim a tio n >

R an d o m Initial P o p u latio n : L |, L 2. L3. L4, L gb* F b^PC

Lb. B b. v M s Q. d)

O b je c tiv e F unction: E v alu atio n o f P o p u latio n S tatic E qu ilib riu m F o ce A nalysis G e o m e tric A nalysis

P e n a lty F unction: C o n s tra in t C o n d itio n s < M a th e m atic al M odel fo r S k irt S y stem >

E quation o f M o tio n U sin g L agrange M eth o d M ain O p e ra to rs: S e le c tio n . C ro ss o v e r, M u ta tio n

L in e arizatio n

N e w P o p u latio n : its re -e v a lu a tio n & P e n a lty F u n ctio n

S tale-S p a ce F o rm

C o m p u tatio n fo r v e h ic le 's behavior and p ro p e rtie s E litis t R e p la cem en t

F req u en cy R e sp o n se . S k irt H eig h t P re ss u re R atio. F lo w R ate, H o v er G ap. e tc . No S to p p in g C o n d itio n In terface a m o n g sy s te m s Y es S o lu tio n

Figure 3.3: Overall process of the GA on skirt optimization

56

3.2 Code Development for GA and Skirt System with MATLAB
The codes were developed in MATLAB in order to implement the GA for the optimization o f skirt system of ACVs. Since the optimization process for ACVs bag and finger skirt system is quite complex, the codes were developed under several categories. Then the main source code operates the entire system by interfacing with other source codes in different categories. Finally it will produce the optimized skirt system for improved ride quality and stability. The followings are the list o f codes built and applied for the skirt optimization with the GA.

Genetic Algorithm Codes
GA.m Main source code initiating the optimization process Initial conditions for GA are inputted (Population size, Maximum number o f generations. Coefficient o f penalty. Coefficient o f elitist, etc.) Initial population is randomly generated Binary coded potential solutions are decoded into actual values Population is evaluated by objective function with linearized equations o f motion for skirt system Penalty fimction and rank fimction are also included Remainder Stochastic Sampling method is applied Single point crossover is performed Two point crossover is performed Random crossover is performed

input_data.m

initial_pop.m decode.m

objfunction.m

srselect.m point_cross.m two_point_cross.m random cross.m

57

single_mut,m two_mut.m elitist.m

Single bit mutation is performed Two bit mutation is performed Best portion o f population is reserved without any destruction Best optimized solution is recorded in this file

output_data.m

Parameter Estimation Codes
input_para.m staticcond.m equilibrium equations.m Input parameters are estimated in this file Parameters Hco, Oo, Qeo, To at equilibrium conditions are computed Equilibrium equations used for static force analysis on skirt system

Linearized Equations of Motion Codes
deri_elem.m state_space.m bode_plot.m Derivatives at equilibrium conditions are presented State-space form o f linearized equations is obtained Bode plot and eigenvalues are computed

Other Source Codes
drawing.m input_filel.m input_file 2 .m md.m Optimized and original skirt shapes are drawn Original properties o f skirt system is recorded Optimized properties o f skirt system is recorded An integer between low and high boundaries is randomly generated Integer I or 0 is randomly generated

flip.m

58

These GA codes have been developed in long period o f time and many modifications and additions of advanced GA components have carried out during the research period. In order to validate the GA codes, several experiments and tests have been performed. Those experiments ranged from a simple function optimization to complicated optimization problems. For example, airline fleet assignment and landing sequence o f aircrafts were demonstrated with the GA codes [17,30]. Furthermore, optimization o f cantilever beam was also tested with the GA codes by the author. Hence these GA codes are veiy genuine with the author's great effort contributed to the development o f codes from the beginning to the modification, enhancement, tests, and validation. The following sections will describe some of the components implemented in the skirt optimization. Figure 3.4 illustrates the flow chart for the interaction o f the program codes.

59

G enetic Algorithm <GA.m>
Initial C o n d itio n s fo r G A a re in p u tte d in p u t_ d a ta m

Genetic Algorithm For Skirt Optimization o f Air Cushion Vehicle
In te ra c tio n b e tw ee n s y ste m s

Initial p o p u la tio n is g e n e ra te d w ith binar> c o d in g

in itial_ p o p .m

P aram eter Estimation
p o p u la tio n is d e c o d e d to g et a ctu al values d e co d e .m input_para.ni P a ra m e te rs re la te d to sk irt s y ste m are e stim a te d

P o p u la tio n is e v alu ate d by o b je c tiv e fu n c tio n in c lu d in g p e n alty & ra n k fu n c tio n s R e m a in d e r S to c h a stic S a m p lin g m e th o d fo r s e le c tio n p ro c e s s

o b jfu n c tio n .m

sta tic _ c o n d .m

s ta tic fo rc e an aly sis on sk irt s y ste m

s rs e le c t.m

e q u ilib riu m _ eq u a tio n .m

p o in t_ c ro s s.m

In te ra c tio n be tw ee n sy ste m s

C ro s s o v e r O p e ra to rs

tw o _ p o in t_ c ro s s.m

ra n d o m _ c ro s s.m

M athem atical Model of Skirt System
d eri e le m .m D erivatives are d e te rm in e d

sin g le _ m u t.m M u ta tio n O p e ra to rs t v w m u t.m state _ sp a c e .m S ta te _ sp a c e fo rm o f lin e a riz e d e q u atio n s is c o m p u te d

b o d e _ p lo t.m N e w p o p u la tio n is c re a te d N e w P o p u la tio n

o b jfu n c tio n .m

B est p o rtio n o f p o p u la tio n is re s e r v e d

e litis t.m

In te ra c tio n b e tw ee n sy ste m s

M ax im u m num ber o f G e n e ra tio n s

No
S to p p in g C ondition

Y es

^

S o lu tio n ^

B est o p tim iz e d sk irt sy ste m

Figure 3.4: Flow chart of program codes for the GA and skirt system

60

3.3 Model of the Bag and Finger Skirt The model of the Bag and Finger skirt system involves the consideration o f dynamic behavior o f the skirt structure, the fluid mechanical processes in the cushion and air supply system, and the vehicle dynamics combined with the interaction o f all three. The skirt material effects can also play a role in skirt dynamics [31], and the geometry o f the typical cushion can be complex, and the skirt geometry can undergoes large changes during the vehicle motion. Furthermore, to adequately describe the cushion air escape process, the model must account for intermittent skirt-surface contact around the craft periphery arising from craft motion and from wave action; this can have major effects on the dynamics. Hence, some assumptions [23,32] are applied to simplify the formulation and analysis. The geometry o f skirt is determined by static equilibrium o f forces, considering the skirt as a two dimensional section o f an inflated membrane. Since very little lateral curvature exists in the skirt except for the skirt comers, the model is restricted to the twodimensional representation [3]. It is also assumed to undergo the pure heave motion at constant speed over long waves without pitch, roll, and yaw. In this case the surface disturbance or ground motion is equivalent to a flat horizontal surface moving in pure heave under the cushion, and the resultant craft motion in the vertical plane can also be assumed to be pure heave. The sliding friction between the skirt and ground is ignored. The model is also assumed to be symmetrical and confined to move in a plane parallel to a cross section o f the model. Finally the outer bag is assumed to form the arc shape all the time for the simplification of model. Furthermore since the ratio o f bag pressure to

61

material surface weight per unit area is usually large, the outer bag can be assumed to be a massless inelastic and subject to a spatially uniform bag pressure. The model is mainly consisted o f three distinct parts that are outer-bag, inner-bag, and fingers. The air flow generated from the lift fan first goes to the bag, and it escapes to the atmosphere through the fingers. The inner bag is supported by the two rigid links that are assumed to be massless. The two rigid links are capable o f forming the different angles with respect to horizontal level, and one end o f each link is connected together. The mass o f skirt is concentrated at the centroid o f the finger and its location can be determined by the geometric parameters o f skirt. Figure 3.5 depicts the simplified mathematical model o f two dimensional section o f the bag and finger skirt.

L2

lA

Figure 3.5: Two dimensional section of the bag and finger skirt

62

The performance o f ACVs depends upon an adequate and continuous supply o f low pressure air. Considering now the fluid mechanics, the air flow from the vehicle

lift fan into the bag is modeled as a quasisteady response to the fluctuating ph(t) by specifying a function o f the form pb = fb(Qb) representative o f a steady fan characteristic. The volume flux Qc from bag to cushion through the orifices in the inner bag and from cushion to atmosphere Qa through the hovergap are assumed to be quasisteady and described by Bernoulli's law together with suitable discharge coefficients. With he defined as the distance between the bottom tips o f the fingers and the surface, the discharge coefficient for Qa depends on the finger geometry through both the hovergap he and the finger orientation angle 6. The bag and cushion volumes Vb and Vc are modeled as lumped pneumatic capacitances, this being included because the compressibility o f the cushion air has been shown to significantly affect dynamics under certain operating conditions, and can be a source o f dynamic instability [33]. As shown in Figure 3.5 with he and hg being the craft base and surface heights above a suitable inertial datum, the fluid dynamics is coupled to the skirt and craft dynamics through mass conservation laws for the variable Vb{a,y) and Vc{cc,y,hc,h^, and through the modulation o f he. Thus the system has three degrees o f freedom, he, a, and y with input hg{t) and output he{t). The equations o f motion for the A C V s dynamics including the skirt system are formulated using the Lagrange Method. With the generalized coordinates 9,, Lagrange's equations for the N degrees o f freedom can be expressed as following. ST dg, dP dq,

dt d q j

(3.1)

63

Here, Q,

represents the non-conservative forces associated with the generalized

coordinates q,. Q!'" = P h K '"+ (P h -P c W ."'+ P cK ' (3.2)

There are three independent variables which are the craft heave displacement the angles a and y for the skirt geometry. Therefore the generalized coordinates become <Ji=K , and q 3 =y. The mass o f the skirt is assumed to be lumped at the centroid o f

the finger. Then the kinetic and potential energies are derived as the following equations.

^ =

+ ^ A 4 y # c o s ( /^ , - a ) - 2 h ^ X L ,à c o s a + L ^,ycosr^,)]

+ --M^.hl + --/.s/^

(3.3)

P = M^.gh^ - M ^giL , sin a + where

sin Xa, )

(3.4)

is the moment o f inertia about the center o f skirt mass, is the angle between the center o f mass o f the skirt and the horizontal, is the distance between center o f mass o f the skirt and inner bag joint D, M^ is the total mass o f the air cushion vehicle including the skirt mass, and M is the mass o f the skirt.

- PROPERTYO F RY ERSO NU N IV ER SITYLIB R A R Y

64

Ld

L4

Figure 3.6: Parameters used for the skirt geometry

Fm
Lm

Figure 3.7: Parameters used for the finger geometry With the Lagrange's equations, the nonlinear differential equations for the two dimensional skirt model are derived. The following equations are obtained for the motion o f vehicle including the skirt system. The equations o f motion as well as the bag and

65

cushion volume conservation equations are shown in Chung's paper [2]. The fluid mechanics equations are also presented in his paper.

The heave equation o f motion for h^. is ^cK + k (« s in a - acosor) + L^, ( / ' sin y,,, -y c o sy ,,, )]+ dV.. g

(3.5)

The skirt equation o f motion for a is s in (y ^ - d ) f + i ,, cos(y,, - a ) ÿ - A , c o s a - g c o s a ] = P.K"" H p >+ P .y j (3-6)

The skirt equation o f motion for y is + sin(/^y - a ) a ^ + ^ c o s(/^ , - a ) a - h . c o s y ^ ^ ~ g c o s y ,, ,] + I s ÿ (3.7)

The bag volume conservation law is

1
Ph = 7 T

(3.8)

'-A

dV, . dv. where K = ---- a + da dy '

66

The cushion volume conservation law is

(3.9)
Pc =

C.

da

dy

dh^.

dy dh, . g j,r

uc i/r · . ,· ,· ,· dh, . where K = ^ à - > - ^ r + ^ K ^ K - K - K «

The flow from bag to cushion is \'APh-Pc

Q c^A ^E ^(P h -P c\

(3.10)

The flow from cushion to atmosphere is

& = L h,\h^.,e)sgn{Pc\

(3.11)

where L = 2{B^ + 1 *) + 8% ,

5 ^ and

are the width and length o f the vehicle base between inner bag are the

attachment points, respectively. The functions V f , V ^ \ V j , V *,V ^'', and

rates, with respect to the a and y , at which the surfaces ABC, CDE and CF sweep out volumes as the skirt moves, hf is an effective leak height which allows air leakage from the atmosphere into the cushion, when the pressure in the cushion is smaller than the pressure in the atmosphere. This function can be determined analytically from the geometry o f the segments, or it can be determined experimentally. The following equation is expressed in the non-dimensional form to apply it for the full size vehicles.

67

hj

(3 . 12)

where B , is the finger width, and 6 is defined in Figure 3.5. The function /,, is the product o f the area between the bottom o f the fingers and the surface with a discharge coefficient dependent on 6. As decreases from }\. > 0 , h, initially depends linearly h, to

on h^.. Then, when surface contact occurs at /j.. = 0 , furtherdecrease in causes

decrease nonlinearly as the tips of the fingers (at F inFigure 3.6)collapse,shutting off the flow [32]. The air in the bag and cushion is assumed to be compressible, and at any instant in time the pressures are assumed to be uniform throughout the volumes. Then, the bag and the cushion air mass conservation laws take the following forms. C ,P ,+ V ,= Q ,-Q ^ . (3.13) (3.14) In these equations, Q and Q are the pneumatic capacitances o f respectively by Q =V^!yP^ and Q =1^ which is 1.4 for air. The term deformation under the action o f and V^., given

Where y is the ratio o f specific heats,

in equation (3.13) is associated with flexible skirt and term V ^. in equation (3.14) is associated with both .

vehicle motion and flexible skirt deformation under the action o f

68

3.4 The Linearized Equations of Motion
The nonlinear equations in the previous section are linearized about an equilibrium point with the standard linear analysis techniques. Let the instantaneous value o f a quantity hex,, and a function be the following equations. (3.15) then these are expressed as

(3.16)
t=l

dx,

In the above equations, "0" means that the quantity is evaluated at the equilibrium condition, and âx, is the increment o f x, over the equilibrium condition. For the two dimensional skirt model with capacitance effects, it is X ' = [à,ÿ,a,y,p^,p^.,h^,h^.] with the input A^(/). Then with a linearization process there are the eight first order differential equations that are two equations for the vehicle heave dynamics h^., two equations each for the skirt displacements a and y , and one equation each for the pneumatic capacitances o f the bag and cushion volumes. The heave velocity o f the craft and angular velocity o f the skirt geometry ( a ,y ) are denoted as R^, and R ^ , respectively.

The heave motion equations for Sh,, = ÔR.

are

(3.17)

PaA

Jo

+ ôaÔK °

ây

69

A»(-- )o àh^dh,.

(3.18)

The skirt motion equations for a are S à = ôR,,
cosûfoJ^jR,, + [ M +{ M^L^L^, cos(y^,,, -«0)]^^^,

(3.19)

,dV, ah da

.ÔV' da

A/,Z,gsinao + A ,, (^ ^ )o +(A,, ~ P a X - f - ) o + P a X ~ ^ ) a

.d V ! da

dV"'' dV' dV' Ph,X~T~^0 + (A o " P c ,.X ~ ^ )o +Pc»(~T^)o Sy dy dy dy
+ [ ( V f ) o + i V : , \ W , +[(.V j)o-(V a)oW c (3.20)

The skirt motion equations for y are Sy = SR.
(3.21)

[~M,L^ cosy^JSR^ +[A/.vA^a/ cos(/^,, - « o ) % H ^ s ^ l +
dV""
P h o (--^ ) o

dv;"
+ (P h ,, - P c o ) ( - ^ ) o

Sa

-MsL^gsmy^^ + A ,, ( - ^ ) o +iPh,, -A « )(-ÿ -)o ôy (3.22)

dv;"'

d v ;\

70

The bag volume conservation law equation is ÔR

=

SR,, +

+

Sp.

(3.23)

where

is the linearized fan characteristic equation.

The cushion volume conservation law equation is

=

1 m .. - -- {2(5* + f-A) + 8jr,,, ) ( - ^ ) o -, C, dh^. V P 1
Q

5h..

dh, dhf. ^Pco S a +-^ a)(-T" ) o + 8 x *,,(--- ) o - 8 1 , sinoTo/j*,} oa da \ P

dh, dh. 1 -- {2(5* + 4 ) ( - ^ ) o + 8x,,,, ( - ^ ) o - 8 4 sin(Q + C, dy dy

)h ,,,} \ P

Sy

1 fd V

55* +

1

ÔF

5F

SR.

1 ÔF. ÔF.  ^ { ( ÿ ")o - ( - ^ ) o ^ 3 C O s ( Q + y^)} SR.

±

j l

+

C, PQ..

2p,

» ,

L (£ ü ) LC, SA,

Sh^ + - i { 2 ( B , + I . ) + 8a : . jÆ ) ,,

Sh^

(3.24)

where x,,, = I , cosqTo + 1 , cos(Q + y j

71

The linearized bag to cushion flow equation is

A;
PQco

(3.25)

The linearized cushion to atmosphere flow equation is

Sh.. V P
dhf dhf h n

{2 (B ,+ L ,K -^ )o

- 8i , sina.*,,,)

Sa

dhf {2(5* + A* )(-- -)o + dy

dhf ( - ^ ) o - 8I 3sin(Q + /q )h ,,,} . dy \ P

Sy

-- ( 2(B. + L j + S x j / , J ^ 2 A,

{2(5*+Z*) + 8x .,,, } ( ^ ) dh^

Sh..

(3.26)

All the equilibrium derivative terms in the above equations are presented in appendix B o f the reference [2]. The set o f these simultaneous differential equations could be expressed in a matrix form as follows.

Hx = Rx + Tu where x - [Sà,S y ,S a , S y ,^ , ,, ^ ^ ,S h ^ , S h ^ ] ', u = [Sh^,Sh^^

(3.27)

72

Then the linearized equations for ACV heave dynamics can be represented in a compact state-space form. x -A x -\-B u where A = H '^ R , (3.28)

The outputs o f a linear system can be related to the state variables and the input by the state equation. Y = Cx (3.29)

where the C matrix depends on the system input and output choices, and Y is the set o f outputs. From the state-space matrices, the linear response o f the craft can be obtained. Moreover the stability o f the system can be known from the system matrix. Other important parameters representing the vehicle's characteristics can also be computed.

73

3.5 Parameter Estimation
In order to optimize the properties o f the bag and finger skirt system for improved ride quality and better stability, the parameters involved in the equations o f motion should be estimated to predict the motion o f vehicle. The parameters are categorized into the several groups related to the craft structure system, the skirt system, cushion flow system, and the lift fan system. In this section the estimation for some o f the parameters is addressed. The parameters involved in the craft system are the craft's mass, length, width, base length and base width. The craft's mass, length, and width have to be initially given for the design requirement. The approximation o f these parameters can be estimated from the following relationships. Mf. = the given craft mass including the skirt,

4 . = the given craft length,
= the given craft width, D^,H ^ = the given lengths defining the craft base geometry, - the craft base length = L ^ ~ 2%, Bf, = the craft base width = B ^ - 2x, (3.30) (3.31 )

where x, is the lateral deflection o f the skirt, and its relationship is described in the previous section. The parameters in the skirt system are the skirt mass and dimension. In these parameters, some o f them are to be optimized for better ride quality and stability. The following relations describe these parameters.

74

A/s - = the skirt mass estimated from the area density and total skirt area. = the lengths defining geometry o f inner bag and finger, which are being optimized, = the length o f outer bag, which is being optimized.
_i L, + Z,, --L Q = the angle related to the finger geometry - cos ( '

(3.32)

. I js i n Q O = the angle related to the finger geometry = sin ( )

(3.33)

The cushion flow system has the following parameters which are estimated in the equilibrium condition. p^.^. = the equilibrium cushion pressure estimated from

=

(3.34)

Q^. = the equilibrium flow rate estimated from the correlation by experience

4 .5 x 1 0 -'+ 5 .9 x 1 0 - 4

Pee PaSk

(3.35)

--
Pet;

= the ratio o f bag pressure and cushion pressure, which is being optimized.

h^. = distance between bottom tips o f fingers and ground that is estimated from the static equilibrium force analysis. The parameters related to the lift fan system are the effective area o f bag to cushion feed hole orifices, reference bag pressure, reference volume flow from fan to bag, and constant for fan characteristic law. These parameters are explained in detail in the reference [2].

75

There are some other parameters related to the geometry o f skirt at the equilibrium condition. They are the angles defining the bag geometry,orQ,/,, at equilibrium conditions and the height o f craft base, H ^ . These parameters can be estimated from the equilibrium force analysis. The following figure describes the parameters estimated from the given design requirements.

G iw n D esign Requirem ents

Targeted D e sig n Param eters for O ptim ization

Me vehicle's total mass Lc vehicle's length Be vehicle's width Dy vehicle's base geom etry Hy vehicle's base geom etry

L, L] L3 U f'ob Pb/Pc

Parameter Estim ation

i
O , O Angle defining finger geom etry Ae C ushion area Pb, Pe Bag and C ushion pressure he, a , Qe, y P roperties o f skirt system and craft Q b,Q c Bag and C ushion flo w rate hg, he, hg Skirt height, hovergap, and ground height Bf, hf Finger width and e ffe c tiv e cushion leak height Mg, Xg Skirt m ass and lateral skirt d eflection Lb, Bb Length and width o f veh icle base L ^ , Ym» Pm G eom etry defining finger Ig M om ent o f inertia about center o f skirt mass Pbn Qbr R eferen ce pressure and flo w etc.

Figure 3.8: Parameter estimation

76

3.6 Im plem entation of GA The initial population is randomly generated at the beginning o f optimization process. The population is composed o f several individuals which are the potential solutions. Representing each individual is called the coding and it should present all the design variables through the coding process. There are commonly two kinds o f representing methods available such as binary representation and real number representation [34,35]. In a binary coding, each variable is coded as a bit string. The bit strings for the variables are concatenated together to give a single bit string (or chromosome) which represents an entire vector o f variables. In a real number coding, the actual value o f variable is directly used instead o f converting it to a bit string. The main advantage o f this coding method compared to the binary one is that it can use the value o f variable directly without any conversion. This can save a great deal o f time when it is computed in the algorithm. The major drawback, however, is that it can be applicable only when the values o f variables are fixed, discontinuous or relatively easy to represent. Such an example can be shown in aircraft landing sequence optimization [30]. In this thesis work, the binary coding is applied because all the design variables are easily represented in the binary numbers and it is easier to interact with the algorithm itself. Then the population is composed with 30 o f such individuals. Table 3.1 shows a sample individual coded in binary numbers. In this sample individual, each variable uses the four bits to represent its value. Thus one individual has the total 24 bits to represent the entire potential solution point, because there are total six different variables o f skirt geometry and pressure ratio being optimized. Since this individual is in binary number.

77

the decoding method is required to convert the coded variables to the actual real number. The decoding method is based on the same mechanism of coding method.

Table 3.1: Sample individual with binary coding

0
L'ob

0

Objective function is the given condition specified in the problem, which the individuals need to satisfy it in order to survive. The value obtained from the evaluation procedure by objective function for each individual is called the fitness. The decision is made whether the individual is good or bad for the given problem, according to how much this fitness value is. In this work for the optimization of the bag and finger skirt, the objective is to reduce the second peak magnitude and prevent the second peak frequency away from the range at which humans are most sensitive. Hence, the individual whose second peak magnitude is the least will get the best fitness value, while the one whose second peak magnitude is the most will obtain the worst fitness value. For the case o f second peak frequency, the same principle will be applied as the second peak magnitude. Figure 3.9 illustrates the frequency response curve for original skirt system in the CCG Waban-Aki and LCAC. The optimized skirt system should produce lower magnitude and frequency o f second peak than those from original skirt system.

78

BODE PLOT WAÛW4fWACV

BODE PLOT. LCAC

<

1 0

£

5

10

15

20

25

30

36

40

45

50
FREQUENCY (rad/sec)

FREQUENCY (r»d/MC)

< Frequency Response Cur%« for Original Skirt System o f CCG W'aban-Aki>

< Frequency Response Curve for Original Skirt System o f LCAC>

Figure 3.9: Frequency response curve for original skirt system The better individuals are usually the ones who have the higher fitness value for the maximizing problems or vice versa. However, the concept about better individual might be changed depending on the conditions of problem. In other words, the fitness value is not the only factor judging whether the particular individual is better than others. For example, the individual who has the highest fitness value for the maximizing problem may not be in the feasible region, so that this point cannot be reachable in the reality and should be rejected during the selection process even though it has the highest fitness value [36]. This kind o f problem generally happens in the constrained optimization problems. One o f the solutions for the constrained optimization problem is to use the Penalty Approach. Several forms o f penalty functions have been proposed in the GA literatures [37]. The common form o f penalty function is given as following equation. p{x) = Q ) max(g(x),0) + ^ |A (x )|) (3.36)

This penalty function consists o f a penalty coefficient Cp multiplied by the sum o f constraint violations. The penalty coefficient can be selected depending on the type o f

79

optimization problem. For stiff problems, high value o f penalty coefficient may be appropriate. This value can also be selected through the trial-and-error technique. There are several constraints that should be considered for the realistic design in optimization o f ACVs skirt system. Most o f all, ACVs must be stable [38,39]. In order to reflect this constraint, penalty function will examine the eigenvalues o f the skirt system from the linearized equations of motion. Then if it finds out the instability in the system, penalty function will assign the proper values for those individuals who have the instability. Since the objective function is to minimize the second peak magnitude and frequency, penalty function will add some values to those individuals, in order to make their fitness value worse. The next constraint is the skirt bounce o f ACV. The skirt bounce is a dynamic instability o f the skirt-cushion system caused by the interaction between the motion o f the skirt and the cushion flow processes. This skirt bounce can be prevented or reduced by setting the proper pressure ratio o f the bag and cushion. Thus if the pressure ratio is out o f the proper range which is 1.0- 1.6, then penalty function will assign the penalty values. The third constraint is the height o f hover gap that is the distance from the bottom o f the finger tips to the ground. Since the motion o f ACVs is computed at the equilibrium conditions, the hover gap should always be the positive number. Hence if the skirt system produces the negative hover gap, then penalty function will again add the proper penalty values to the individuals. At last, there is an allowable range for the modification o f dimensions in the bag and finger skirt geometry. If the dimensions are out o f this range, then the shape o f frequency response curve becomes unrealistic, and it is even impossible to compute the frequency response plots with those skirt dimensions. Thus penalty function will assign the proper penalty value to the

80

individuals depending on whether their parameters are in the allowable range. This allowable range can be determined by the experiments, experience or trial-and-error. At the end o f penalty function process in the GA all individuals will have the total fitness value which is the sum o f the objective value and the penalty value. Among the individuals, the one who possesses the least total fitness value will become the best individual in the whole population and produce the best optimized properties o f the bag and finger skirt system. Moreover the penalty value o f the best individual should be zero, in order to produce the feasible design o f the bag and finger skirt system. Figure 3.10 describes the constraint conditions applied in penalty function.

P en alty fu n ction

i
C onstraint C o d itio n s

I . N egative E igen valu es o f S y stem M atrix

2.

Proper B ag and C u sh ion P ressu re R atio ( 1 .0 - 1 .6 ) fo r A nti-Skirt B ou n ce

3 . P o sitiv e H overgap

4 . A llow ab le Range fo r the C hange in B ag and F inger G eom etry

P en alty value is zero

Y es S a tisfie d ?

P en alty value is larger than zero

No

Figure 3 . 10: Constraint conditions in penalty function The selection process is performed to choose the better individuals for further genetic processes. In order to select the better individuals, rank method is firstly used. According to rank method each individual gets its own rank in the whole population. This

81

method is more appropriate for the use in domains where the fitness range is extremely wide. In these domains it is feared that the first individuals with high fitness values will dominate the population and prevent other good individuals in other regions o f the search space from being found [19]. Once all the individuals obtain their ranks, the selection is performed with the remainder stochastic sampling method [13]. The remainder stochastic sampling method usually works with the fitness values, but in this thesis it has been modified such that it works with rank values instead o f fitness values o f the individuals. In this method, average o f rank values is computed, and then each individual's rank is divided by the average value. The value obtained from division is called expected number. This expected number is consisted o f an integer part and the fraction part. Integer part indicates the number o f copies of the individual. For instance, the individual, whose expected number is 4.3, will have four copies o f the same chromosome during the selection process. Here, the term, copy, means the selection operator chooses the individual as many as the number o f copies. Then the fraction parts o f the expected numbers are used to provide the probability of each individual for the rest o f selection process. This fraction part process will be continued until the total number o f copies is reached to the original population size. As a result, the contents o f population will be changed through the selection process such that it is now comprised o f better individuals. The individuals chosen from selection process go through the crossover process [14]. Crossover process produces the superior genes with the chosen individuals, so that the ones after crossover process likely have the high probability ol possessing the lower total fitness value which is closer to the best optimized solution point. There have been

82

several forms o f crossover operator came out for the past years [40,41]. In this thesis, the three common types o f crossover operator have been applied. First type o f crossover operator is `Single Point Crossover'. This one basically does a cut and paste operation on the genotypes o f the parents to produce newborns. Figure 3.11 illustrates this operation. In order to carry out this operation, a single point in the chromosome should be selected. Then the genes before the point will be remained the

<Single Point Crossover>

1

0

1

-1

0

0

0

1

0

Parent I

0

I

1

0

I

0 !

1

1

1

Parent 2

This section o f parents is exchanged

0
0 0

1

I

1

Offspring 1

0

0

Offspring 2

Figure 3.11: Single point crossover same and the genes after the point will be changed with another chromosome. Through this process, the new chromosome will be formed which is referred as "Offspring . The second type o f Crossover operator is `Two Point Crossover'. This operator is performed in a similar way o f Single Point Crossover, but the only difference is that the two points in the genotypes o f the parents will be used for exchanging the information. Figure 3.12 describes this crossover operator.

83

<Two Point Crossover>

I

1

0

1

1

0

0 10

1

0

Parent 1

0

n

?
'

1

1

1

Parent 2

This section between two points is exchanged

0

0

0

1

0

Offspring 1

Offspring 2

·

Figure 3.12: Two point crossover

The third type o f crossover operator is `Random Crossover'. In this operator, each bit in a new individual is selected randomly from the corresponding position in either parent. For example in Figure 3.13, if the first bit in the offspring 1 is selected from the parent 2 then the value o f bit in the first position is going to be `O', while if the second bit in the offspring 1 is chosen from the parent 1 then the value o f bit in second position is `O'. This selection o f parents for each bit o f offspring 1 is performed at random. The offspring 2 is also built based on the same principle o f offspring 1. Since single point crossover has a simplest form, its performance time is the shortest among the three common types o f operator. However, it has the major problem which is a great deal o f difficulty searching the space. Unless both parents are close to each other, single point crossover may produce a bad newborn even if it starts with two good parents [13]. In the case o f two point crossover, it performs better than single point crossover but the computational time will be increased. The random crossover operator is

84

not trapped in the problem single point crossover has and it introduces a lot o f diversity. Therefore, in the thesis all three crossover methods are simultaneously applied due to the unique characteristic o f each method described above.

<Random Crossover>

1
0

0
1 1

1
0

1

0
1 0

0

0

1

0

Parent 1

1 1 1

Parent 2

Each bit o f offspring is the same bit at corresponding position in the parent which is randomly chosen

0
0

0

1

0

0
1

0
0

1

1

0

Offspring 1

1

1

0

0

1

1

Offspring 2

Figure 3.13: Random crossover Mutation process comes after crossover process in the GA. Its main role is to provide the diversity in the population. It gives the chance to explore the entire search space by changing randomly the bit values in the chromosome. It is especially important when the solution point is trapped in the local optimums. That solution point can be escaped by changing the genes in the chromosome through the mutation process. There are two common forms o f mutation operator used in this thesis work. The first one is `Single Bit Mutation'. It basically changes the bit value based on a probability o f mutation, one at a time. For example, if the bit value is `one' at the first position in the chromosome with probability o f mutation 0. 8 then it is likely changed

85

from `one' to `zero'. The bit values at the rest o f positions in the same chromosome will be mutated based on the same principle applied to the bit value at the first position. Figure 3.14 illustrates this mutation operator.

<Single Bit Mutation>

1
0

0
1 1

I
0

1

0
1 0

0

0
1 1

1

0

Parent I

Parent 2

Each bit o f parents is changed based on probability o f mutation

0

0

1

1 I 0

1

0
1 1

1
0

Offspring 1

0

1 0

0

1 0

Offspring 2

Figure 3.14: Single bit mutation The other type o f mutation operator is `Two Bit Mutation'. This operator exchanges the bit values at two randomly selected positions in the same chromosome. For instance, if the first and fourth positions are randomly selected from the parent then the bit values at those chosen positions are exchanged and the rest o f bit values will remain the same as that o f parent. Figure 3.15 describes this mutation operator. These two common types o f mutation operator provide the extra chances to find the best solution for the given problem and help not to be trapped in the local optimums. This can be seen in the nature such as mutated birds for the specific environment in order to survive. Since each o f mutation method has imique characteristics, all two mutation processes are again simultaneously performed in the GA.

86

<Two Bit Mutation>

1

0

1

1

0

0

0

1

0

Parent 1

0

1

1

0

1 0

1 1 1

Parent 2

The bit values at two randomly selected positions in the parent are exchanged

1

0

0

1

0

0

1

1

0

Offspring 1

0

0

1 0

1

1

1

1

1

Offspring 2

Figure 3.15: Two bit mutation After the crossover and mutation processes, the current population will be composed o f better individuals whose genes are now superior compared to the ones in the old population. These individuals have a good structure and information about the best optimized solution point, so that the portion o f them will be kept during the next genetic process without any interference or modification. This is done by the elitist replacement. This strategy provides the fast convergence in the solution and also keeps the good structures o f individuals for future reference in the next generation process. At the end o f genetic procedure, the algorithm checks the stopping condition, and if it meets the condition the optimization process will be ceased. The condition used in this thesis is to stop the GA if the current generation is reached the maximum number o f generations which is pre-set by user. The maximum number o f generations is generally recommended to use the multiple o f the population size. For example, if population size is 30 then the maximum number o f generations can be 60, 90, 120, and so on. Then the

87

point obtained at the last stage o f generation is the best optimized solution and it produces the lowest second peak magnitude and second peak frequency by the combination o f optimized design variables. The following table shows all the parameters used in the GA such as population size, length o f an individual, maximum number o f generations, etc.

Table 3.2: Parameters used in the GA on skirt optimization problem Population size Max. Generations Length o f an individual Elitist reservation Crossover methods 30 individuals 180 steps 24 bits 10% o f population size Single Point Crossover Two Point Crossover Random Crossover Single bit mutation Two bit mutation
f 'N ^ 2 , T 3 , Z»4,

Mutation methods Design variables o f skirt system Design restriction o f skirt system

L > o h ^Pi/Pc Me Lc, Be, Dh, Hh

88

3.7 Results of Experim ents The bag and finger skirt system o f AC Vs is optimized using the optimization technique, the GA, and its results are compared with the existing skirt system in terms o f all the important properties and frequency responses in this section.

3.7.1 Optimization on Waban-Aki Skirt For the model o f ACV skirt system, CCG Waban-Aki is chosen for the optimization. The total craft mass, craft length, craft width, and the lengths defining craft's base geometry are initially given as A/, =36,740 kg, 4 . = 21 m, = 8.60 m,

D* = 1.39m, and H,, = 0.975 m, respectively. Within these initial design constraints, the skirt system is optimized with the GA technique.

Second Peak Magnitude & Frequency vs. Generation Number -- 2nd Peak magnitude of best solution 2nd Peak frequency of best solution Average of penalties of the whole population

05

O )
Li.

) 80 100 120 Number of Generations

140

160

180

Figure 3.16: Overall performance o f GA on Waban-Aki skirt optimization

89

In Figure 3.16 the overall performance o f the GA on skirt optimization is depicted. The upper two lines in the figure represent the 2"" * peak's frequency and magnitude o f best solution obtained in each generation step. Since the tradeoff exists between the 2"*' peak's frequency and magnitude, the GA was trying to find the optimal point where those two properties meet the best condition without losing any particular side. The convergence o f 2"^ peak's frequency and magnitude occurred after the number o f generations reached around 140 steps. The third line which is located at the bottom o f Figure 3.16 represents the average penalty value o f whole population at each generation step. This line does not have a convergence for most o f optimization problems, since the stochastic optimization method like GA has always the perturbation in the results. That is why this line is not smooth, but rather be disturbed slightly at every generation step.

Table 3.3: Properties o f the original and optimized skirt systems in Waban-Aki

Waban-Aki
M c (k g ) Z ,c ( m ) ^ c (m )

Original skirt Optimized skirt

36,740 36,740 M,(kg) 932.27 932.43
L o b iv a )

21 21 Li(m) 0.180 0.164 Q (rad) 0.576 0.600 a,,(rad) 0.498 0.422

8.6 8.6 Liim) 2.02 1.90 P«(Pa) 2,000 2,000 y,,(rad) 0.187 0.174

1.39 1.39 l3(m) 1.69 1.70 6((m^/s) 95.088 97.161 Hdm) 1.2576 1.2586

#6(m) 0.975 0.975
l4 (m )

Original skirt Optimized skirt

1.10 1.08
P be^P ce

Original skirt Optimized skirt

2.60 2.64 /f«(m) 0.0036 0.0039

1.2 1.1 /fw(m) 1.254 1.2547

Original skirt Optimized skirt

90

The optimized skirt should be met the several stability requirements and the main objective - improved ride quality. Table 3.3 shows the dimensions and other properties o f original skirt system and optimized skirt system. According to Mantle [4]. he explained some factors which can improve the stability in heave motion. However those suggestions are not necessarily required to fulfill the stability criteria. Since the ACV systems are very complex and inter-related each other, it is not easy to pin-point the conditions for the stability requirements. Nevertheless those suggestions may help to understand the system in terms o f how they are related each other in some ways. In order to improve the stability in heave motion, it is recommended to increase the air gap height and flow rate. In Table 3.3, the result o f optimization on Waban-Aki skirt shows that the air gap height o f optimized skirt was increased from 3.6 mm to 3.9 mm and the flow rate o f that was also increased from 95.088 m^/s to 97.161 m^/s. Hence the stability o f optimized skirt system is improved according to M antle's

recommendation. However the pressure ratio was decreased from 1.2 to l.I. This change degrades the stability o f vehicle, but as mentioned earlier there are many factors interacted together for the stability, and the GA optimization method tries to find the solution which falls into the best optimized conditions even though some o f factors couldn't be fully satisfied. For the loss o f pressure ratio, the compensation for stability was made from the improvement o f other skirt properties such as the dimensions o f bag and finger. The mass o f optimized skirt was not changed much compared to the original skirt. The outer bag length was increased from 2.6 m to 2.64 m. This change eventually contributes the vehicle's stability by providing more flexibility and ability to absorb more energy caused from the ground or during the vehicle's heave motion. Other dimensions

91

such as the lengths and angles related to the bag and finger were also changed to provide better stability and ride quality. Furthermore eigenvalues o f the system matrix were checked and satisfied for the stability criteria. The modification on design parameters was also performed in allowable range. Other constraint conditions were also met. The comparison o f original and optimized skirts o f Waban-Aki was also made in a view o f frequency response. The second peak's magnitude and its frequency o f original model were found as 20.8 units and 24.7 rad/s, while those o f optimized model were obtained as 6. 6 units and 21.2 rad/s. Thus the second peak's magnitude and its frequency were reduced significantly through the optimization process. The percentages o f reduction in these properties are 68.3 % and 14.2 %, respectively. This result indicates that the magnitude o f disturbance during the vehicle's heave motion is reduced more than a half o f that in original skirt system. Furthermore the frequency o f second peak was far from the range which humans feel the most sensitivity during the heave motion. Thus the changes in both second peaks magnitude and its frequency provide better ride quality than the ones in original skirt system. Therefore, it is proven from the above results that a small change o f geometry can improve ride quality a lot. Figure 3.17 and 3.18 depicts the frequency curve and phase shift curve for the original and optimized skirts o f Waban-Aki. The actual physical shapes of original and optimized skirts are also plotted in Figure 3.19.

92

B O D E PLOT: W ABANAKI A CV 25

-- Original system --- Optimal system 20

cn

< 10

20 25 30 FREQUENCY (rad/sec)

45

50

Figure 3.17:Frequency response curve for the original and optimized skirts o f Waban-Aki

PHASE DIAGRAM Original system Optimal system

-20
-40 -60 2 , -80

O )

I -.00
Dl

-120
-140 -160 -180 20 25 30 FREQUENCY (rad/sec) 45

Figure 3.18: Phase shift curves for the original and optimized skirts of Waban-Aki

93

optimized Skirt
Vehicle Hard Structure

Original Skirt

Figure 3.19: Physical shapes o f the original and optimized skirts o f Waban-Aki

3.7.2 Optimization on LCAC Skirt LCAC is also chosen as another example o f a bag and finger skirt optimization with the GA. The initial conditions given for the vehicle dimensions are the followings: = 150,000kg, = 2 7 m, = 14m, D,, = 1 .81m ,and = 1 .2 7 m.

Figure 3.20 shows the overall performance o f the GA on LCAC skirt optimization. All the important properties of the graph were explained in the previous section under the case o f Waban-Aki skirt optimization. As shown in the figure, the GA found the point o f optimal solution after 42 generation steps. This is quite fast convergence compared to the previous case o f Waban-Aki skirt system. The reason is that the original skirt has the properties closed to the optimal solution already, so that it didn't take time for a long to

94

Second Peak Magnitude & Frequency vs. Generation Number -- 2nd Peak magnitude of best solution -- - 2nd Peak frequency of best solution Average of penalties of the whole population

J 30

>

S25 O )

I 20

) 80 100 120 Number of Generations

140

160

180

Figure 3.20: Overall performance o f GA on LCAC skirt optimization reach that point. It is also known from the fact that the magnitude o f optimization level made on the skirt o f LCAC is less than the case on the skirt o f Waban-Aki. Nevertheless the GA produced the quite significant reduction in the 2"`* peak's frequency and magnitude o f LCAC skirt system. All the properties of optimized and original skirts o f LCAC are shown in the following Table 3.4. The results showed the reduced air gap height from 38.8 mm to 23.0 mm. This change contributes the instability o f vehicle. However, the system o f optimized skirt produced the compensation for this instability by generating longer outer bag length and changes in other dimensions. That is why the optimized skirt has better stability and ride comfort compared to the original skirt system, even if it has the reduced air gap height. The flow rate and pressure ratio o f bag and cushion for optimized skirt were

95

found almost same as the original skirt system. Finally eigenvalues o f the system proved that the overall stability o f skirt system was satisfied by producing all negative values. Other stability and design constraints were also fulfilled.

Table 3.4; Properties o f the original and optimized skirt systems in LCAC LCAC Mc(kg)

Original skirt Optimized skirt

150,000 150,000

Z,c(m) 27 27 £i(m) 0.270 0.280 O (rad) 0.576 0.589 or,,(rad)
0.4178 0.5315

5c(m) 14 14 l 2(m) 3.03 3.12 1.807 1.807 Zjfm) 2.535 2.350

Hb(m) 1.267 1.267 Z,4(m) 1.65 1.75

Original skirt Optimized skirt

Mj(kg) 1,913 1,902

Original skirt Optimized skirt

3.90 4.20 hAjn)

p,,(Pa) 3,893 3,893
r,, (ra d ) 0.1015 0.2016

Pb/Pice
380.0 379.9 Heim) 1.7371 1.8350 1.20 1.18
hsoim)

Original skirt Optimized skirt

0.0388 0.0230

1.6983 1.8120

The second peak's magnitude and its frequency o f original model are found as 14.64 units and 20.7 rad/s, while those o f optimized model are obtained as 7.69 units and 19.2 rad/s. The percentages of reduction in 2"^ peak's magnitude and frequency between the original and optimized skirt systems are computed as 47 % and 7 %, respectively. The reduction in both o f characteristics contributes improved ride quality and stability. The frequency and phase shift curves are plotted in Figure 3.21 and 3.22. Figure 3.23 illustrates the actual physical shapes o f original and optimized skirts.

96

B O D E PLOT: LCAC 15

-- Original system --- Optimal system

10

O
5

0

0

5

10

15

30 35 20 25 FREQUENCY (rad/sec)

40

45

50

Figure 3.21: Frequency response curves for the original and optimized skirts o f LCAC

PHASE DIAGRAM

-20
-40 -60 -80
LU

-- Original system --- Optimal system

-100

a: -120 -140

-180 -200 20 25 30 FREQUENCY (rad/sec) 40

Figure 3.22: Phase shift curves for the original and optimized skirts of LCAC

97

O riginal Skirt

Vehicle Hard Structure

V'

Figure 3.23: Physical shapes o f the original and optimized skirts o f LCAC

3.7.3 Effect o f various skirt masses on optimization In this section, the effect o f different skirt masses on skirt optimization with the GA is addressed. The original skirt material is an elastomer coated fabric composite and its area density is 2.8 kg/m^. The second skirt material for comparison purpose is an arbitrary chosen material which area density is 1.4 kg/m^. Unlike previous experiments for skirt optimization, the GA has now two different skirt material choices. Hence, design variables include the continuous parameters as well as discontinuous ones, while in previous experiments only continuous parameters were considered. Then the lengths o f individual and computation time are increased compared to previous experiments. The objective function o f the GA is also changed to evaluate and assign the proper fitness

98

value. For the general information about the effect o f different skirt masses on ACV performance, it was found that the magnitude o f second peak in the frequency response curve will be decreased while its frequency will be increased for the reduced skirt mass [2]. Since it is not possible to reduce both o f magnitude and frequency o f second peak at the same time, objective function is modified so that it will produce the lowest second peak magnitude without any concern or interest about its frequency range. The reason is that much reduced magnitude o f second peak does not disturb ride comfort even though it is in the sensitive frequency range. Same parameters in previous experiments are again applied for this optimization practice. The only difference is the objective function and the freedom for the GA to choose different skirt material properties. The results o f this new experiment are plotted in Figures 3.24, 3.25,3.26, and 3.27 with original system and fixed skirt mass system.

BODE PLOT: WABANAKI ACV 25 Original system GA-fixed skirt m ass GA-various skirt m asses

20

O )

Z) 25 30 FREQUENCY (rad/sec)

Figure 3.24: Frequency response curves for different skirt mass condition on Waban-Aki

99

P H A S E DIAGRAM

-20 -40 -60 -80 m -100
CL - 1 2 0

Original system GA-fixed skirt mass GA-various skirt m asses

-140

-1B0
-180

-200

20 25 30 FREQUENCY (rad/sec)

40

Figure 3.25: Phase shift curves for different skirt mass condition on Waban-Aki

BODE PLOT: LCAC 15 Original system GA -fixed skirt m ass GA-various skirt m asses

10

 < u X <
5

0 0

5

10

15

30 35 20 25 FREQUENCY (rad/sec)

40

45

50

Figure 3.26: Frequency response curves for different skirt mass condition on LCAC

100

P H A S E DIAGRAM

-20
-40 -60

Original system GA-fixed skirl m ass GA -various skirt m asses

q

: -120
-140 -160 -180

-200

35 20 25 30 FREQUENCY (rad/sec)

40

45

50

Figure 3.27: Phase shift curves for different skirt mass condition on LCAC The results showed that the GA selected the new skirt material property which is a half area density o f original skirt material in order to produce the second peak's magnitude as low as possible. Thus the skirt mass for Waban-Aki and LCAC becomes 501 kg and 958 kg, respectively. In the frequency response curves, the second peak's magnitude o f Waban-Aki and LCAC was reduced in a great magnitude, compared to the original skirt system and the optimized skirt system with fixed skirt mass. The pressure ratio and air gap o f new optimized skirt system for Waban-Aki were found as 1.26 and 3.50 mm, respectively. Those for LCAC were also computed as 1.18 and 22.0 mm, respectively. Hence the pressure ratio for each ACV was set in the boundary o f anti-skirt bounce to satisfy the stability. The air gap for each ACV was also obtained similar to that o f first optimized skirt system with fixed skirt mass. Finally eigenvalues o f system matrix and other design constraints were also satisfied for both cases o f Waban-Aki and LCAC.

101

The following table summarizes the magnitude o f second peak and percentage o f reduction compared to the original skirt system.

Table 3.5: Second peak magnitude and percentage o f reduction for each system W aban-Aki 2"" Peak Magnitude (unit) 20.80 6.60 1.76 LCAC 2"" Peak Magnitude (unit) 14.64 7.69 0.90 Percentage o f Reduction (%)__________

Original system without optimization Optimized system with fixed skirt mass Optimized system with various skirt masses

0
68.3 91.5 Percentage o f Reduction
m __________

Original system without optimization Optimized system with fixed skirt mass Optimized system with various skirt masses

0
47 93.9

In conclusion, it was found that the reduced skirt mass can decrease the magnitude o f second peak in the frequency response curve even though it increases the frequency o f second peak. However the increased frequency can be ignored by producing a small magnitude o f second peak's magnitude. Hence the GA further optimized the skirt system with the reduced skirt area density and found the lowest magnitude o f second peak with satisfying all the stability criteria. Since the magnitude o f second peak is much reduced, the ride comfort and quality are further improved compared to the previous optimized system with fixed skirt area density. This is very significant result and implies that the ride comfort can be improved much further using the reduced skirt material density in real application. This characteristic should be noticed by the manufacturers o f ACVs, and the research for advanced material o f skirt should be carried on.

102

4. CONCLUSIONS

As an amphibious vehicle, the ACV is a unique marine craft that provides the ability to travel over rough surfaces as well as at high speeds. In this thesis, design o f ACVs was carried out with the Artificial Intelligence; Expert System and Genetic Algorithm. The program codes o f these two techniques were specifically built and implemented for the design o f ACVs. In the first part o f the thesis, initial design o f ACVs was performed with the expert system. The main dimensions, weight distributions, and parametric properties were successfully generated with the expert system. A simple configuration o f subsystems such as lift system, propulsion system, and skirt and cushion system were also created. Since the design o f ACVs is very complicated, it was carried out based on the simplified model and some o f design steps were omitted in an initial design phase. These simplifications and omissions could be replaced with more accurate design process in later development. In order to build a satisfactory and accurate expert system, more than 70 existing ACV data sets were collected and analyzed. Furthermore the statistical data, past trends, and much literature were also referred and used. For the validation o f expert systems, tests were performed on the two existing ACVs, the CCG Waban-Aki and LCAC. The overall performance was quite satisfactory compared to the original system even though some design parameters were obtained with some errors. These errors should be corrected when the design phase is further developed. As an initial design stage, these errors should be acceptable and provide the helpful guideline and estimation for the designers. In order to produce better estimation o f design

103

parameters and configurations, more data sets and literature need to be collected and analyzed. Moreover the ACV database should also be updated with the newly developed technologies. In conclusion the implementation o f expert system on initial design o f ACVs was successfully carried out. The results o f tests were quite satisfactory and stable in an initial design phase. The valuable design tool, expert system, is surely helpful for non-expert designers and beginners. In the second part o f the thesis, the bag and finger skirt o f ACVs was optimized with the robust search technique; the GA. The GA is the search technique that can be applicable to most engineering problems and those o f other fields. The past several years have shown its robusmess and flexibility on optimization problems. Furthermore it can search the solution point with great speed even though there are complicated constraint conditions. Such a powerful tool was applied for the optimization o f the bag and finger skirt system. The example ACVs were again selected as the CCG Waban-Aki and LCAC. The linearized equations o f motion for the vehicle were used to predict the behaviors o f the vehicles as well as the skirts. The design variables of skirt system were the dimensions of outer bag, inner bag, and finger, and pressure ratio of the bag and cushion. Then the original parameters and the optimized parameters were compared. The optimization o f skirt results the increment in the outer bag length. It indicates that the skirt has more flexibility and is able to absorb more energy from the groimd or during the motion o f vehicles. The increased air gap height and flow rate also contribute the vehicle's better stability in heave motion. The frequency response curves for the original and optimized models were compared in terms o f the second peak magnitude and frequency. The results showed that the optimized skirt

104

has the greatly reduced second peak magnitude and frequency, so that it provides the better quality o f ride compared to the original skirt configuration. The skirt bounce problem in optimized skirt was also solved by getting the pressure ratio o f bag and cushion as 1.10 and 1.18 for the CCG Waban-Aki and LCAC, respectively, which is in the allowable range for anti-skirt boimce. The optimization o f the skirt system with various material choices was also carried out by the GA. The results o f experiments indicated that the GA can further optimize the skirt system with the reduced skirt area density. The GA produced the very small magnitude o f second peak so that the ride comfort became much improved. All the stability criteria were also satisfied. Hence the reduced skirt mass improved ride quality while meeting the stability conditions at the same time. In conclusion the bag and finger skirt o f both ACVs produced better ride quality as well as stability through the optimization process with the GA. In future work, in the expert system part, more data sets for ACVs will be collected and summarized for better prediction o f design parameters. At the same time, initial design phase will cover a wide range o f design processes so that it can include the complicated model and constraints as well. The inputs for users will also be modified in a way that users can express their design options more freely. In the GA part skirt model will be modified to reflect more characteristics o f real world behavior including the equations o f motion, configuration o f the bag and finger skirt, its parameter estimation, and so on. The codes for the GA are also going to be refined for more effective and efficient performance so that it can produce the solution faster. The constraint condition for the skirt optimization will be expanded further to contain more realistic conditions.

105

REFERENCES

1. Amyot, J. R., "Hovercraft Technology, Economies and Applications", Elsevier Studies in Mechanical Engineering, Vol. 11, Elsevier, 1989.

2 . Chung, .1., "Theoretical Investigation of Heave Dynamics of an Air Cushion Vehicle:
Bag and Finger Skirt", Ph.D. dissertation. Institute for Aerospace Studies, University o f Toronto, 1997. 3. Ma, T. and Sullivan, P. A., "Dynamics o f Responsive Skirts", Hovercraft Technology, Economics and Application, J. R. Amyot, ed., Elsevier Studies in Mechanical Engineering, Vol.l 1, Elsevier, Amsterdam, Chap. 13,1989. 4. Mantle, P. J., "Air Cushion Craft Development", David W. Taylor Naval Ship Research and Development Center, Bethesda, Maryland, DTNSRDC-80/012,1980. 5. Tzafestas, Spyros, "Expert Systems in Engineering Applications", Springer-Verlag, 1993.

6 . Reich, Y., Bertram, V., and Friesch, J., "The development o f a Decision Support
System for Propeller Design", In Proceedings o f the 9"' International Conference on Computer Applications in Shipbuilding, 1997. 7. Nah, Seung-Hyeog, "The Development o f an Expert System for Aircraft Initial Design (DESAID)", Ph.D. dissertation, Cranfield Institute o f Technology, 1991.

8. Neufeld, D. and Chung, J., "Development o f an Expert System for Unmanned Aerial
Vehicle Design", CASI 50* Annual General Meeting and Conference, Montreal, 2003.

106

9. Bulitko, V. V, and Wilkins, D. C., "Automated Instructor Assistant for Ship Damage Control", Proceedings o f the 11"' lAAI '99 Conference, Orlando, Florida, 1999. ] 0. Lucas, P., "Knowledge Acquisition for Decision-theoretic Expert Systems", AISB Quarterly, 94, 23-33, 1996. 11. Jung, T. and Chung, J., "Initial Design o f Air Cushion Vehicles by Expert System", submitted to 17*'' International Sessions in 41*' Aircraft Symposium, Japan Society o f Aeronautics and Space Science, 2003. 12. Barzilay, R., DeCristofaro, J., Korelsky, T., Lavoie, B., McCullough, D., and Rambow, 0 ., "A new approach to Expert System Explanations", In proceedings o f INLG-I998, p.78-87. 13. Goldberg D. E., "Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Learning", Addison-Wesley, 1989. 14. Perez, R. E., "Aircraft Conceptual Design Using Genetic Algorithms", 8"' AIAA/USAF/NASA/ISSMO Symposium on Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization, AIAA paper No., AIAA-2000-4938,2000. 15. Perez, R. E., Behdinan, K., and Chimg, J., "Airfoil Shape Optimization Using Genetic Algorithms", CASI 47"' Annual Conference, Ottawa, Canada, May 2000. 16. Gen M. and Cheng R., "Genetic Algorithms & Engineering Optimization", John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 2000. 17. Jung, T. and Chung, J., "Airline Fleet Assignment using Genetic Algorithm" Genetic and Evolutionary Computer Conference (GECCO-2002) for late breaking papers. New York, 2002.

107

18. Chung, J. and Jung, T., "Optimization of an Air Cushion Vehicle Bag and Finger Skirt Using Genetic Algorithms", accepted to Journal o f Aerospace Science and Technology, Elsevier 2003. 19. Rasheed K. M., "GADO: A Genetic Algorithm for continuous Design Optimization", Ph.D. dissertation. Computer Science, The State University o f New Jersey, 1998. 20. Krishna Rao K.V., Muralidhar S., and Dhingra S. L., "Public Transport Routing and Scheduling using Genetic Algorithms", Proceedings o f the 8th International Conference on Computer-Aided Scheduling o f Public Transport (CASPT), 2000. 21. Ryan G. W., "A Genetic Search Technique for Identification o f Aircraft Departures", NASA Contractor Report 4688, Dryden Flight Research Center, 1995. 22. Herrera F., Lozano M., and Verdegay J. L., "Tackling Real-Coded Genetic Algorithms: Operators and Tools for Behavioural Analysis", Artificial Intelligence Review, vol. 12,265-319, 1998. 23. Chung, J. and Sullivan, P.A., "Linear Heave Dynamics o f an Air Cushion Vehicle Bag and Finger Skirt", Transaction o f Japan Society for Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Vol.43, No. 140, pp.39-45,2000. 24. Lundstrom, R., Holmlund, P., and Lindberg, L., "Absorption o f energy during vertical whole-body vibration exposure". Journal o f Biomechanics, Vol.31, Issue4, pp.317326, 1998. 25. Horvitz, E. J. and Breese, J. S., "Decision Theory in Expert Systems and Artificial Intelligence", International Journal o f Approximate Reasoning, 2:247-302,1988.

108

26. Zupan, B. and Cheng, M. K., "Response Time Optimization o f Rule-Based Expert Systems", Proceedings o f SPIE -Knowledge Based Artificial Intelligence System in Aerospace and Industry, Vol.2244, pp.240-248, 1994. 27. Shaw, M. and Gaines, B., "Comparing Conceptual Structures: Consensus, Conflict, Correspondence and Contrast", In Knowledge Acquisition, V ol.l, pp.341-363, 1989. 28. Cheetham, B. and Pomeroy, B., "Knowledge Acquisition for a Fluid Bed Reactor Expert System", Proceedings o f SPIE -Knowledge Based Artificial Intelligence System in Aerospace and Industry, Vol.2244, pp. 196-205,1994. 29. Reiter, E., Robertson, R., and Osman, L., "Knowledge Acquisition for Natural Language Generation", In proceedings o f INLG-2000, p.2I7-224. 30. Cheng, V.H.L., Crawford, L.S., and Menon, P.K., "Air Traffic Control Using Genetic Search Techniques", IEEE International Conference on Control Applications, August 22-27, Hawaii, 1999. 31. Chung, J., "Skirt-Material Damping Effects on Heave Dynamics o f an Air-CushionVehicle Bag-and-Finger Skirt", Canadian Aeronautics and Space Journal, Vol.48, N o.3,pp.201-212,2002. 32. Chung, J., Sullivan, P. A., and Ma, T., "Nonlinear Heave Dynamics o f an Air Cushion Vehicle Bag and Finger Skirt", Journal o f Ship Research, Vol.43, No.2, pp.79-94, 1999. 33. Sullivan, P. A., Hinchey, M. J., and Green, G. M., "A Review and Assessment o f Methods for Prediction o f the Dynamics Stability o f Air Cushions," Journal o f Sound and Vibration, Vol.84, No.3, (1982) pp337-358.

109

34. Kateman and Lucasius, Understanding and Using Genetic Algorithms, Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems, vol25, p.99-145,1994. 35. Wright A. H., "Genetic Algorithms for Real Parameter Optimization", Foundations of Genetic Algorithms 1, Morgan Kaufman, 205-218,1991. 36. Coit D. W. and Smith A. E., "Penalty Guided Genetic Search for Reliability Design Optimization", Computers and Industrial Engineering, Special Issue on Genetic Algorithms, vol.30, number 4,1996. 37. Rasheed K., "An Adaptive Penalty Approach for Constrained Genetic-Algorithm Optimization", The third annual conference on Genetic Programming (GP-98): Symposium on Genetic Algorithms (SGA-98), 1998. 38. Hinchey, M. J. and Sullivan, P. A., "On Hovercraft Over-Water Heave Stability", Journal o f Sound and Vibration, Vol. 163, Issue 2, pp.261-273,1993. 39. Hinchey, M. J. and Sullivan, P. A., "Hovercraft Heave Stability", Canadian Aeronautics and Space Journal, Vol.30, No.2, pp. 130-151, 1984. 40. Bradley C. Wallet, David J. Marchette, and Jeffery L. Solka, "A Matrix representation for genetic algorithms". Proceedings o f Automatic Object Recognition IV o f SPIE Aerosense, 1996. 41. P. Larranaga, C. M. H. Kuijpers, R. H. I. Inza, and S. Dizdarevic, "Genetic Algorithms for the Traveling Salesman Problem: A Review of Representations and Operators", Artificial Intelligence Review., vol. 13, pp. 129-170,1999. 42. Chung, J., "Chaos and Nonlinear Heave Dynamics o f an Air Cushion Vehicle Bag and Finger Skirt", ICNPAA 2002 International Conference on Nonlinear Problems in Aviation and Aerospace, Melbourne, Florida, 2002.

110

43. Sullivan, P. A., Charest, P. A., and MA, T., "Heave Stiffness o f an Air Cushion Vehicle Bag and Finger Skirt", Journal o f Ship Research, Vol.38, No.4, pp. 302-307. 1994.

Ill

APPENDIX A. Codes for Linearized Equations of Motion of a Bag and Finger Skirt System
deri elem.m
% % D erivatives and Matrix Elements (Two degrees o f freedom Skirt Model. Linearized at equilibrium conditions) function [PAADD.PAGDD.PAHCDD.PGADD.PGGDD,PGHCDD.PHCADD.PHCGDD.PHCHCDD.PAA.PAG.PAPB.PAPC,PGA,PGG.PGP B .P G P C P P B A D .... PPBG D .PPBPB,PPBPC,PPCAD.PPCG D,PPCA,PPCG.PPCPB,PPCPCPPCHCD.PPCH CPHCA.PHCG.PHCPCPHCHC.PPCHG D. P P C H G .... PHCHG] = deri_elem

[Bb,D b,Hb,LD,Lm ,M c,LI,L2,L3X4,Lob,om ega,M s,LM ,Lb,alphao,gammao.Gam ma.sigm ao.phi.muo.gamm aM o.A IÜ.Acrrjs,g.rho,C b .C c ,... heo,Bf,Pbo,Pco,Obo,Oco.hfo,Xso] = inputjaara; SL4=L4-(-heo)/(sin(phi-gammao)); % For Skrit G eom etry 'alpha' bo=(Ll ^2+L2^2+2*LI *L 2*cos(alphao-gam m ao))^.5; betao=atan((LI*sin(alphao)+L2*sin(gam m ao))/(LI*cos(alphao)+L2*cos(gam m ao))); co=(LD ^2+bo^2+2*LD *bo*sin(betao-G am m a))^.5; d a_db= (-l/(2*L I )+ (L r2 -L 2 ^ 2 )/(2 * L I *bo"'2))/sin(alphao-betao): dbeta_da=(L P 2 + L I *L2cos(alphao-gammao))/bo'^2; db_da=-LI*L2*sin(alphao-gam m ao)/bo: db_dg=-db_da; dbeta_dg=(L2""2+LI*L2*cos(alphao-gammao))/bo^2; dc_db=l/co*(bo+LD *sin(betao-G am m a)); dc_dbeta=LD*bo/co*cos(betao-Gam ma); dc_da=dc_db*db_da+dc_dbeta*dbeta_da; dc_dg=dc__db*db_dg+dc_dbeta*dbeta_dg; daa_dab= ((L 2''2-L r2)/(L l*bo'"3)*db__da^sin(alphao-betao)-((L r2-L 2''2)/(2*L I*bo''2)-l/(2*L I))*cos(alphao-betao)*(ldbeta_da))/(sin(alphao-betao))'^ 2 ; daa_dgb=((L 2 ^ 2 - L r 2 )/(L I*bo'' 3 )*db_dg*sin(alphao-bctao)-((LI''2 -L 2 '' 2 )/( 2 *L I*bo'' 2 )-l/( 2 *LI))*cos(alphao-betao)*(dbeta_dg))/(sin(alphao-betao))"'2 ;
d c s_ d a = (l/L o b * d c _ d a )* (sig m a o * sin (sig m ao )+ c o s(sig m a o ))/(sin (sig m a o )-sig m a o * co s(sig m a o )); dc s_d g = (l/L o b * d c_ _ d g )* (sig m ao * sin (sig m ao )+ co s(sig m ao ))/(sin (sigm ao)-sigm ao*cos(sigm ao));

dvoba_da=-Lm *(-LI L 2 *sin(alphao-gam m ao)+ L D *L r 2 *(cos(betao^am m a)*dbela_da*bo-sin(belao-G am m a)*db_da)/bo''2 ... +LD *LI*L2*((-sin(alphao-gam m ao)*bo<os(alphao-gam m ao)*db_da)/bo''2*sin(belao-G am m a)... +cos(alphao-gam m ao)/bo*cos(betao^am m a)*dbeta_da)+Lob*LD *LI''2*dcs_da*l/bo*cos(bclaoG am m a)/co ...

+Lob*LD*LP2*cos(sigmao)/sigmao^(-db_da/bo'"2*cos(betao<jamma)/co...
+l/bo*(-sin(betao-Gamm a)*dbeta_da*cO"Cos(betao-Gam m a)*dc_da)/co^2)...

112

+Lob*LD*LI L2 *dcs_da*cos(betaa-G ainm a)/co*cos(aIphao-gam m ao)/bo... +Lob*LD*LI*L2*cos(sigm ao)/sigm ao*((-sin(betao-Gam m a)*dbeia_da*co-cos(beiaoGamma)*dc__da)/co''2*cos(aIphao-gammao)/bo... +cos(betao-Gam m a)/co*(-sin(aIphao-gam m ao)*bo-cos(alphaogam m ao)*db_da)/bo''2 ) ) ... -»-Lm*(-LD*LI*L2*(-sin(bctao-Gamma)*dbcta__da*sin(alphao-gammao)/bo... +cos{beiao-Gam m a)*(cos(alphao-gam m ao)*bo-sin(aIphao-gam m ao)*db_da)/bo^2)... +Lob*LI *L2*dcs_da*sin(alphao-gam m ao)/co... ·Lob' Ll *L2*cos(sigm ao)/sigm ao*(cos(alphao-gam m ao)*co-sin(alphao-gam m ao)*dc__da)/co''2... -·Lob' LD' Ll *L2*dcs__da*sin(betao-Gamm a)/co*sin(alphao-gam mao)/bo... -f-Lob*LD*LI*L2*cos(sigm ao)/sigm ao*((cos(betao-Gamm a)*dbeta_da*co-sin(bctaoG am m a)*dc_da)/co''2*sin(alphao-gam m ao)/bo... -^sin(bciao-Gam ma)/co*(cos(alphao-gamm ao)' bo-sin(alphao-gammao)*db__da)/bo^2)): dviba_da=Lm *(-LI*L2*sin(alphao-gam m ao)-Lr2*L2*((cos(alphao-betao)*(l-dbela_da)*bo-sin(alphaobetao)*db_da)/bo"" 2 *sin(alphao*gam m ao)... sin(alphao-betao)/bo*cos(alphao-gammao))... -LI''2*L2*((-sin(alphao-betao)*(l-dbeta_da)*sin(alphao-gam m ao)*da__db)... -Hcos(alphao-belao)*cos(alphao-gammao)*da_db-»-cos(alphao-belao)*sin{alphao-gammao)' daa_dab)); dvfa_da=-2*Lm *LI*L4*sin(alphao-gam mao4"phi); dvoba_dg= -Lm *(LI*L2*sin(alphao-gam m ao)-t-L D *LI^2*(cos(betao^am m a)*dbeta_dg*bo-sin(belao-G am m a)*db_dg)/bo''2... i-LD^LI*L2*((sin(alphao*gammao)*bo-cos(alphao-gammao)*db_dg)/bo''2' sin(betao-G am m a)... Kcos(alphao-gamm ao)/bo*cos(betao-Gamma)*dbeta_dg)+Lob*LD*LI^2*dcs_dg*l/bo*cos(betaoG am m aV co... i-Lob*LD*LP2*cos(sigmao)/sigmao*(-db_dg/bo'^2' cos(betao-G am m a)/co... --1/bo' (-sin(betao-Gam m a)*dbela_dg*co-cos(betao-Gamm a)*dc__dg)/co^2)... 4-Lob*LD*LI *L2*dcs_dg*cos(blao-G am m a)/co*cos(alphao-gam m ao)/bo... »-Lob*LD*Ll*L2*cos(sigmao)/sigmao*((-sin{betao-Gamma)*dbeta__dg' co-cos(belaoG am m a)' dc_dg)/co''2*cos(a!phao-gam m ao)/bo... 4"Cos(beIao-Gamma)/co*(sin(alphao-gammao)*bo-cos(alphaogammao)*db__dg)/bo''2 ) ) ... -»-Lm*(-LD' Ll *L2*(-sin(betao-G am m a)*dbeta_dg*sin(alphao-gainm ao)/bo... ·^cos(betao-Gamma)*(-cos(alphao-gammao)*bo-sin(alphao-gammao)*db__dg)/bo'^2)... -»-Lob*LI *L2*dcs_dg*sin(alphao-gam m ao)/co... -»-Lob*LI*L2*cos(sigmao)/sigmao*(-cos(a!phao-gamm ao)*co-sin(alphao-ganim ao)*dc_dg)/co'^2... HLob*LD*LI *L2*dcs_dg*sin(belao-G am m a)/co*sin(alphao-gam m ao)/bo... +Lob* LD* LI  L2' cos(sigmao)/sigmao*((cos(betao-Ganima)*dbeta__dg*co-sin(betaoGam m a)*dc_dg)/co^2*sin(alphaO "gam m ao)/bo... +sin(betao-Gamma)/co*(-cos(alphao-gammao)*bo-sin(alphao-gammao)*db__dg)/bo''2)): dviba_dg=Lm *(LI*L2*sin(alphao-gam m ao)-LP2*L2*((cos(aIphao-betao)*(-dbeta_dg)*bo-sin(alphaobelao)' db_dg)/bo^ 2 *sin(alphao-gam m ao)... -sin(alphao-betao)/bo*cos(alphao-gam m ao))... -LI^2*L2*((sin(alphao*betao)*(dbcta_dg)*sin(aIphao-gam m ao)*da_db)... -cos(alphao-bctao)*cos(alphao-gam mao)*da_db+cos(alphao-betao)*sin(alphao-gam m ao)*daa_dgb)); dvfa_dg=2*Lm *LI*L4*sin(alphao-gam m ao+phi); voba=-Lm *(bo'^2-i-LD*bo*sin(betao-Gamma)+Lob*LD*bo*cos(sigmao)/sigtnao*cos(betaoG am m a)/co)*l/bo"^2*(LI''2-»-LIL2*cos(alphao-gam m ao))... -^Lm*(LD*cos(betao-Gamma)-Lob/co*cos(sigmao)/sigmao' (bo+LD *sin(betao-G am m a)))*(-LI*L2*sin(aIphao-gam m ao)/bo); viba=Lm*(bo'^2*dbcta_da+LI*(sin(alphao-betao)+bo*cos(alphao-betao)*da_db)*db__da); ifh e o > = 0 vfa= 2 *Lm *LI *L4cos(aIphao-gammao+phi); else vfa=2*Lm ^LI*SL4*cos(alphao-gam m ao+phi); end % For Skrit G eom etry 'gam m a' dvobg_da=*Lm *(-LI*L2*sin(alphao-gam m ao)+LD*L2'^2*(cos(betao-Gam m a)*dbcta_da*bo-sin(betao-Gam m a)*db_da)/bo'"2... + L D *L P L 2*((-sin(alphao-gam m ao)*bo-cos(alphao-gam m ao)*db_da)/bo''2' sin(betao-G am m a)... -Kcos(alphao-gam mao)/bo*cos(betao<jamm a)*dbeta_da)+Lob*LD*L2^2*dcs_da* I/bo*cos( betao-

113

Gamma)/co...
+Lob*LD*L2^2*cos(sigmao)/sigmao*(-db_da/bo'^2*cos(bctao-Gam ma)/co... +I/bo*(-sin(betao-Gam m a)*dbcia_da*co-cos(bclao-G am ma)*dc_da)/co^ 2 ) ... +Lob*LD*LI *L2*dcs_da*cos(betao-Gamm a)/co*cos(alphao-gam m ao)/bo... +Lob*LD*LI*L2*cos(sigm ao)/sigm ao*((-sin(bctao-Ganim a)*dbcia_da*co-cos(bciaoGam m a)*dc_da)/co'"2*cos(alphao-gam m ao)/bo... +cos(belao-Gamma)/co*(-sin(alphao-gammao)*bo-cos(aIphaogam m ao)*db_da)/bo^ 2 ) ) ... +Lm *(LD *LI*L2*(-sin(belao-G am m a)*dbcta_da*sin(alphao-gam m ao)/bo... +cos(betao-Gamma)*(cos(aIphao-gamniao)*bo-sin{alphao-gammao)*db_da)/bo'^ 2 ) ... -Lob*LI *L2*dcs_da*sin(alphao-gam m ao)/co... -Lob*LI*L2*cos(sigm ao)/sigm ao*(cos(alphao-gam m ao)*co-sin(alphao-gam m ao)*dc_da)/co'^2... -Lob*LD*LI *L2*dcs__da*sin(betao-Gamma)/co*sin(alphao-gammao)/bo... -Lob*LD*LI*L2*cos(sigm ao)/sigm ao*((cos(betao-Gamm a)*dbcta_da*co-sin(bctaoGam m a)*dc_da)/co^2*sin(alphao-gam m ao)/bo... -*-sin{betao-Gamma)/co*(cos(alphao-gammao)*bo-sin(alphao-gammao)*db_da)/bo^ 2 )); dvibg_da=Lm *(-LI*L2*sin(aIphao-ganim ao)+LP2*L2*((cos(aIphao-betao)*(l-dbeta_da)*bo-sin(aIphaobctao)*db__da)/bo^ 2 *sin(alphao-gam m ao)... +sin(alphao-beiao)/bo*cos(alphao-ganim ao))... +LP2*L2*((-sin(alphao-betao)*(l-dbeta_da)*sin(alphao-gam m ao)*da__db)... +cos(alphao-betao)*cos(alphao-gammao)*da_db+cos(aIphao-beiao)*sin(alphao-gammao)*daa__dab)); dvobg__dg=-Lm *(Ll*L2*sin(alphao-gam m ao)+LD*L2''2*(cos(belao-Gam m a)*dbeta_dg*bo-sin(betao-Gam m a)*db_dg)/bo^2... +LD *Ll*L2*((sin(aIphao-gam m ao)*bo-cos(aIphao-ganim ao)*db_dg)^''2*sin(bclao-G am m a)... +cos(aIphao-gammao)/bo*cos(bclao-Gamma)*dbeta_dg)+Lob* LD* L2^2*dcs__dg* I A)o*cos(bctaoG am m a)/co ... +Lob*LD*L2^2*cos(sigmao)/sigmao*(-db_dg/bo'^2*cos(betao-Gamm a)/co... +l/bo*(-sin(betao-G am m a)*dbcta_dg*co-cos(bctao-G am m a)*dc_dg)/co^2)... +Lob*LD*LI *L2*dcs__dg*cos(betao-Gamma)/co*cos(alphao-gammao)/bo... +Lob*LD*L]*L2*cos(signiao)/sigm ao*((-sin(belao-Gam ma)*dbeta_dg*co-cos(betaoGam m a)*dc_dg)/co'^2*cos(aIphao-gam m ao)/bo... +cos(bctao-Gamma)/co*(sin(alphao-gammao)*bo-cos(aIphaogam m ao)*db_dg)/bo^ 2 ) ) ... +Lm *(LD*LI L2*(-sin(betao-Gam m a)*dbeta_dg*sin(alphao-gam m ao)/bo... +cos(betao-Gamma)*(-cos(alphao-gammao)*bo-sin(alphao-gammao)*db__dg)/bo"'2)... -Lob* LI *L2*dcs_dg*sin(alphao-gam m ao)/co... -Lob*LI*L2*cos(sigm ao)/sigm ao*(-cos(alphao-gam m ao)*co-sin(alphao-gam m ao)*dc_dg)/co'^2... -Lob*LD*LI *L2*dcs__dg*sin(betao-Gamma)/co*sin(alphao-gammao)/bo... -Lob*LD*LI *L2 *cos(sigmao)/sigmao*((cos(betao-Gamma)*dbela_dg*co-sin(bclaoGam m a)*dc_dg)/co''2*sin(alphao-gam m ao)/bo... +sin(betao-Gamma)/co*(-cos(alphao-gammao)*bo-sin(alphao-gammao)*db__dg)/bo^2)); dvibg_dg=Lm *(Ll*L2*sin(alphao-gam m ao)+Lr2*L2*((cos(alphao-betao)*(-dbeta_dg)*bo-sin(a!phaobetao)*db_dg)/bo^ 2 *sin(alphao-gam m ao)... -sin(alphao-betao)/bo*cos(a!phao-gam m ao))... +Lr2*L2*((sin(alphao-betao)*(dbeta_dg)*sin(alphao-gam m ao)*da_db)... -cos(alphao-belao)*cos(aiphao-gammao)*da__db+cos(alphao-betao)*sin(alphao-gammao)*daa_dgb)); vobg=-Lm *(bo^2+LD*bo*sin(belao-Gamm a)+Lob*LD*bo*cos(sigmao)/sigmao*cos(betaoGammaVco)* l/bo'"2*(L2'^2+L! *L 2*cos(alphao-gam m ao))... +Lm *(LD *cos(betao-G am m a)-Lob/co*cos(sigm ao)/sigm ao*(bo+LD*sin(bctao-Gam m a)))*(LI*L2*sin(alphao-gam m ao)/bo); vibg=Lm *(bo^2*dbeta_dg+LI*(sin(alphao-betao)+bo*cos(alphao-betao)*da_db)*db_dg); ifh e o > = 0 vfg=2*Lm *L4*(L2*cos(phi)-L4/2); else vfg=2*Lm *SL4*(L2*cos(phi)-SL4/2); end % For Cushion Volume Conservation Law dvit_dbt=Lm *bo*(Db*cos(betao)-Hb*sin(betao)); dvit_db=Lm *(Db*sin(betao)+Hb*cos(betao));

114

dvit_da=dvit_dbt*dbeta_da+dvii_db*db_da:
dvii_dg=dvii_dbt*dbeia_dg+dvil_db*db_dg: dvc_da=Lm *(B b*Ll*cos(alphao)+L r2*cos(2^aIphao)-2*L l*L3*sin(m uo)*sin(alphao)-2*heo*L I*sin(aIphao)); ifh e o > = 0 . dvc_dhe=Lm *(Bb+2*LI *cos(alphao)+2*L3*cos(muo)); else dvc_dhe=Lm *(Bb+2*LI*cos{aiphao)+2*L3*cos(om ega+gam m ao)+2*heo*(l/tan(m uo)-2/sin(2*m uo))); end ifh e o > = 0 dvc_dg=Lm *(Bb*L3*cos(muo)-»'L3^2*cos(2^muo)'»-2*LI*L3*cos(alphao)*cos(muo)-2*heo*L3*sin(muo)): else dvc_dg=Lm *(Bb*L3*cos(m uo)+L3"'2*cos(2*m uo)+2*LI*L3*cos(alphao)*cos(m uo)-2*heo*L3*sin(m uo))heo''2*(csc(m uo)r2+ 4*hco^2*cos(2*m uo)/(sin(2*m uo)r2;
end

dhf_da=- 0 .6 *LI *cos{alphao): dhC dg= (-0.6*L 3*cos(m uo)*l000/B f+0.I05)*B f/l000; dhf_dhc= 0 .6 : % ForThe Heave motion dvcvc_dhca=-2*Lm *Ll*sin(alphao); d vcvc_dhcg=-2  Lm  L3 *sin(omega+gamm ao); ifh e o > = 0 dvc_dhc=Lm *(Bb+2*LI*cos(alphao)+2*L3*cos(om ega+gam m ao)); else dvc_dhc=Lm *(Bb+2*LI*cos(alphao)+2*L3*cos(om ega+gam m ao)+2*(-heo)*cot(phi-gam m ao)); end dvcvc__dhchc= 0 ; dhf_dhg=- 0 .6 ; dvcvc_dhchg= 0 : % M atrix Elements

P A A D D = M s* L r 2 ;
PA G D D =M s*Ll*LM *cos(gam m aM o-alphao); PAH CDD=-M s*LI *cos(alphao); P G A D D =M s*LI^LM *cos(gam m aM o-alphao); P G G D [> M s*L M ^2+ls; PGH CD D =-M s*LM *cos(gamm aM o); PHCA D D =-M s*Ll *cos(alphao); PHCGD D=-M s*LM *cos(gam m aM o); PHCHCDD=M c; PAA=-M s*Ll*g*sin(alphao)+Pbo*dvoba_da+(Pbo-Pco)*dviba__da+Pco*dvfa_da; PAG=Pbo*dvoba_dg+(Pbo-Pco)*dviba_dg+Pco*dvfa_dg; PAPB=voba+viba; PAPC=vfa-viba; PGA=Pbo*dvobg_da+(Pbo-Pco)*dvibg_da; PGG=-M s*LM *g*sin(gammaMo)+Pbo*dvobg__dg+(Pbo-Pco)*dvibg_dg; PGPB=vobg+vibg; PGPC=vfg-vibg; PPB AD= I /Cb*(voba+viba+dvit__da); PPBG D =l/Cb*(vobg+vibg+dvit_dg); P P B P B = l/C bM /(-3*A fD *Q bo'^2)-A cfr2/(rho*Q co)); P P B P C = l/C b * A cfT 2/(rho*0co); PPCAD= 1/Cc*(dvc_da-dvc_dhe* L 1·cos(alphao));

115

PPCG D =l/Cc*(dvc_dg-dvc_dhc*L3*cos(om ega+gam m ao)); PPCA=-l/Cc*(2*(Lb+Bb)*dhf_da+8*X so*dhf_da-8*LI*sin(alphao)*hfo)*(2*Pco/rhor0.5: PPCG=-l/Cc*(2*(Lb+Bb)*dhf_dg+8*Xso*dhf_dg-8*L3*sin(m uo)*hfo)*(2*Pco/rho)^0.5; P P C PB =l/C c*A efT 2/(rho*Q co); PPCPC=-l/Cc*(A efr2/(rho*Q coH I/(2*Pco)*(2*(Lb-»-Bb)-*-8*X sorhtb*(2*Pco/rho)^.5): PPCH C D =I/C c*dvc_dhe: PPCH C =-I/Cc*(2*(Lb+Bb)+8*Xso)*dhf_dhc*(2*Pco/rho)"0.5: PHCA =Pco*dvcvc_dhca; PHCG=Pco*dvcvc_dhcg; PHCPC=dvc_dhc: PHCH C=Pco*dvcvc_dhchc; PPCH G D =I/Cc*dvc_dhc: PPCHG=-I/Cc*(2*(Lb+Bb)+8*Xso)*dhf_dhg*(2*Pco/rho)'H).5; PHCH G =Pco*dvcvc_dhchg;

S ta te s p a c e .m % State-Space Form o f Linearized Equations for two degrees o f freedom skirt model with the capacitance effects function [A.B] = state_space

[PAADD.PAGDD,PAHCDD,PGADD,PGGDD,PGHCDD,PHCADD,PHCGDD,PHCHCDD,PAA.PAG,PAPB.PAPC,PGA,PGG,PGP B .P G P C P P B A D ,... PPBG D,PPBPB ,PPB PC,PPCA D ,PPCG D ,PPC A ,PPCG ,PPCPB,PPCPC PPC H CD ,PPCH C,PH CA ,PH C G ,PH CPCPH C H CPPCH G D . P P C H G ,... PHCHG] = deri__elem; % H*X2 = R*X + T*U . where X is the transpose matrix o f [dhc,dalpha.dgamma,dhc2,dalpha2,dgamma2.dPb.dPc] % U is the transpose matrix o f [dhg2,dhg] 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 H=[ 0 0 0 0 0 0 I 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0

PHCHCDD PAHCDD PGHCDD
0 0

PHCADD PHCGDD PAADD PAGDD PGADD PGGDD 0 0 !
0 0 0

];

R=[
0 0

0 0 0

0 0 0

0 0 0

1

0 1 0 0

0 0 0 0

0 0 0 0

0

i
0 0

PHCHC
0 0 0

PHCA PHCG PAG PAA PGG PGA

PPCHC

PHCPC 0 PAPB PAPC 0 PGPB PGPC 0 0 0 -PPBAD -PPBGD PPBPB PPBPC 0 0 PPCA PPCG -PPCHCD -PPCAD -PPCGD PPCPB PPCPC 0
0

];

T=|
0 0 0 0 0 0

0

0 0 0

PHCHG
0 0 0

PPCHGD PPCHG

];

% X2 = A*X + B * U . where A and B are state-space matrices A =inv(H)*R; B=inv(H)*T;

116

bode plot.m
% % Bode Plot & Eigenvalues function [m ag,w ,phase,eigenvals.he)=bodej)lot

global heo [A,BJ = state-space;

% % % B odc P lot% % %
BI = B * [1 :0 ]; B2 = B * |0 : I ] : B = A*BI + B 2 ;

C = (l OOOOOOOJ;

.

D = C *B I; n = 100; w = linspacc(0.50.n); f o r j = l:n |m ag(j),phasc(j).w (j)]=bodc(A ,B ,C D J,w (j)); end fo rj= l;n if phase(j ) > 0 phase(j )=phasc(j )-360; end end

% % % Eigen val ucs% % %
eigcnvals=eig(A); % % % H eo% % % he=heo;

117

APPENDIX B. Codes for Parameter Estimation
in p u t p a r a .m
®/o%!npul d a ta file (A t eq u ilib riu m )

function [Bb,Db,Hb,LD.Lm,M cXl,L2,L3X4,Lob,omcga,M s,LM ,Lb,aIphao,gammao.Gamma,sigmao»phi.muo,gammaM o.AIT).Aerr.ls.g.rho.C b ,C c ... ,heo.Bf.Pbo.Pco,Qbo,Oco,hro,Xso] = input_para

global population ID heo L I= population(ID ).x(l); L2=population(ID).x(2); L3=population(ID).x(3); L4=population(ID).x(4): Lob=population(ID).x(5); Pb_Pc=population(ID).x( 6 ): D b= l.39: Hb=0.975; M c=36740; L c= 2 l; Bc= 8 .6 : om ega=acos((L2'^2+L3^2-L4^2)/(2*L2*L3)); phi=asin(L3/L4*sin(om ega)); Ac=Lc*Bc; rh o= l.223; g = 9 .8 l; TA =15: Pco=M c*g/Ac; Pbo=Pco*Pb_Pc; Pcbar=Pco/(rho*g*Lc); Ocbar=0.0045+0.000587*Pcbar; A efN A c*Q cbar/(Pbo/Pco-l)^0.5; % M a's formula % M a's formula % M a's formula

[hco.al phao,Qe,gammao]=static_cond( L 1, L2 ); Obo=Oe; Oco=Aefï^(2*(Pbo-Pco)/rho)'^0.5; hso=L I sin(alphao)+L3 sin(omega+gammao); hgo= 0 : heo=hco-hgo*hso; BP=l/3.4*hso*IOOO; % mm, Ma's formula hfo=(0.0323+0.6*heo* I (X)0/Bf+0.105*(gammao-; om ega)-0.042)*Bf/l 000; M s=(2*(Lc+Bc)*Lob+0.5*L4*L3* 1.2*2*(Lc+Bc)/(Bf/!000))*2.8; density is 2 . 8 kg/m ^ 2 Xso=LI*cos(alphao)+L3*cos(om ega+gam m ao); Lb=Lc-2*Xso: Bb=Bc-2*X so; Lm=Lc; L M = (2/3*L 3^2+ 1/3*L 4''2)^.5; LD=(Db'^2+Hb^2)'H).5; % kg, for elastomer-coated fabric com posite m aterial, area

118

Gam m a=asin(Db/LD): Is=I/I8*Ms*(L3/'2-»-L4^2): cgam m aM o=om ega-atan( L4/2/L3 ); gam m aM o=gam mao+cgam m aM o: m uo=om ega+gam m ao; S A = I: S B = -0.I6: SC=0.0083; bo=( LI ''2+ L 2''2+ 2 L 1* L2 *cos(alphao-pm m ao))^0.5: betao=atan«L I*sin(alphaoH L2*sin(gam m ao))/(L I*cos(alphao)+L 2*cos(gam m ao))); theta=alan(Hb/Db): cce=(bo^2-2*LD *bo*cos(betao+lheta)+LD ^2)^0.5; szeta=cee/Lob; si^\=((-SB -(SB ''2-4*SC *(SA -szcta))'^0.5)/(2*SC )r0.5; dsigx=(szeta*sigx-sin(sigx))/(cos(sigx)-szela); sigm ao=sigx+dsigx; zcta= l.4 : Pbr=Pbo; % Pbr & Q br are reference pressure and flow, which are usually taken from equilibrium condition Qbr=Qbo; Afl)=((zeta-I )*Pbr)/Qbr"'3: bvbI=Lm *Lob^2*((2*sigm ao-sin(2*sigm ao))/(4*sigm ao^2)); bvb 2 =Lm *bo*LI *sin(alphao-betao); bvb3=Lm *(D b*bo*sin(betao)+Hb*bo*cos(betao)); vb=bvbI+bvb2+bvb3; Cb=vb/(rho*( 1.4*286.8*(TA+273.3))); b v c-B b * (h co -h g o )+ (l/2 )* L 3 ''2 * sin (2 * m u o )+ (l/2 )* L P 2 * ... sin(2*alphao)+Ll *L 3*sin(m uo)*cos(alphao)+... L2*L3*sin(om ega)+hco*(2*Ll *cos(alphao)+2*L3*cos(m uo))... -2*hgo*(LI *cos(alphao)+L 3*cos(m uo))-L P 2*sin(2*alphao)... -2*LI*L3*sin(alphao)*cos(m uo)-2*LI *L 3*sin(m uo)*cos(alphao)... -L3'^2*sin(2*muo); vc=Lm *bvc; Cc=vc/(rho»( 1.4*286.8*(TA+273.3)));

S ta tic

cond.m

% % This function com putes the parameters Heo, Alphao, Qeo, Gam m ao at equilibrium conditions function |hc,alpha,Q e,gam m a]=static_cond(LI,L2)

% *****W A BAN A KI*^*** % lnitial Guess X R D -1 .5 2 : X R 2)= 0.I: X n3)=95.78; X a4 )= 0.98*(L I+ L 2); alphao=X R 2)+acos(X R4)/(2*LI H L r2 -L 2 '^ 2 V (2 * L I Xfl4))); gam m ao= .X R 2)-acos(X n4)/(2^L 2H L 2'^2-L r2)/(2*L 2^X fl4))); Xf\2)=alphao; X f\4)=gam m ao; d iff= I; while (difï> 0 .0 0 0 1 )

Xi=Xf;
options=optim sct('display','ofr); X f=fsolve('equilibrium _equations',Xi,options);

difNabs(Xnn-Xi(D);
end

119

h c= X R I): alpha=X R2); Qe=X R3): gam m a=XR4):

e q u ilib r iu m CQuations.m
% EquiIibrium equations for the Heo, Alphao, Qe, Gammao function F=equilibrium_equations(X)

global population ID L I= population(ID ).x(l); L2=population(ID).x(2); I-3=population(ID).x(3); L4=population(ID).x(4);

Lob=population(ID).x(5); Pb_Pc=population(ID).x( 6 ); Db=1.39; Hb=0.975; M c=36740; Lc= 2 l: Bc= 8 .6 ; hco=X( I ); alphao=X(2): O e=X (3); gam m ao=X (4); om ega=acos(( L2'"2+L3 ^2-L4^2 )/(2  L2  L3 )); phi=asin(L3/L4*sin(om ega)): rh o = l.223; g = 9 .8 l; A c=Lc*Bc: Pco=M c*g/Ac: Pbo=Pco*Pb_Pc; hso=L I *sin(alphao)+L3 *sin(omega+gammao); B f^l/3 .4 * h so * l0 0 0 ; M s=(2*(L c+B c)*Lob+0.5*L 4*L3*l.2*2*(U +B c)/(B f/I000))*2.8; Xso=LI*cos(alphao)+L3*cos(om ega+gam m ao); Lb=Lc-2*Xso; Bb=Bc-2*X so: Lm=Lc; LM =(2/3*L3'^2+1/3*L4'^2)^.5;

LD={Db''2+Hb'^2m5;
m uo=om ega+gam m ao; bo=(LI^2+L2^2+2*LI*L2*cos(alphao-gammao))"X).5; betao=atan((LI*sin(alphao)+L2*sin(gam m ao))/(Ll*cos(alphao)+L2*cos(gam m ao))); %* RELA TIONSHIP BETW EEN BEE,BETA AND ALPHA,GAM M A db_da=-(LI * L2*sin(alphao-gammao))/bo; db_dg=(L I *L2*sin(alphao-gam mao))/bo; dbela_da=(LI ''2+ L I * L2*cos(alphao-gammao))/(bo^2); dbela_dg=(L2''2+LI*L2*cos(aIphao-gam m ao))/(bo''2);

% ***** FINGER GEOM ETRY 

120

he=hco-LI*sin(alphao)-L3*sin(oniega-»-gammao); hw=-hc; SL4=L4-hw /(sin(phi-gam m ao)): %*** BAG GEOM ETRY cgam m aM o=om ega-atan( L4/( 2 * L3 )); gam m aM o=gam m ao+cgam m aM o; INNER BAG VOLUME DERIVATIVES d a l_ d b = ((L r2 'L 2 ''2 )/(2 * L I  b o ''2 H l/(2*LI )))/(sin(alphao-bctao));
d v i_ d a= L m * (b o '^ 2 * d b cia_ _ d a+ L I* (sin (a!p h ao -b etao H b o * co s(alp h ao -b ctao )* d al_ d b )* d b _ d a);

dvi_dg=Lm *(bo''2*dbela_dg+LI*(sin(alphaobetao)+bo*cos(aIphao-betao)*dal_db)*db_dg); % **** OU TER BAG ANGLE (SIGM A) ***** S A = I; S B = -0.I6: SC=0.0083; Gam m a=asin(Db/LD): theta=alan(Hb/Db): cee=(bo''2-2*LD *bo*cos(betao+theta)+LD^2)'^0.5; szeta=cee/Lob: sigx=((-SB-(SB''2-4*SC*(SA-szeta))'H).5V(2*SC))^0.5; dsigx=(szeta*sigx-sin(sigx))/(cos(sigx)-szeta); sigm ao=sigx+dsigx; co=(LD'^2+bo''2+2*LD*bo*sin(bctao-Ganim a))''0.5; %***** DERIVATIVES O F C RESPECT TO ALPHA AND GAM M A db_da=-LI*L2*sin(aIphao-gam m ao)/bo; db_dg=-db_da; d b eta _ d a = (L r2 + L I *L2*cos(alphao-gam mao))/bo^2; dbeta_dg=(L 2 '' 2 +LI *L2 *cos(alphao-gammao))/bo"'2 ; dc_db=l/co*(bo+LD *sin(betao-G am m a)); dc_dbcta=LD*bo/co*cos(betao-Gam m a): dc_da=dc_db*db_da+dc_dbeta*dbeta__da; dc_dg=dc_db*db_dg+dc_dbela*dbela__dg; %***** O U TER BAG VOLUM E DERIVATIVES ***** voba=-Lm *(bo''2+LD*bo*sin(belao-Gam m a)+Lob*LD*bo*cos(sigm ao)/sigm ao*cos(betaoG am m a)/co)*l/bo'"2*(L I''2+L I*L 2*cos(alphao-gam m ao))... +Lm *(LD *cos(betao-G am m a)-Lob/co*cos(siginao)/sigm ao*(bo+LD *sin(betao-G am m a)))*(-LI*L2*sin(aIphao-gam m ao)/bo); vobg=-Lm *(bo"'2+LD *bo*sin(betao-Gam m a)+Lob*LD*bo*cos(sigm ao)/sigm ao*cos(belaoGam m a)/co)* l/bo^2*(L2'^2+LI *L 2*cos(alphao-gam m ao))... +Lm *(LD *cos(belao-G am m a)-Lob/co*cos(sigm ao)/sigm ao*(bo+LD *sin(betao-G am m a)))*(LI*L2*sin(alphao-gam m ao)/bo); %***** AUXILIA RY EQUATIONS ***** PB=Pbo; % W ABANAKI

PC=Pco: he=hco-LI*sin(alphao)-L3*sin(om ega+gam m ao): hs=LI*sin(alphao)+L3*sin(om ega+gam m ao); % ***** CUSHION FLOW FUNCTION ***** % W ABANAKI hcb=hc* I CKX)/Bf; ifh cb < -O .II8 2 7 CFFB=0:

121

elseif heb < 0 CFFB=0.0323+0.64*heb+3.90^heb''2+6.76*heb'^3; else C FFB=0.0323+0.6*heb; end FLFFB=CFFB+0.l05*(gam m ao+om ega)-0.042; FLH E=FLFFB*Bf/1000: %* GENERALIZED FORCE DERIVATIVES * ifh e > = 0 DV CD HC=Lm *(Bb+2*LI*cos(alphao)+2^L3*cos(m uo)); D V FD A =2*Lm *LI*L4*cos(alphao+phi-gam m ao); D V FD G =2*Lm *L4*(L2*cos(phiH L4/2)): else DV CD HC=Lm *(Bb+2*LI*cos(alphao)+2*L3*cos(muo)+2*hw*cot(phi-gam mao)): DV FDA=2*Lm *LI*SL4*cos(alphao+phi-gam mao); D VFDG =2*Lm *SL4*(L2*cos(phiHSL4/2)); end % **** EQUILIBRIUM EQUATIONS *** %*** HC EQUATION  F(I)=PC*D V C D H C-M c*g; ALPH A EQUATION F(2)=PB*voba+(PB-PC)*dvi_da+PC*DVFDA+M s*g*LI*cos(alphao); % ** CUSHION AIR ESCAPE LAW ** if PCX) F(3)=Qe-(2*(Lb+Bb)+8*Xso)*FLHE*(2*PC/rho)'^.5; else PCA=abs(PC); F(3)=Q e+(2*(Lb+Bb)+8*X so)*FLH E*(2*PCA /rho)^.5; end % GAM M A EQUATION ** F(4 )=PB*vobg+(PB-PC)*dvi_dg+PC*DVFDG+M s*g*LM *cos(gamm aM o);

122

APPENDIX C. Codes for Genetic Algorithm
GA.m
% % G enclic Algorithm for the optimization o f skirt geom etr) and property o f ACV global population oldpopulation

% Rcading from input_data |popsize.N para,paraJength,m axgen,C oef_penalty.n_elitJ = input_dala; % lnitializc n= 0 ; initial__pop(popsizc,para_length); decode(popsize.Npara,para_length); objfunction(popsize,Npara,Coef_penalty); % Loop util the last generation hold on for n= l:m axgen oldpopulation=population: Pc=0.9-0.3*n/m axgen; Pm=0.1 -0.07*n/m axgen;

% includes the ranking o f each individual

% 'Pc' is the probability o f crossover % 'Pm ' is the probability o f mutation

% Genetic procedure choices=srselect(popsize); i= l; while(i<=popsize) % Selection% pick I =m d( I ,popsize-i+1 ); m atel= choices(pickl): if p ick l-= p o p size-i+ l choices(pick I )=choices(popsize-i+l ); end pick 2 =m d( Kpopsize-i); mate 2 =choices(pick 2 ); ifp ic k 2 -= popsize-i choices(pick 2 )=choices(popsize-i): end % Crossover(Three different crossover m ethods)% k = m d (l.3 ): if k = l [new bornI(i).chrom ,new bom I(i + 1 ).chrom ]... =point_cross(population(m atel).chrom ,population(m ate2).chrom ,paraJength,Pc); end if k = 2 [newborn I(i).chrom .new bom I(i+ l ),chrom ]... =tw o_point_cross(population(m atel).chrom ,population(m ate2).chrom ,paraJength,Pc); end ifk = 3 [newborn I(i).chrom .new bom 1 (i+ 1 ).chrom ]... =random _cross(population(m atel).chrom ,population(m ate2).chrom ,paraJength,Pc); end % M utation(Tw o different m utation methods)% k = m d (I^ ): if k = l new bom 2(i).chrom =single_m ut(new bom I (i).chrom ,paraJength,Pm ); new bom 2(i+ l).chrom = single_m ut(new bom l(i+l ).chrom ,paraJength,Pm ); end if k = 2 new bom 2( i).chrom =two_m ut(newbom I (i).chrom ,paraJength,P m ); new bom 2( i+l).chrom =tw o_m ut(new bom I (i+1 ).chrom ,paraJength,Pm ); end

123

i=i+ 2 ; end % M ake a population data after genetic procedure for i= l:popsize population( i ).chrom =newbom 2 ( i ).chrom: end decode! popsize,Npara,para_!ength); objfunction{popsize.N para,Coefj)enalty}: % New population contents after elitist reservation®/© elitist(popsize.Npara,n__elit); tem p I =max( [oldpopulation.rank] ); for i= l:popsize i f tem p l= o ld p o p u lation(i).rank best_old=i; break end end tem p 2 =m ax([population.rank]); for i= l:popsize if tem p 2 = p o p u latio n (i).ran k best_new -i; break end end % Graph plot![n - 1 n],[oldpopulation!best__old).sy populaticn!best_new).sy],'b'); plot![n - 1 n],[oldpopulation!best_old).sx population!best_new).sx],'m'); plot!(n-l n],[mean![oldpopulation.penaltyJ) m ean![population.penalty])]/r'): end legend!'2nd Peak height o f best solutionV2nd Peak frequency o f best solution'/A verage o f penalties o f the whole population'): title!'Peak Height & Frequency vs. Generation Number*); xIabeU'Number o f Generations') hold o ff % O utput the best one output_data!popsize);

in p u t d a ta .m % % lnput file function [popsize,Npara,paraJength,m axgen,Cocf_penalty,n_elitJ = input__data popsize=30; Npara= 6 ; p arajen g th = [4 ,4 ,4 ,4 ,4 ,4 ]; m axgen=180: C oef_penalty= l.5: n__elit=popsize*0.1: % Population size, should be even num ber% % Number o f parameters®/© "/©length o f each parameter's chromosome®/© % M aximum number o f generation®/© "/©Coefficient o f penalty© "/©Number o f preseved individuals for elitism®/©

in itia l p o p .m % % lnitial population generator function initial_pop!popsize,para_length)

124

global population lch rom = sum (|paraJength]): for i= l:popsize ro rj= l:lch ro m populalion(i).chromCl)=flip(0.5); end end

d e c o d e .m % % Dccoding procedure function decode(popsize,N para,paraJength)

global population for i= I:popsize n u m = l; fmal=K); fo rj= l:N p a ra ans= 0 ; initial=num; final= final+ parajength(j); . for k=initial:final tem p=population(i).chrom (k)* 2 ^(final-k); ans=ans+tem p; num=num4-l; end if j= l population! i ).x(j )=(0.6*ans+14 ) / 1 0 0 ; elseif j = 2 population(i).x(j)=(6*ans+ l60)/l00; elseif j = 3 population! i )x !j )=!5 *ans+130)/l 00; e ls e ifj= 4 population!i).x!j)=!4*ans+80)/l00; elseif j= = 5 population!i).x(j)=! 8 *ans+ 2 0 0 y i 0 0 ; else population!i).x!j)=!4*ans+90)/l00; end end end

o b if u n c tio n .m % % Evaluation o f the objective function and Rank

function objfunction!popsize,N para,C oefj)cnalty) global population ID ar= 0 . 1 0 ; s! 1H ) . 18; s! 2 )=2 .0 2 ; s!3 )= l.6 9 ; s ! 4 ) = l.l; s!5)=2.60; s! 6 )= 1 .2 ; % allowable range o f modification within the standard value o f parameters, should be less than 15% % Standard values o f given parameter set

125

for i= l:popsize tem p= 0 ; fo rj= I:N p ara if populalion(i).x(j)<(s(j)-ar` s(j)) | population(i).x(j)>(s(j)+ar*s(j)) temp=temp+abs((populaiion(i).x(j)-s(j))/sO));

en d

end popuIalion(i).feas=Coer_pcnalty*iemp*IO: end j= 0 :

k=0;
for i=I:popsize if populalion(i).feas = = 0 ID=i; [m ag,w ,phase_shift,eigenvaIs,he]=bodej)lot; individualfj).hee=he; individual^! ).eigen=cigen vais; % % % find the coordinate o f second peak%%% for q = l:9 9 difT=mag( 1 0 0 -q)-mag( 1 0 0 -q + 1 );

ifdifr< 0
p e a k j d = 1 0 0 -q + l: break end end sepeak(j).sx= w (peakjd); sep eak(j).s>^m ag(peakjd); population( i ). fitness= 0 ; popu!ation( i ).penalty= 0 ; success(j)=i; else population(i).fitness=population(i).feas; population(i).penalty=population(i).feas; k = k + l; fail(k)=i; end end ifj- = 0 m inpeak=m in((sepeak.sy]); m infreq=m in((sepeak.sx]); for i= l:j % % % Peak value com parison--% %% if (sepeak(i).sy-m inpeak)>=50 peakfitness=50; else peakfitness=(sepeak(i).sy-minpeak); end population(success(i)).ritness=population(success(i)).fitncss+peakfitness; % % % Frequency value comparison% %% i f (sepeak(i).sx-m infreq)>=50 freqfitness=50; else freqfitness=(sepeak(i).sx-minfreq); end population(success(i)).ritness=population(success(i)).ritness+freqfitness; % % % Stability Test with eigenvalues%% % (ro,co]=size(individual(i).eigen); penal= 0 ; for p = l:co R=real(individual(i).eigen(p)); if R > 0 penal=penal+Coef_penalty* I ; end

126

end %%%Hco>O.OOI m condition% % % ifindividual(i).hee < 0 . 0 0 1 penal=pcnaI+Coef_penaIty*3; end population(success(i)).penalt>'=population(success(i)).penalty+penal; popuIaiion(success(i)).riiness=populaiion(success(i)).runess+populaiion(success(i)).penalty; end end % % % highest rank num ber is minimum fitness value% % %

ifj^O
p= 0 : for i= l:j p = p + l; tem p_s(p)=popuIation(success(i)).fitness; end tem pl= sort(ltem p_s]); for i= I :j for p = l:j if popuIation(success(p)).fitness= tem pl(i) population(success(p)).rank=popsize-i + 1 ; end end end for i= l:j if sepeak(i).sx<=50 popuIation(success(i)).sx=sepeak(i).sx; else population(success(i)).sx=50; end if sepeak(i).sy<=50 population(success(i)).sy=sepeak(i).sy; else population(success(i)).sy=50; end end end ifk - = 0 p= 0 ; for i= l:k p = p + l; temp_ll[p)=population(fail( I)), fitness; end tem p 2 =sort(ltem p_f]); for i= l:k for p = l:k ifp o p u latio n (fail(p )).fitn ess= tem p 2 (i) population(fail(p)).rank=popsize-i-j + 1 ; end end end for i= l:k population! fail(i)).sx=50; population(fail(i)).sy=50; end end

s rs e le c tm % % Stochastic Rem ainder selection function choices = srselect(popsize)

127

global population i= 0 ;j= 0 ; w hilc(i<popsize)

H+l:
expecied=populaiion(i).rank/mean([populaiion.rank}): jassign=fix(expected); fraction(i)=expected-jassign; vvhileC|assign>0 ) j= j+ l: jassign= jassign-l: choices(j)=i: end end i= 0 ; vvhile(j<popsize) 1 =1 + 1: if i>popsize i= l; end iffraction(i)> 0 . 0 winner=flip(fraction(i)); if w in n e r = l choices(j)=i: fraction(i)=fraction(i)-l .0 ; end end end

p o i n t c r o s s .m % % Point crossover function [child I ,child2]=point_cross(parentl ,parent2,paraJength,Pc) lchrom = sum ([paraJength] ); if f lip ( P c ) = l jcross= m d( I .Ichrom); else jcross=lchrom ; end fo rj= l:jc ro ss childici)=parentlCi); child 2 (i)=parent 2 (j); end ifjcro ss-= lch ro m for j=jcross+1 :Ichrom childl(i)= parent 2 (j): child 2 (i)= parentl(j); end end

tw o

p o in t c r o s s .m

% % Tw o Point Crossover function (child 1.child 2 )=two_point_cross(parenl I .p arcn a.p araJe n g th .P c) lchrom =sum ({para_length]);

ifflip (P c )= l

128

a= m d (IJch ro m ); b= m d (U ch ro m ); while(a==b) b = m d(U chrom ): end ifa < b jc ro ssl= a : jcro ss 2 =b; else jcro ssl= b ; jcro ss 2 =a; end fo rj= l:jcro ssI childI(j)=parentICj); child 2 (j)=parent 2 (j): end for j= jcross I + 1 :jcross 2 childl(j)= parenl 2 (j); child 2 (j)= parentl(j); end ifjcross2-= Ichrom for j=jcross2+1 :Ichrom ch ild l(;)= p arentl(j); child 2 0 )=parent2 (j); end end else ch ild l= p aren ll; child 2 =parent 2 : end

ra n d o m

c o r s s .m

% % Random Crossover function [childl.child2] = random _cross(parentl,parenl2,paraJength,P c) lchrom = sum (IparaJength]); ifflip (P c)= = l for i=I .'Ichrom j= m d (l. 2 ); ifj-- I ch ild l(i)= p arcn ll(i); else childl(i)= parent 2 (i): end j= m d (l, 2 ); ifj= l child 2 (ip=parentl(i): else child 2 (i)=parenl 2 (i): end end else for i= l:lchrom ch ild l(i)= p aren tl(i); child 2 (i)=parent2 (i); end end

s in g le

m u t.m

% % Single bit m utation

129

function newchrom = singie_m ul(chrom ,paraJcngth,Pm ): Ichrom =sum ([paraJength]): for i= l:lchrom ifflip (P m )-- 1 if c h r o m (i) = l newchrom (i)= 0 : else new chrom (i)= l; end else newchrom( i )=chrom( i ): end end

tw o

m u t.m

% % Two bit sw apping mutation function newchrom = two_mut(chrom,para_!engtii,Pm) lchrom = sum (lparaJength] ); newchrom =chrom ; if f lip ( P m ) = l p I = m d(l.Ichrom ): p 2 = m d (U ch ro m ); new chrom (pl )=chrom(p 2 ); new chrom (p 2 )=chrom (pl ); end

e litis t.m % % Elitist Replacement function elitist(popsize,Npara,n_elit)

global oldpopulation population tem p I =sort( [oldpopulation.rank]); for i= l:n _ elit fo rj= l:p o p size i f oldpopulation(j ).ra n k = te m p I (popsize-i+1 ) tru e= l; if i- = l for k = l:i-l if elit(k)==j true= 0 ; end end end elit(i)=j; iftru e= = l break end end end end tem p 2 =sort([population.rank]); for i= l:n _ elit fo rj= l:p o p size ifpopulation(j).rank==tem p 2 (i) tru e= l; ifi-= l

130

for k = I:i-l if b a d ( k ) = j true= 0 : end end end bad(i)=j; if true-- I break end end end end for i= l:n_eli( populalion(bad( i)).chrom=oldpopulation(elit( i)).chrom: populalion(bad(i)).x=oldpopuIation(elil(i)).x; population(bad(i)).ritness=oldpopulation(elit(i)).fitness; population(bad(i)).penaIty=oldpopulation(eIit(i)).penalty; popuIaiion(bad(i)).rank=oldpopulation(eiit(i)).rank; population(bad(i)).sx=oldpopulalion(eIit(i)).sx; populalion(bad(i)).sy=oldpopulation(elit(i)).sy; population(bad(i)).feas=oldpopulation(elil(i)).feas; end % % % Rank Re-distributor% % %

j=0;
k= 0 : for i=I:popsize if populalion(i).feas =

0

successÇ iH ; population(i).fitness= 0 : else k = k + l; fail(k)=i; end end ifj~ = 0 for i= l:j sepeak(i).sx=population(success(i)).sx; sepeak(i).sy=population(success(i)).sy; end minpeak=m in((sepeak.sy]): m infreq=m in([sepeak.sxj); for i= I:j % % % Peak value com parison-- % % % if (sepeak(i).sy*m inpeak)>=50 peakfitness=50; else peakfitness=(sepeak(i).sy-m inpeak); end population(success(i)).fitness=population(success(i)).ritness+peakritness; % % % Frequency value com parison% % % if (sepeak(i).sx-m infreq)>=50 freqfilness=50; else freqfitness=(sepeak(i).sx-m infreq); end population(success(i)).fitness=populalion(success(i)).fitness+freqfitness; population(success(i)).rilness=population(success(i)).fitness+population(success(i)).penalty; end end

131

if j- = 0 for i= l:j tem ps(i)=population(success(i)).fitness; end tem ps I =sort([temps]): for i= l:j for p = I:j if population(success(p)).ritness==tem ps I (I) popuIation(success(p)).rank=popsi 2 e-i + 1 ; end end end end if k ~ = 0 for i= l:k tempRi)=popuIation(fail(i)).fitness: end tem pfl=sort([tem pf]); for i= l:k for p = l:k if population(faiI(p)).ritness==tem pfl(i) population(fail(p)).rank=popsize-i-j+l; end end end end o u tp u t d a ta .m % % O utput o f the result function output_data(popsize) global population best=max( [population.rank] ); for i= l:popsize ifb est= p o p u latio n (i).ran k best_one=i; break end end disp("); d isp (T h e best chrom osom e is'); disp([population(best_one).chrom ]); dispC'); disp("); dispClts LI value is'); disp(population(best__one).x( I )); disp('lts L2 value is'); disp(population(best__one).x( 2 )); disp('lts L3 value is'); disp(population(best__one).x(3)); disp('lts L4 value is'); disp(population(best_one).x(4)); disp('lts Lob value is'); disp(population(best_one).x(5)); disp('lts Pb/Pc value is'); disp(population(best_one).x( 6 )); disp("); d isp D ; disp('lts Second peak height is'); disp(population(best_one).sy);

132

dispClls Second frequency (rad/s) is'): disp(populaiion(besi_one).sx); dispClts penalty is'): disp(population(best_onc).penalty): dispC'):

d r a w in g .m
% This file draws the pictures o f ACV skirt with original and optimized dimensions global ID % Original Dimension ID = I: (B b,D b,H b,L D ,Lm ,M c,LI,L2,L3,L4,Lob,om ega,M sX M X b,alphao,gam m ao,G am m a,sigm ao,phi.m uo,gam m aM o,A ro.A efT,ls,g.rho,C b ,C c ... ,heo.Bf,Pbo,Pco,Obo,Qco.hfo,Xsol = input_data: h eig h t= l/ 6 *Bb: PI=[O.OJ P 2= lP 1(l)-B b/2.PI(2)+0] P3=[P2( I )-LI *cos(alphao),P2(2)-LI sin(alphao)] P4=[P3(l)-L3*cos(m uo),P3(2)-L3*sin(m uo)l P5=[P4( I )-L4*cos(phi+om ega-m uo),P4(2)+L4*sin(phi+omega-m uo)] P6=[P2(l)-Db,P2(2>+Hb] P 7= [P 6(l),P 6(2)+I/6*B b] P 8= [P I(I)+ B b/2.P I(2)+ 0] P9=|P8( I )+LI cos(alphao),P8(2)-Ll *sin{alphao)] PI0=(P9( I )+L3*cos(m uo),P9(2)-L3*sin(m uo)] PI 1=|PI0(1 )+L4*cos(phi+om ega-m uo),PI0(2)+l 4*sin(phi+om ega-m uo)] P I2=[P8(D +D b,P8(2)+H b] P I3 = [P I2 (l),P I2 (2 )+ l/6 * B b ] hold on h( I )=plot([PI ( I ),P2( I )],[PI (2),P2(2)J): h(2)=plot([P2( 1),P3( 1)],[P2(2)X3(2)]): h(3)=plot((P3( I ),P4( I )],[P3(2),P4(2)]): h(4)=plot([P4( I ),P5( I )],|P4(2),P5(2)1): h(5)=plot(|P2( I )X 6 ( I )],[P2(2),P6(2)]): h( 6 )=plot([P 6 ( I ),P7( I )],[P6(2),P7(2)]): h (7)= plot((P I(l),P 8(1)L [P I(2),P 8(2)]): h( 8 )=plot([P 8 ( I ),P9( I )]JP8(2),P9(2)]): h(9)=plot([P9( 1),P10( I )],1P9(2),PI 0(2)]): h( 1 0 )-p lo t([P 10(1 ),PI l( I )],[PI 0(2),P 11(2)1): h( 11)= plot(|P 8 ( I ),PI2( I )],[P8(2),P12(2)1): h( l2)=plot([P12( I ),PI3( I )M P I2(2),P I3(2)]): h (l3 )= p lo t([P 7 (l),P I3 (l)M P 7 (2 ),P I3 (2 )l): h( l4)=plot([P3( 1),P5( I )],[P3(2)X 5(2)j): h( 15)=plot([P9( 1),P11( I )L[P9(2),P11(2)]):

% O plim ized Dim ension ID=2: [B b,D b,H bX D X m .M cX K L2,L3X 4X ob,om ega,M sX M X b,alphao,gam m ao,G am m a,sigm ao,phi,m uo,gam m aM o,A fO ,A e(T,Is,g,rho,C b .C c ... ,heo,Bf,Pbo,Pco,Qbo,Qco,hfo,Xso] = input_data; PI =[0,0] P 2 = [P I(l)-B b /2 ,P l(2 )+ 0] P3=[P2( I )-LI cos(aIphao),P2(2)-LI sin(alphao)] P4=[P3( 1)-L3*cos(m uo),P3(2)-L3^sin(m uo)] P5=[P4( I )-L4*cos(phi+om cga-m uo),P4(2)+L4*sin(phi+omega-m uo)] P6=[P2(I)-D b,P2(2)+H b]

133

P7= |P 6(l).P 6(2)+ heightl P 8= [P I(l)+ B b/2,P I(2)+ 01 P9=(P8(I)+LI*cos(alphao).P8(2)-LI*sin(alphao)] PI0=[P9( I >+L3*cos(muo).P9(2)-L3*stn(muo)l PI 1=[PI0( 1)+L4*cos(phl+omega-m uo),PI0(2)+L4*sin(phi+oniega-niuo)] P I2= |P 8(l)+ D b.P8(2)+ H bI P I3= |P 1 2 tl).P 1 2 (2 )+ h cig htl

ploUIPK I ).P2( I )l.[PI(2).P2(2)l,'r:'); p!ol([P2( I ),P3( I )).IP2(2).P3(2)],T:'); plot(|P3( 1).P4( I )I,IP3(2).P4(2)].'r:'); plol([P4( 1).P5( I )I,(P4(2).P5(2)],'r:'); plot(IP2( 1),P6( I )].(P2(2).P6(2)].'r:'); ploUlP6( 1).P7( 1)].[P6(2),P7(2)l/r;'); plot(IP I{l),P 8(l)],lP I(2).P 8(2)],'r;'); piot([P8( I ).P9( I )],(P8{2).P9(2)].'r:'); plot((P9( I ).PI 0(1 )].(P9(2).PI 0(2)I.'r:'); p lo td P 1 0 (I),P 1 1 ( !)],1P10(2).P11(2)I,'r:'); plot([P8( I ).PI2( I )).(P8(2).PI2(2)].'r:'); p lo t([P !2 (l),P I3 (l)I,[P I2 (2 ).P I3 (2 )],'r:'); plot(IP7( 1),P13( 1)],IP7(2).P13(2)l.'r:'); plot([P3( 1).P5( 1)].lP3(2),P5(2)j;r:'); p lo U lP 9(l).P l l(l)ld P 9 (2 ).P I l(2 )i;r.'); hold ofT sel(h.'L ineW idtb'J) axis equal titleCW A BA NAK D

134

APPENDIX D. Codes for Expert System
ES.m
% % Experl System for Initial Design o f Air Cushion Vehicle% %

[M c.Vm .Purpose] = input__(lle; [SC] = speed_category(Vm ); [Lc,Bc,Pc.h_L.Pt,TE.vv'l ,w2,w3,w4,w5,w6,w7,wL] = inference_enginel (M c.Vm); [ctaJ,N s.D s,psi,phi,fc,cta_ap,StJ = infcrence_cngine2; output_rile(M c,V m ,Purpose,SC X c,B c,Pc,h_LPt,TE ,w l,w '2,w3,w4.w5,w6,w 7,wL,eta_t,Ns,Ds,psi,phi,fc.eta_ap.St):

inference enginei.m
% % lnfcrence Engine I -- uses forward chaining% % function (Lc,B c,Pc,h_L,Pt,TE,w l,w 2,w 3,w 4.w 5,w 6,w 7,w L] = inference_engine1(M c,Vm)

% % PA RT l% % % Vehicle Overall Dim ensions [m]% [Lc.Bc] = OD(M c); % Param etric Study% ( P c .h .L P tJ E J = PS(M c,V m X c,B c); % W eight Distribution% lw K w2,w 3.w4.w 5,w 6.w7,wL] = W D (M cX c,B c,P c,P tJE ,V m );

inference engine2.m
% % lnference Engine2 -- uses forward chaining% % function [eta_t,Ns,Ds,psi,phiXc,eta_ap,St] = inference_engine2

% % PA RT ll% % % Lift System Design®/© [etaj,N s,D s,p si,p h i,fc] = LS; " /©Propulsion System Design% |eta_ap] = ProS; % Skirt and Cushion System Design% [St] = SCS:

input file.m
function [M c,Vm ,Purpose] = input_file Me = 36740; Total craft m ass (kg) Vm = 25.8; % M aximum speed (m/s) Purpose = 4; % Purpose o f ACV: 1 -C om m ercial, 2 -M ilita ry , 3 -S p o rt, 4 -U tility

%

135

output file.m
% % Output file%% function output_nie(M c,Vm ,Purposc.SC,Lc,Bc.Pc.h_UPt,TE,u'I,w 2,w 3,w 4.w 5,w 6,v\7,w Lela_t,N s.D s.psi,phi.fc,cla_ap,St) ®/bCrafl mass and maximum velocity®/© dispC--------------------------------------------------- ·); d i s p ( '« General Information o f ACV » '); dispC '); dispCCraft mass(Kg):'); disp(M c); dispCMaximum speed(m /s):'); disp(Vm ); VoPurpose o f ACV and Speed C atergor)% dispCSpeed catergory:'): m atrix! = | ' Low Speed ' ' Medium Speed ' 'H ig h s p e e d '] : disp(lm atrix2(SC,:)]): dispC ·); dispCPurpose o f ACV;'); m atrix I = [ ' Commercial ' ' Military ' ' Sport ' ' Utility ' ]; disp( [matrix 1(Purpose,:)]); dispC ·); "/©Overall dim ensions o f vehicle% dispCCrafl Length(m):'); disp(Lc); dispCCrafl W idth(m):'); disp(Bc); "/©Cushion Pressure, Nominal airgap, and Total Power% dispCCushion Pressure(Pa):'); disp(Pc); dispCNominal Airgap:'); disp(h_L); dispCTotal Power(kW ):'); disp(Pt); % Transport Efficiency% dispCTransport Efficiency:'); disp(TE); % W eight Distribution% dispC--------------------------------------------------- '); d i s p ( '« W eight Distribution » ' ) ; dispC '); dispCStructural W eight(Kg):'); disp (w l); dispCPropulsion System W eight(Kg):'); disp(w2); dispCEIectrical System W eight(Kg):'); disp(w3); disp('Com m and and Surveillance W eight(Kg):'); disp(w4); dispCAuxiliary W eight(Kg):'); disp(w5): dispCOutfit and Furnishings W eight(Kg):'); disp(w6); d isp('A rm am ent/Equipm enls( Kg):'); disp(w7); dispCLoad W eight(Kg):'): disp(wL); % Lifl System"/© dispC--------------------------------------------------- ·); d i s p ( '« Lift System » ' ) ;

136

dispC '): disp('Fan Efllcicncy:'); d is p (e ta j): dispCSpecific Speed:'): disp(Ns): dispCSpecific Diameter:'): disp(Ds): dispCPressure Coefficient:'): disp(psi): dispCFlow Coefficient:'): disp(phi): dispCFan Type:'): m atrix] = [ ' Centrifugal fan ' ' M ixed_Flow fan ' ' Axial_Flow fan '] : disp(|m atrix3(fc,:)J): d isp C ): % Propulsion System®/© dispCdisp('« Propulsion System » ' ) : dispC '): dispCAir Propeller System '): dispCMax. Efficiency o f Air Propeller:'): disp(eta_ap): dispCGas T urbine System'): dispC '): dispCIn order to preceed further the propulsion system design/): dispCmore database is required including'): dispCthe propeller profile or properties o f gas turbine'): dispC '): ®/oSkirt and Cushion System®/© dispC----------------------------------------------------'): d i s p ( '« Skirt and Cushion System » ' ) : dispC '): dispC SkirtType:'): m atrix4 = [ ' Bag and Finger ' 'L o o p S e g m e n t ' 'J u p e ' Pericell ' ]: disp((m atrix4(St,:)]): dispC '): dispCBag and Finger Skirt is the most updated and'): dispCadvanced system developed in ACV Industries'): dispC '):

speed categorv.m
% % ACV is categorized into low, m edium , and high speed vehicle% % function [SC] = speed_category (Vm)

% SC is speed category: I - l o w speed, 2 -M ed iu m speed, 3 -h ig h speed % All unit is m /s ifV m <= 13.4 S C = I: elseif Vm < = 4 4 .7 SC = 2: else SC = 3; end

OD.m

137

% % Craft Overall dim ensions% % function [Lc.Bc] = OD(M c) % Unils are in m% Lc = 0 .6 5 03*(M cr0.3334: Be = 0.3721 * ( M c r 0 .3 148;

WD.m
% % W eight Distributiono%% function [wl,w2,w3,w4,w5,w6,vv7,wL] = W D(M cXc,Bc,Pc,Pt,TE,Vm)

% StructuraI W eight% tem p=0.0064*Pc/(Lc*Bc)"^.5; if tem p <=0.75

wl=(0.28/(Mc/1000r(l/3)+0.04*((Mc/I000r(l/3))/(temprU/3))*Mc;
elseiftem p< = 1.5

wl=(0.24+0.007*((Mc/1000ni/3))/(tempr(l/3))*Mc;
else w l = (0 .2 1+0.008*((M c/l 0 0 0 r (l/3 ) )/( te m p r( I/3))*M c; end % Propu!sion System W eight% tem p=i .25+74/((Pt/0.7457n0.5)); w2=(tem p*(3.28*V m )*(l/(550*TE)))*M c; % Electrical System W eight%

w3=(0.00034*(Mc/l000r0.5+0.i/((Mc/1000r0.5))*Mc;
% Com m and and Surveillance W eight% w4=(0. l4/(M c/l 0 0 0 r(l/3 )-w 3/M c)*M c; % A uxiliary System Weight

w5=(O.OO24*(Mc/IO0Om/3)+O.O6/(Mc/l0OOr(l/3)+0.O44-K).08/(Mc/l0OOr(l/3))*Mc;
% Outfit and Furnishings Weight

w6=(0.003*(Mc/l000r(l/3)+0.07/(Mc/!000ni/3))*Mc;
% Arm am ent

w7=(0.5/(Mc/l 000ni/3))*M c;
% Load W eight wL=Mc-( w I +w2+w3+w4+w5+w6+w7);

PS.m
% % Param etric Study% % function [Pc,h_LPLTE] = PS(M c,Vm Xc,Bc)

% Cushion Pressure [Pa]% Pc = (M c*9.8l)/(L c*B c); % Nom inal air gap% h_L = 0.014/(1.1*Mc/IOOOr( 1/3); % Total Power [kW ]%

Pt = 0269*(Mc)''0.867;

138

% T ra n sp o rt E ffic ic n c j^ o

TE = (I800*M c/I000)*(3.28*V m )/(550*Pt/0.7457);

LS.m
% % Lift System Design% % function [eta_t.Ns,Ds,psi,phi,fc] - LS % D esired Fan Efficiency'% e t a j = 0.8: % Specific Speed% N s = l/0.02*(0.85-cta_t); % Specific Diam eter% Ds = 0.9+2/Ns: % Pressure Coefficient% psi = (l/(D s * N s )r2 ; %FIo\v C oefficient% phi = psi''(3/2)*N s''2: % Choice for fans% % I -C en trifu g al fan, 2 -M ix e d flow fan, 3 -A x ia l flow fan% ifN s <= 2.5 f c = I: elseif Ns < = 3 .5 fc = 2: else fc = 3: end

ProS.m
% % Propulsion System Design% % function [eta__ap] = ProS % A ir Propeller System®/© eta_ap = 0.65; ®/oGas Turbine System®/©

% ln order to preceed the propulsion system design, more database is required including ®/©the propeller profile or properties o f gas turbine

SCS.m
% % Skirt and Cushion System Design% % function [St] = SCS ®/©Skirt Type% ®/© l - B a g and Finger, 2 - L o o p segm ent, 3 -J u p e , 4 -P e ricell St=l;

139

ACV Database
Name Saint-Michel Baroudeur Adoc 4
A doc 3S

Builder Ackerman I. Ackerman I. Ackerman I.
A c k e rm a n I.

Purpose Public Ser. Public Ser. Public Ser. Sport/Util. Public Ser. Sport/Util. Sport/Util. Comm. Sport/Util. Comm. Sport/Util. Comm. Public Ser. Sport/Util. Military Comm. Comm. Comm. Comm. Comm. Sport/Util. Sport/Util. Sport/Util. Comm. Comm. Military Sport/Util. Comm. Public Ser. Sport/Util. Sport/Util. Comm. Comm. Comm. Comm. Public Ser. Public Ser. Comm. Comm. Military

Power Plant 37kW 37kW 37kW 37kW 63kW 1 Piston engine 1 Piston engine 2 Piston engines. 77kW 2 Piston engines. 77kW 2 Diesel engines. 330kW 99kW 4 Gas turbine. 11334kW 1 Gas turbine. 896kW 1 Diesel engine. 83kW 2 Diesel engines. 112kW 1 Diesel engine. 141 kW 1 Diesel engine. 265kW 2 Diesel engines. 772kW 2 Diesel engines. 772kW 2 Diesel engines. 1192kW Yamaha Vmax SOOcc Fuji EC50PM-02. 39kW 1 ZM2-505. 180kW 2 ZMZ-53-11. 240kW 2 Diesel engines. 382kW 3 1D12BMS1. 895kW 1 Rotax-582. 48kW 2 VAZ-2112. 119kW Diesel engine. 75kW 2 Diesel engines, 225kW Diesel engine. 188kW 2 Diesel engines, 384kW 2 Diesel engines, 262kW 2 Diesel engines. 384kW 2 Diesel engines 2 Diesel engines. 268kW 2 Diesel engines. 306kW 2 Diesel engines Diesel eingine. 238kW 4 Gas turbines, 11930kW Briggs&Stratton, 15kW Automotive, 63kW Automotive, 112kW Automotive. 149kW Diesel engine, 447kW Diesel engine, 221 kW Toyota 4L V8. 194kW Twin cylinder, 34kW 1268kW 1268kW 1939kW 2237kW

Length(m) Beam(m) Mc(kg) Vcru(m/s) Vmax(m/s) Payl.(kg) # pass 5.9 3.7 4.6 3.6 7.0 3.8 5.0 6.1 6.1 12.2 5.3 56.4 14.7 28.5 6.6 7.6 9.0 12.7 18.4 21.2 21.2 4.2 4.2 6.9 12.2 17.5 18.7 4.0 8.5 6.1 13.4 11.6 15.0 11.6 18.0 5.6 9.5 10.6 8.5 7.1 10.6 26.8 4.4 5.5 6.7 8.5 10.7 10.5 7.3 3.5 13.2 16.5 20.0 24.0 2.3 2.2 2.3 1.8 3.0 2.2 2.2 4.0 4.0 6.0 2.5 27.9 7.7 12.0 3.4 3.4 4.7 6.1 10.1 10.1 11.0 2.0 2.5 3.2 5.2 6.2 9.1 2.0 3.2 2.4 4.6 4.3 4.8 4.3 8.0 2.4 4.2 4.6 4.2 4.0 4.2 14.3 2.2 2.4 3.0 4.3 4.9 4.5 3.5 1.9 6.7 6.7 10.0 10.5 600 200 200 200 1100 182 237 830 759 n/a 495 195000 8500 70000 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 320 200 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 670 n/a n/a n/a 850 n/a 149500 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 3750 1600 265 14700 19000 35000 27000 13.9 11.1 13.9 11.1 16.7 9.7 11.1 15.3 15.3 19.6 12.9 25.8 20.6 23.2 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 15.6 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 20.6 24.2 22.2 13.9 16.7 18.0 12.9 14.4 14.4 n/a 12.9 16.5 20.6 14.2 15.5 20.0 20.0 24.4 19.6 18.5 19,4 25.8 25.8 24.2 32.0 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 12.5 13.3 16.4 16.4 28.4 n/a 30,9 30.9 30.9 12.9 15.5 13.9 18.0 19.1 18.0 20.6 22.2 20.0 20.8 18.1 18.1 2.8 18.1 n/a 25.8 28.3 25.8 n/a n/a n/a 15.5 18.0 n/a 15.5 15.5 20.6 20.6 17.8 22.2 24.4 24.4 27.5 n/a n/a n/a 600 n/a n/a n/a 500 182 295 550 650 3000 600 3000 n/a 25000 300 380 1000 2200 4000 5900 9300 480 272 380 1350 3000 10000 200 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 500 1700 2000 1000 600 2200 60000 317 453 815 1178 1993 2400 1200 200 5 3 4 2 5 2 4 7 2 29 4 321 3 4 5 6 12 26 44 68 82 6 4 5 18 34 2 2 9 7 14 14 34 21 63 6 12 6 15 7 23 29 2 6 9 13 22 25 12 2

Garonne Canair 300 Canair 500 AH560P AH560U AH1160 BBV6 GH-2006 CCGH 045 CCGH Siyay 375TD 450TD 1000TD 2000TD 3000TD 4000TD 8000TD Mariah 425 Hovertrek Gepard Puma Irbis Bizon Sobol Alligator Klamath Columbia Deschutes SF3000 SF2000 SF6000 Sovereign500 Airlift950A Fire T. 1060 CS700 Shuttle SAH2200 LCAC SEAL SHARK SEALION SEAWOLF TOURISTER Odyssey Explorer Slider Viking 7501 Viking 7505 Voyageur N300

Ackerman I. ACV D. ACV D. Airlift H. Airlift H. Airlift H. BBVH. British H.C. British H.C. GKNW.A. Griffon H. Griffon H. Griffon H. Griffon H. Griffon H. Griffon H. Griffon H. Mariah H. Neoteric Neptun H. NeptunH. Neptun H. Neptun H. Neptun H. Neptun H. Oregon H. Oregon H. Oregon H. Scat H. Scat H. Scat H. Scat H. Scat H. Scat H. Scat H. Scat H. Slingsby Textron

Public Ser. 4 Diesel engines. 2818kW

Public Ser. 2 Gasoline engines. 164kW

West Cost H. Sport/Util. West Cost H. Sport/Util. West Cost H. West Cost H. West Cost H. Pacific H. Pacific H. Pacific H. Canada Canada Canada France Comm. Comm. Comm. Comm. Comm. Sport/Util.

140

N500 MV.PP6 MV.PPôMkll MV.PPIb Aist Gus Lebed BH.7 BH.7 Mk5A SH2 SH2-4 Skima 12(12) SR.N5 SR.N6 SR.N4 Mkl SR.N4 Mk2 SR.N4 Mk3 SR.N6 Mk6 VT-2 Bell AL30 JEFF(A) JEFF(B)

France Japan Japan Japan
R u s s ia

12677kW 783kW 783kW 3281 kW 19388kVV 1745kW 5369kW 2834kW 2834kW 149kW 149kW 186kW 671 kW 671 kW 12677kW 12677kW 13423kW 839kW 5667kW 2685kW 16778kW 16778kW *

50.0 15.4 17.6 25.1 47.8 21.3 23.3 23.1 23.1 5.9 8.0 7.2 11.8 14.8 39.7 39.7 56.4 17.1 30.2 23.0 28.0 24.2

23.0 7.6 7.6 11.1 17.5 7.3 10.2 11.3 11.2 4.4 4.4 2.8 6.6 6.6 23.2 23.2 23.2 6.6 13.3 10.0 13.4 13.1

265000 16300 19300 50000 260000 27000 90000 50000 55000 1800 3100 1900 6700 10000 180000 200000 300000 17000 100000 52000 157000 150000

36.1 28.4 26.8 33.5 36.1 25.8 28.4 30.9 29.9 23.2 21.6 13.9 30.9 26.8 36.1 36.1 33.5 25.8 32.5 25.8 30.9 32.0

Russia Russia UK UK UK UK UK UK UK UK UK UK UK UK USA USA USA

W 600 200 200 200 1100 182 237 830 759 495 195000 8500 70000 320 200 670 850 149500 3750 1600 265 14700 19000 35000 27000 265000 16300 19300 50000 260000 27000 90000 50000 55000 1800 3100 1900 6700 10000 180000 200000 300000 17000 100000 52000 157000 150000 5 .9 3 .7 4 .6 3 .6 7 .0 3 .8 5 .0 6.1 6.1 5 .3 5 6 .4 1 4 .7 2 8 .5 4 .2 4 .2 5 .6 7.1 2 6 .8 1 0 .5 7 .3 3 .5 1 3 .2 1 6 .5 2 0 .0 2 4 .0 5 0 .0 1 5 .4 1 7 .6 25 .1 4 7 .8 2 1 .3 2 3 .3 2 3 .1 2 3 .1 5 .9 8 .0 7 .2 1 1 .8 1 4 .8 3 9 .7 3 9 .7 5 6 .4 17.1 3 0 .2 2 3 .0 2 8 .0 2 4 .2 600 200 200 200 1 10 0 18 2 237 830 759 495 195000 8500 70000 320 200 670 850 149500 3750 1600 265 14700 19000 35000 27000 265000 16300 19300 50000 260000 27000 90000 50000 55000 1800 3100 1900 6700 10000 180000 200000 300000 17000 100000 52000 157000 150000 2 .3 2 .2 2 .3 1 .8 3 .0 2 .2 2 .2 ^ .0 ^ .0 2 .5 2 7 .9 7 .7 1 2 .0 2 .0 2 .5 2 .4 4 .0 1 4 .3 4 .5 3 .5 1 -9 8 .7 8 7 1 0 .0 1 0 .5 2 3 .0 7 .8 7 .6 11.1 1 7 .5 7 .3 1 0 .2 1 1 .3 1 1 .2 4 .4 4 .4 2 .8 8 .6 8 .8 2 3 .2 2 3 .2 2 3 .2 8 .8 1 3 .3 1 0 .0 1 3 .4 13.1

M 600 200 200 200 1 10 0 830 759 495 195000 8500 70000 200 149500 3750 1600 265 14700 19000 35000 27000 265000 16300 19300 50000 260000 27000 90000 50000 55000 1800 3100 1900 6700 10000 180000 200000 300000 17000 100000 52000 157000 150000 36740

Pt 37 37 37 37 63 77 77 99 11334 896 2818 39 1 1930 221 194 34 1268 1268 1939 2237 12677 7 83 783 328 1 19388 1745 5369 2834 2834 149 1 49 186 671 671 12677 12677 13423 839 5667 2685 16778 16778 1760

141

Weight vs. Length

10

100

1000 Weight (kg)

10000

100000

1000000

y = 0 .6 5 0 3 x 0 .3 3 3 4

Weight VS. Width
30 25

Î "

I:

5 0 1 10 100 1000 Weight (kg) 10000 100000 1000000

y = 0 .3 7 2 1 x 0 .3 1 4 8

Weight VS. Total Power
25000

20000 I
w 15000

a 10000
5000 0
1

10

100

1000 Weight (Kg)

10000

100000

1000000

y = 0 .2 6 9 x 0 .8 6 7

142

APPENDIX E. CCG WABAN-AKI

I

Jkt

(Source: Canadian Coast Guard, http://www.vif.com/users/malina/cacts/gardc_e.htm)

143

APPENDIX F. LCAC

(Source: LCAC. http://www.rlhenterprises.com/hovercraft/lcac.htm)

144

