Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
English Publications and Research English

3-1-1999

Review: Canadian Dreams
Nancy Johnston
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/english Part of the English Language and Literature Commons Recommended Citation
Johnston, Nancy, "Review: Canadian Dreams" (1999). English Publications and Research. Paper 1. http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/english/1

This Other is brought to you for free and open access by the English at Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in English Publications and Research by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

142

SCIENCE FICTION STUDIES, VOLUME 26 (1999)

ing fact that part of him never grew up. The exterior chronology of their writing shows a progression from early childhood to old age, as well as increased subtlety in narration, as Lewis warmed to his theme and entered more deeply into his story. Read in this order, as Adey perceptively notes, the and fosters a personal sequence gives evidence of Lewis's "underthought" experienceof the books, especially for young readers.The interiorchronology of events in the story approximates the Christianmythos from the creation and Fall of The Magician's Nephew (1955), through sacrifice and resurrectionin The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe(1950), the "Narnianequivalent of Exodus" (175) in The Horse and His Boy (1954), the journey toward Heaven in The Voyage of the "Dawn Treader" (1952), a descent into Sheol in The Silver Chair (1953), and the apocalypse in TheLast Battle (1956). This order of reading, whose recognition depends on the reader's age, education, and acquaintance with the Bible, puts greater weight on Lewis's theological " "overthought. As with Mark Twain's characterization of Wagner's music as better than it sounds, this book is better than it looks. While there are inconsistencies in his study, on the whole Adey takes a thoughtful and critical look at the pervasive themes of Lewis's literary career. The personified headings give Adey a handle on the sometime interaction,sometimeconflict between Lewis's rationalistand romantic selves out of which the fiction, especially, arises. In sum, for people who do not like C.S. Lewis, or who find him only mildly interesting, the ground covered here may seem already well-trodden, and the Mentor and the Dreamer a predictable allegorizing of a man whose intellect often muffled his emotions. For people who like C.S. Lewis, on the other hand, this is the sort of book they will like.-Verlyn Flieger, University of Maryland Canadian Dreams. Edo van Belkom. Northern Dreamers: Interviews with Famous Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Horror Writers. Out of This World Series #4. Ontario:Quarry, 1998. 254 pp. $19.95 CDA; $14.95 USA paper. Dist. in USA by InBook (800-243-0138). This collection of 22 interviews with Canadian sf, fantasy, and horror writers is the first of its kind, and as such it is a valuable guide to the genre in Canada.Edo van Belkom is a professionaleditor, authorof horrorfiction, and a CanadianRegional Director of the Science Fiction Writersof America. His familiaritywith his interview subjects and the field in Canadais immediately evident. He can be forgiven, then, for the effusive claims he makes for these authors in his introduction. While not all of these writers are "pioneers, leaders, and suprememastersof their realms" of speculative fiction (8), as he suggests, they do representthe leading voices in Canadianspeculative fiction. Indeed, most of those includedhave received international awards, critical and reader acclaim, and some commercial success. Van Belkom can also be commended for the breadthof his selection since the volume includes male and female writers in nearly equal numbers. Attentionis focused on professionalwriterswho have establishedactive careers

BOOKS IN REVIEW

143

in speculative fiction, including gaming fiction, ratherthan on newcomers to the field. The book thus makes an excellent companion to David Ketterer's Canadian Science Fiction and Fantasy (IndianaUP, 1992), since more than half of these writers appearin his overview of the Canadiangenre. American and Canadianreaders and scholars will recognize, in particular,the names of William Gibson, RobertSawyer, Spiderand JeanneRobinson, W.P. Kinsella, Guy Gavriel Kay, Terence Green, Charles de Lint, and Phyllis Gotlieb. The anthology does not include other Canadian writers like Margaret Atwood, authorof TheHandmaid'sTale (1985) and a numberof sf short fictions, who are not primarilyidentifiedwith speculativewriting. One particularshortcoming for researchers is the volume's emphasis on English Canada. The only Quebecois author representedhere is Elisabeth Vonarburg, whose work has been translatedand distributedwidely in English Canadaand the US. Despite what the subtitle may suggest, it is not fame that unites these writers; rather it is the fact that all the interview subjects live and work in Canada. Since the majority of these authors were born in the United States, questionsabout Canadiancontent and identityhave an interestingspin. When van Belkom asks his interviewees about the importanceof their identities as Canadians, two linked themes emerge: the importanceof a Canadianidentity for their writing, and the difficulty of success in the publishing marketplace. awardsand sales, as van Belkom points out, few of Despite their international these 22 writers have had books published in Canada. These are writers who have largely made their professional careers and reputations in the US. According to those interviewed, the Canadianliterarymainstream,including both critics and publishers, is mostly uninterestedin speculative fiction; only smaller presses like Quarry, Tesseracts, and Pottersfield have consistently published sf anthologies and genre books. When questionsof Canadian contentandthe significanceof nationalidentity arise, few authors, at least in this context, seem concerned with a symbolic landscape of the North or with the idea of geographical alienation. Instead, many embraceCanadianurbanlandscapes.Nancy Baker, Tanya Huff, Charles de Lint, and Spider Robinson use Canadian urban settings despite the publicationor marketingof their novels in the US. As Terence Green suggests, "it's very much not having an inferioritycomplex as a Canadianand realizing our world is as interesting to outsiders as it can be to insiders" (107). Similarly, Michael Coney is not alone in suggesting that, though adamantly committedto Canada,the literarydistinctionsbetween Americanand Canadian sf elude him: "The truth is: I don't know what a Canadian story is.... Currently I have a story ... [that] has snow, Indians, possibly even caribou, and it was deliberatelywrittento sound Canadian.We'll see what people think of that" (31). As one might expect from interviews, these writers respond well when asked to discuss their literaryinfluences, theirreasonsfor choosing their genre, anecdotes from their careers, and their views on the direction of the genre as a whole. More unusual is the subject of the publishing marketplace. Strong insights into complexities of marketingforces in Canadaand the US and their

144

SCIENCE FICTION VOLUME 26 (1999) STUDIES,

influence on speculative writing are articulated in nearly every interview. Among the most penetrating on this subjectare Terence Green, RobertSawyer, Michele Sagara, Candas Jane Dorsey, and Dave Duncan, who offer candid opinions about genre categorization, sales figures and marketing, agent and author relationships, and self-promotion strategies. On the whole, this collection remains positive about the genre. Many of these same authorsalso discuss the writing process and its personal rewards. Phyllis Gotlieb, now in her seventies, remarks that while she began her career as the only visible Canadianwriting sf, with little supportand few models, she has few regrets. Now, after a career of 36 years, she asserts: "neighborswho came snickered at the dust on my furniture,but then afterwards they said, 'Phyllis you had the right idea!' (103)"-Nancy Johnston, Ryerson Polytechnic University

