Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Politics and Public Administration Publications and Research 9-1-1979 Politics and Public Administration

Review [untitled]
Phil Rawkins
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/politics Part of the Political Science Commons Recommended Citation
Rawkins, Phil, "Review [untitled]" (1979). Politics and Public Administration Publications and Research. Paper 6. http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/politics/6

This Other is brought to you for free and open access by the Politics and Public Administration at Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Politics and Public Administration Publications and Research by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

Recensions / Reviews

643

governmentalprocess, and eloquently expressingthe author'sconviction that since culture is central to the life of a people, governments,both federal and provincial,mustevolve cultural policies thatserve as a moredeliberateresponse to social needs than ever in the past. Ostry carefullytraces Canada'sculturaldevelopmentsbefore WorldWar Two andthe originsof ourfirst culturalinstitutions,arisingin the mainfromthe effortsof interestedindividuals who were able at times to drawuponthe support of a prominently placedpersonsuch as a governorgeneral.After 1945the pace of developmentpickedup, especiallywiththe move of the St. Laurentgovernment in appointingthe Massey Commissionand the government'sdeferreddecision to establish the CanadaCouncil.Ostry rightlyregardsthese developmentsas a turningpoint in Canadianculturalhistory. Until 1957 and the creation of the CanadaCouncil,Ostryponts out, the CBC served as almost the only source of for the arts, andindeedits programme publicpatronage budgetis still "by farthe largest source of public supportfor artists in Canada." After 1957, the pace further quickens as new government policies and structuresemerge, both in Ottawaand the variousprovincialcapitals. Ostry is particularlygood in assessing the influence of several secretaries of state, including Maurice Lamontagneand GerardPelletier, and in suggesting the counterpoint to federal initiatives provided by provincial political developments,especiallyin Quebecafter 1960.The two chaptersassemblingthe informationon these more recent developments, even by themselves, make Ostry's book a must for anyone trying to understandthis phase of Canadian social history. Ostry argues that only through a purposeful and more consciously articulated discoverand shareourculturalexperience. "A policy can Canadians federal policy can provide the links, the connections or the opportunitiesfor sharingand connections.... It is the function of the central governmentin a genuine federation to try to build connections and link these communities, to reachout provincesandregionsinto a largerwhole, to try through imagination andconvince themto see and sense the largercommunity,Canada"(178).Ostry warns, however, that such policy shouldnot be imposedfromabove, shouldnot stemfromthe initiativesof eitherpoliticiansor careercivil servants.Thegoals of libertyand choice demandanotherprocess, with full relianceon the voluntary sector. Ostry gives considerationto the option of another royal commission, similar to the Massey Commission, but discards that option in favour of an elaboratebut less structuredform of public consultationwhich he outlines. Whetheror not we accept the author'sproposalfor initiating the next stage of policy development,one can only applaudhimfor settingthe issues squarely before us and for speakinghis mind so unequivocally.An unusualand not too civil civil servant.
FRANK PEERS University of Toronto

The Canadian Ethnic Mosaic: A Quest for Identity Leo Driedger, ed. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1978, pp. viii, 351

aspects of ethnicity in Canada, volume 6 of the Canadian Ethnic Studies Association series. The chapters are grouped into five sections: theoretical the perspectives;migrationand immigration policy; psychologicalmaturation;

The Canadian Ethnic Mosaic is a collection of eighteen essays on different

644

Recensions / Reviews

identity of native peoples; case studies of ethnic minorities. While the editor has taken care to ensure that his own introduction and subsequent linking and summary sections provide maximum assistance to the reader in evaluating specific contributions, some attempt at cross-referencing, agreement on terminology, and establishing common points of reference might have been made. Perhaps this is an unreasonable expectation, given the assortment of topics and the variety of disciplinary approaches and research methodologies adopted by the authors. For the most part, the essays are well-written and informative. As an introduction to ethnic studies in Canada and a contribution to the re-assessment of the significance of minority groups within Canadian society, the collection represents a useful addition to the literature. However, if we are to apply more exacting standards, the book fails to realize its promise. In his introduction, the editor raises a number of fundamental questions concerning the future of cultural pluralism in Canada. While these questions are further elaborated in the primarily theoretical essays by Isajiw, Breton, and Newman, they are seldom addressed in the empirical studies which follow. William Newman offers a concise analysis of the cultural bias of assimilation theory, which still informs much of the scholarship on ethnicity in North America. Similarly, Raymond Breton examines the radically different evaluations of ethnicity which follow from an "individual rights" and a "collective rights" philosophy. A number of factors appear to have played their part in enhancing the legitimacy of ethnicity as a basis for social organization and collective demands on the state. Breton argues that a general view has developed that social and governmental institutions are malleable and hence adaptable to ethnic diversity. This perspective contrasts with the assimilationist view that it is the people not the structures which must change. Culture is not necessarily eroded by modernization, but changes and adapts. In his thoughtful piece with the tongue-in-cheek title, "Olga in Wonderland," Wsevolod Isajiw notes the relevance of ethnicity as a response to affective needs in a technological society. Similarly, John and Carolyn Matthiason note the adaptability of the Inuit culture of the Eastern Arctic to the growing impact of the Canadian political and economic system. In terms of the Matthiasons' analysis, the Inuit are not victims but participants in the determination of their fate. In a rather different way, Frank Epp demonstrates the way in which it is only with the impact of urbanization and the pressures of the modern state that the Mennonites have begun to overcome internal divisions in forming an umbrella-organization, enhancing collective identity. They now possess the organizational means to act to preserve and strengthen group identity, but at the expense of being drawn much closer to the broader society they are at pains to reject. Here lies the irony of multiculturalism. Support is offered to an affirmation of ethnic identity, so long as this goes along with acceptance of individual integration into the dominant order. A principal function of ethnic organizations, noted by Clifford Jansen in his discussion of Italian immigrants in Toronto, is to assist the immigrant to adapt to the surrounding society and to take his place in the occupational structure. Thus a number of questions remain to be asked. Does multiculturalism have the effect of reinforcing social inequality on an ethnic basis, or is it, alternatively, a means towards minimizing the impact of ethnic background on life-chances? It is an unfortunate feature of the volume that the majority of contributors fail to emulate the precision of the "theorists." The terms "cultural pluralism" and "ethnic mosaic" are used loosely and inconsistently. Little attention is given to

Recensions / Reviews

645

a comparativeassessment of the differentmeaningsand the differentsocial and political significance which are attached to ethnicity by the various groups discussed. In his piece on relations and Italian,Greek,and Gerbetweenfrancophones man immigrantsin Montreal, as manifested in the conflict over language of schooling, PaulCapponemploys an imaginativemethodologyin demonstrating how social class relations, ideology, and ethnicity interact. The Matthiasons' piece on the Inuit shows a similarappreciationof the need to follow Breton's advice in seeking to understandethnicity in terms of a dynamic approachto inter-grouprelationswithin the context of a changingsocial structure. For the most part, however, the individualcontributionsare too narrowly focussed to add much to our understanding of the basic questions concerning culturalpluralismraisedby the editor. Ethnicstudies in Canadaare flourishing, but, on the evidence of this volume, lack focus.
PHILRAWKINS

Institute RyersonPolytechnical

The Invisible French: The French in Metropolitan Toronto Thomas R. Maxwell Waterloo: Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 1977, pp. x, 174 Professor Maxwell has produced a book which is as timely as it is functional. In fact it fulfils three functions: it is the only comprehensive analysis of the French fact in Toronto; it is a sociological study of a fractured fragment the parts of which have little in common apart from language (the French in Toronto are made up of the European French, Franco-Ontarians, Quebecois, and the Acadians); and it is a study which cannot be ignored in the current unity debate in the country, for it shows that the Pequiste argument is correct: despite a decade of official bilingualism the position of the French speakers in Toronto has not materially changed. The French Canadian in Toronto is not an equal partner with between the French Canadian and other ethnic minorities is that, in addition to the preservation of cultural traditions on a voluntary spare-time basis, he also has some official assistance, in the television and radio stations and the French-language schools. Maxwell has done a masterfuljob in tracing the history of French settlement in Toronto from the 1850's, showing that the reason for French-Canadian attraction and growth in migration there has been a dispersal of the Toronto

the English speaker in the national community. However, the difference

immigrationto Toronto throughouthas been the economic attractionof the industrial centre, particularlysince World War Two. But, along with the Frenchcommunityacross the metropolitan area, whichhasdestroyedanyhopes

of establishing a strong viable community. At one time this appeared possible, when in 1887 the French parish of Sacre Coeur was established, and again in 1937 when the new church and parish buildings were completed in downtown Toronto. These hopes, however, were doomed by the tremendous growth of the city between 1941 and 1961 which produced internal demographic changes which isolated the French-Canadian parish buildings in a rundown and working class section of downtown Toronto, whereas the French-Canadian population is physically spread across Metro. Maxwell shows that the French population, as any migrant group, displays significant differences in social background. The primary cleavage is between the French Canadians and the French immigrants from France and

French-speakingcountries in Europe. The second cleavage is between the

