MPC MAJOR RESEARCH PAPER

A Little Birdie Told Me: Journalistic and Individualistic Twitter Use of Local Television News Reporters

LAURA BAKER

Dr. Wendy Freeman September 8, 2014 The Major Research Paper is submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Professional Communication

Ryerson University Toronto, Ontario, Canada

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION FOR ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF A MAJOR RESEARCH PAPER I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this Major Research Paper and the accompanying Research Poster. This is a true copy of the MRP and the research poster, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this major research paper and/or poster to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this MRP and/or poster by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my MRP and/or my MRP research poster may be made electronically available to the public.

  

ii

Abstract Twitter is a social networking platform that connects its users to information in the form of posts that are a maximum of 140 characters long. Twitter has become an important method for news distribution for both print and broadcast news stations. News organizations, individuals and journalists all use Twitter for different purposes, which raises questions as to how local television news reporters tweets both as journalists and as individuals. This study analyzes the tweets of the personal Twitter accounts of five local television news reporters from each of the local television news stations in Toronto (City News, CTV Toronto, Global Toronto, CP24 and CBC Toronto). Findings reveal the existence of blurring of personal (individualistic) and professional (journalistic) uses of Twitter. The tweets from the personal Twitter accounts of local television news reporters in Toronto suggest that while these reporters still take their gatekeeping roles as journalists seriously, they sometimes take advantage of Twitter as a platform that encourages public declaration and personal observations.

  

iii

Acknowledgments I would like to thank my mother, father and sister for their unwavering confidence in my ability to pursue my dreams. Thank you to my second reader, Dr. Jeffrey Boase, for his thoughtful and invaluable feedback on my work. Finally, I would like to thank my advisor, Dr. Wendy Freeman, for her dedication and guidance throughout this writing process.

  

iv

Table Of Contents Author's Declaration ......................................................................................................................ii Abstract...........................................................................................................................................iii Acknowledgements.........................................................................................................................iv List of Tables..................................................................................................................................vi Introduction......................................................................................................................................1 Literature Review...........................................................................................................................4 Research Questions........................................................................................................................18 Method...........................................................................................................................................19 Findings & Discussion...................................................................................................................39 Implications....................................................................................................................................52 Conclusion.....................................................................................................................................53 References......................................................................................................................................55 Appendix A: Tweets from Local Television News Reporters.......................................................62

  

v

List of Figures Table Table 1 Table 2 Table 3 Table 4 Table 5 Table 6 Table 7 Table 8 Table 9 Table 10 Table 11 Table 12 Table 13 Table 14 Table 15 Table 16 Description Top Twitter Users From Each Local Television News Station In Toronto Total Number Of Tweets Per Reporter From March 31- April 20 Journalistic Twitter Themes Journalistic Category of News Dissemination and Sub-Codes Journalistic Category of Promotion and Sub-Codes Journalistic Category of Conversation Journalistic Category of Crowdsourcing Individualistic Category and Sub-Codes Individualized Journalistic Category and SubCodes Categories of Journalistic, Individualistic and Individualized Journalistic Uses of Twitter Journalistic, Individualistic and Individualized Journalistic Uses of Twitter Categories of Journalistic Twitter Use News Dissemination Sub-Codes Promotion Sub-Codes Individualistic Twitter Use Reporters' Use of Individualized Journalistic Tweets Page 20 21 22 23 24 25 25 26 28 29 30 32 32 36 43 47

vi

Introduction Twitter, a microblogging platform, was created in San Francisco, California and launched in October 2006 (Honey & Herring, 2009). Twitter users can send messages, called tweets, which are limited to 140 characters. Users can designate their tweets as public, which allows their tweets to appear on Twitter's public timeline located on the Twitter homepage (Honey & Herring, 2009). They can also direct their tweets to another individual user's Twitter page, known as feed, or users can make their tweets private, which means that only those who have subscribed to the user's feed, known as the user's followers, are able to see the tweets (Honey & Herring, 2009). Tweets can be posted via Twitter.com, mobile phones, and through third party desktop applications such as Hootsuite. The majority of Twitter users send and check tweets from their mobile devices (Palser, 2009). Twitter is a social networking platform used as a news dissemination tool by both print and broadcast news organizations (Armstrong & Gao, 2010). Twitter has developed into a hybrid communication space that Papacharissi and de Fatima Oliveira (2012) characterize as "a complex and networked system of social awareness ... blurring boundaries between information, news, and entertainment" (p. 268). Twitter provides a platform where users are able to tweet a combination of information and observation, outside the boundaries of the established order of the information dissemination processes of traditional print or broadcast news (Hermida, 2012). The Project for Excellence in Journalism (2009a) reported that Twitter is an important method for news distribution. In 2007, The Oregonian became one of the first newspapers to use Twitter as a news dissemination tool. Newspaper executives expected that multiple tweets throughout the day would build a community of readers who would initially be drawn in by tweets from the news organization, which gave them glimpses of the news. Newspaper

1

executives then expected readers to seek longer articles on the news origination's website to attain further information. (Greer & Yan, 2011). By 2010, 197 out of 198 American newspapers and TV stations had an official Twitter account (Messner et al., 2011). Various distinguished journalists in the news industry now have followings on Twitter that are almost as vast as the distribution of their newspapers or viewership of their news broadcast. For example, New York Times technology writer David Pogue went from 300,000 followers in 2009 to 1.4 million after only two years (Shultz & Sheffer, 2012). As the popularity of news reporters' Twitter accounts continues to grow, queries are raised pertaining to their roles on Twitter as both professional journalists and as individuals. Research has shown that an individual, a journalist and a news organization may all use Twitter for various purposes due their varying personal and professional roles as Twitter users (Broersma & Graham, 2013; Java, Song, Finin, & Tsen, 2007; Lysak, Cremedas & Wolf, 2012; Schultz and Sheffer, 2010) . The majority of newsrooms, however, use Twitter as a promotional tool. News organizations predominately forward print and broadcast stories to their Twitter feeds (Schultz & Sheffer, 2010), meaning that the same news is being delivered on different platforms in an attempt to help drive Twitter traffic to newsroom websites (Lysak, Cremedas & Wolf, 2012). While the general public uses Twitter for daily chatter, conversations, sharing information and links and reporting news (Java et al., 2007), journalists use Twitter to preview published work, report the news, communicate with other journalists, reach news sources, find more story ideas and verify information (Armstrong & Gao, 2010; Broersma & Graham, 2013). However, news reporters are also professionally tweeting from their personal Twitter account, which calls into question their role as an individual as well as their role as a journalist and how these roles are enacted in their tweets.

2

To date there have been no qualitative studies into how professional and personal uses of Twitter intersect in the context of broadcast journalism. This study aims to address this research gap and highlight the importance of understanding the individual and their profession through social media within the context of news reporting. This MRP examines how local television news reporters tweet from their personal accounts as professional journalists. The differences between how individuals, news organizations and journalists use Twitter will be explored in depth in order to demonstrate how journalistic and individual Twitter use can become blurred when personal accounts are used for professional purposes. The introduction of social media in the workplace has raised questions as to the boundaries concerning personal and professional online communication, making this study both timely and relevant. Moreover, this research will have implications not only for television news reporters, but also more broadly, for employees that tweet as both a professional and as an individual. This research will allow for a better understanding of an employee's dualistic role as a Twitter user.

3

Literature Review Social Networking Sites Social Networking Sites (SNS) are cyber environments that allow users to create profiles and distribute texts, images, and photos (boyd & Ellison, 2008; Pfeil et al., 2009; Powell, 2009; Tapscott, 2008). boyd and Ellison (2007) make a distinction between "social network site" and "social networking site" siding with the former term since the latter suggests these sites are primarily used to network. Networking, boyd and Ellison argue, is not the primary function of some social network sites. For example, YouTube is meant to share and post video content, not necessarily to network with other users, although networking can become a practice of YouTube as a platform should the user decide to use it as such. Specifically, boyd and Ellison define social network sites as online services that enable individuals to firstly, build a public or semi-public profile, secondly, create a list of other users with whom the individual shares a web-based connection, and lastly, examine and navigate their list of connections and the connections made by others in the system. boyd and Ellison assert that the unique quality of a social network site is not its ability to allow users to connect with strangers, but rather the capability for users to showcase their social networks on a web-based platform. This social network can result in connections between individuals. However, boyd and Ellison argue that on many of the popular SNS, users are not necessarily looking to meet new individuals but instead, they are principally communicating with individuals who previously existed in their extended social network. Thus, SNS enable users to present themselves on a web-based platform, connect to a network of users and cultivate and sustain relationships with that network (Ellison, Steinfield, & Lampe, 2007; Kane, Robinson-Combre, & Berge, 2009). Social networking sites, now referred to more broadly as social media (Bhagwat &

4

Goutam, 2013) have quickly become important social platforms through which to engage in computer-mediated communication (Powell, 2009; Tapscott, 2008). boyd and Ellison (2007) suggest that the first major social media platform was Sixdegrees.com, created in 1997. Since its introduction, hundreds of social media platforms have come to fruition, such as MySpace, Facebook, and Twitter. These social media platforms have captivated millions of users and social media is now integrated into the daily lives of many. There is a wide variety of social media platforms available to users, which support a vast range of interests and practices. While most of these platforms have consistent technological features, their uses and practices vary. Most platforms encourage the continuation of pre-established social networks. However, some platforms assist strangers to connect based on shared hobbies, interests and beliefs. Social media platforms also differ in terms of how the platform allows users to incorporate new information and communication tools, for example, blogging, mobile connectivity and sharing videos and photos (boyd & Ellison, 2007). Social media brings together interpersonal communication, content production immediacy and large-scale distribution in a way that does not distinguish between personal and professional uses. It also does not have the same spatial, social, or temporal boundaries of print or broadcast media (boyd, 2010; Burgess & Bruns, 2012). Social media has made communication more social in various ways. Firstly, social media allows social interaction between groups and individuals, where users are able to talk back to companies or other individuals. Unlike print or broadcast communication, social media allows for a two-way dialogue (Baym, 2010). Second, social media permits communication synchronicity, which allows for very rapid transmission of messages, regardless of distance. This synchronicity can make individuals feel connected, even if they are geographically apart (Baym, 2010). Third,

5

social media allows communication to reach vast audiences within wide boundaries. Messages can reach audiences both locally and globally, from anyone using the platform. This challenges the messages of mass media, as individuals through social media can spread messages on the same scale as broadcasters. Finally, social media allows communication mobility, enabling individuals to send and receive communication regardless of location. Echoing Baym's sentiments, Zhao and Rosson (2009) suggest that Twitter as a communication platform allows for user connectedness, real-time information updating, easy mobility as well as vast reach due to the broadcast nature of social media messaging. Zhao and Rosson also suggest that Twitter, as a social media platform, encourages an affiliation with a network of other users and also encourages linking and relinking of information, allowing communication to be more social and collaborative in the transmission and consumption of messages. In this next section, communication on Twitter will be further discussed. Twitter Twitter is defined as a "real-time information network that connects users to the latest stories, ideas, opinions and news about what they [find] interesting" (Wasike, 2013, p. 8). Twitter has become the most popular microblogging site since its introduction in 2006 (Wasike, 2013). Twitter users can post status updates, also known as tweets, to their Twitter feed, which are then read by their followers. Twitter only allows 140 characters per tweet, which encourages those who use the social networking platform to be as brief and succinct as possible when disseminating information (Wasike, 2013). Kwak, Lee, Park and Moon (2010) created a typology for Twitter, which distinguishes between three different Twitter interactions. Firstly, the authors describe the use of a singleton, which is also known as an undirected message, with no specification as to whom the message is

6

directed. Secondly, the authors describe the use of the @ character, which facilitates a direct message. The @ signifies that this message is intended for a specific person. Thirdly, the authors identify the use of a retweet, which is used when a user will redeploy a tweet that was created by a different user. Finally, the authors recount the use of the # (hashtag) which signifies a theme that allows content to be grouped together by various users. Scholars argue that Twitter provides a communicative space, which is affording the emergence of a new type of public realm called "personal public" (Wu, Hoffman, Mason & Watts, 2011). Wu et al. outline personal publics in contrast to the traditional publics afforded by journalistic media by defining it as a public where information is selected by criteria of personal relevance for a known, networked audience in a conversational mode. Three elements allow users of Twitter to create a personal public: (1) communication can be displayed according to criteria of personal relevance, rather than following journalistic news factors, (2) communication is addressed to a specific network, rather than being broadcast to an unknown mass audience, and, (3) communication occurs principally in conversational mode, rather than in the one-way mode of traditional media such as print. Twitter users view the platform as a personal media (Lüders, 2008), in that they have a large degree of control over what and how they communicated. Being able to select and present information of personal relevance is emerging as an expectation among Twitter users (Tufekci, 2011). Lastly, there is no strict separation between sender and receiver on Twitter, unlike other mass media. Twitter allows users to communicate in a conversational style, which enables senders of messages to quickly be the receivers and vice versa (Tufekci, 2011). Twitter is a highly interlinked network structure that allows for rapid forms of news diffusion between users (Lerman & Ghosh, 2010). Meikles and Young (2012) have identified

7

three trends in the way that Twitter is changing news: (1) news on Twitter is becoming linkable, (2) news involves sharing information among audiences and, (3) news is becoming conversational. Thus, users might choose to subscribe to the Twitter account of their favorite newspaper or TV station to get more diverse set of perspectives on current events. Twitter uses can share and comment on those news items with their own network, and also get in touch with journalists to correct errors or suggest related information (Meikles & Young, 2012). In personal publics, instances of professional communication can share the same space with personal reflections. Users are able to select and share information of personal relevance based on who they believe their intended audience to be. As such, they are making information accessible that might be considered private, such as holiday stories, impressions from family events, one's current location or emotional state (Bruns, 2012). The decision to tweet or withhold an opinion, link or piece of information is based on the users' perception of their own audience. In the following section, specific instances of how journalists are using Twitter will be examined. Journalistic Use Of Twitter According to the Twitter website, this social media platform has changed the journalistic landscape (Twitter.com). Broersma and Graham (2013) suggest that journalists use Twitter for a range of purposes. They found, for example, that journalists use Twitter to generate leads, find sources, contribute content and verify information. Through interviews with journalists, Hermida (2010) found three main functions for journalistic use of Twitter: increasing accountability, newsgathering and building brand loyalty. Both of these definitions of journalistic Twitter use focus on sourcing and newsgathering for news stories. These definitions of journalistic Twitter use suggest that journalists use Twitter to obtain the opinions of the public via the internet, which can also be defined as crowdsourcing (Brabham, 2008).

8

Armstrong and Gao (2010) suggest a broader journalistic use of Twitter based on the data that Farhi (2009) collected from his interviews with Twitter experts. Armstrong and Gao propose that journalists use Twitter to preview published work, such as linking to their news stories on their news organization's website. Armstrong and Gao also suggest that journalists use Twitter to report the news, as they tweet about the latest news or current events. Journalists also use Twitter to communicate with other journalists, reach news sources and to find more story ideas, which indicates that journalists are using Twitter to converse with their colleagues and also for crowdsourcing. Neuberger, vom Hofe and Nuernbergk (2013) conducted surveys in German newsrooms to examine the potential of Twitter as a communication tool for news organizations. Based on their findings, they suggest that journalists use Twitter to promote their content on newsroom websites, as seen in tweets that link to website content. This description of promotion is similar to how Armstrong and Gao described previewing published work. Neuberger et al. also suggest that journalists use Twitter to conduct real-time coverage from the scene of current news events, tweeting live reports, directly from where the events are taking place. Armstrong and Gao also note that reporters are routinely tweeting from various events such as speeches, conferences and sporting events, thus these two studies continue to parallel. Neuberger et al. suggest that journalists use Twitter to interact with members of the public, which is another instance of journalists using Twitter to have conversations, similarly suggested by Armstrong and Gao. Journalists also monitor audience reactions and follow up communication to their reports, exhibited in users tweeting to journalists and suggesting how journalists can improve their work. Finally, Neuberger et al. suggest that journalists use Twitter to investigate stories and conduct research on Twitter, insinuating the use of crowdsourcing, which is also noted as a journalistic

9

use of Twitter by Armstrong and Gao (2010). Neuberger et al.'s (2013) description of journalistic Twitter use is similar to Armstrong and Gao's, as both research suggests that journalists use Twitter to disseminate news, promote their work, engage in crowdsourcing and communicate with other journalists as well as individuals about their news stories. Since both of these studies identify the same journalistic uses of Twitter, these findings are integral to this study and will be used in the examination of how local television news reporters use their personal Twitter accounts to tweet journalistically. Journalistic Norms and Practices on Twitter Journalists are negotiating certain frictions that arise as the social affordances of Twitter intermingle with traditional journalistic conventions. They must engage in a process of negotiation between established norms and practices of journalism and the new communication tools that Twitter offers them. This MRP focuses on broadcast journalists and therefore the professional context in which they work is defined by the norms and practices that determine how journalists work. Over the years, journalists have established norms and practices key to their roles as non-partisan, transparent gatekeepers of information important to the public (Kovach & Rosenstiel, 2001). Journalism is coupled to the concept of objectivity or nonpartisanship, which refers to newsgathering as a strictly fact-based process. The impartial methodology of reporting information has been deemed a paramount norm of the profession (Soloski, 1989). Specifically, journalists are expected to keep their values, politics and personal opinions to themselves (Kovach & Rosenstiel, 2007). Clarifying the origins of sources, or remaining transparent during the process of newsgathering, is also an essential practice of journalism. Just as objectivity and transparency have been described as key professional norms in

10

journalism, gatekeeping has also been considered another essential custom. Gatekeeping is a tradition of journalism that aims to separate opinion from fact and reporting from advocacy. Journalistic gatekeeping has been defined as journalists being able to claim authority over the capability to determine what qualifies as news and publish trustworthy and corroborated information (Hermida, 2013). The practice of gatekeeping developed principally in response to the shortage of news channels. These gates are metaphors for the doors of media organizations that control publishing technologies and thus monopolize how news is disseminated to the public (Singer, 2005). Gatekeepers must monitor these gates to guarantee that only correct information is relayed to the public. The `inverted pyramid' style is a method of reporting the news that places the most important or substantial information at the head of the article and the remaining material follows, in order of diminishing importance (Kerrick, 1959). Traditional news media coverage is constantly restricted by the technical and commercial limitations of broadcast and print news channels, such as scope of message reach as well as relationships with advertisers. Thus it is the responsibility of editors and journalists to group the reports of several news sources into a single news story using the inverted pyramid style of journalism. Online journalism allows for the media and their audience to be mutually connected. In an online setting, it is no longer critical for powerful gatekeepers to mediate between news sources and the general public, as was the case for journalists during the era of traditional mass media. On the Internet, journalists function more as a moderator and gatewatcher (Bruns 2005; Neuberger, vom Hofe & Nuernbergk, 2010). Online news websites have shifted the journalists' traditional role as gatekeepers into gatewatchers. Gatewatching has been defined as the journalists' ability to evaluate, highlight and publicize relevant information pulled from the internet (Bruns, 2004). Gatewatchers essentially broadcast news by directing to sources rather

11

than by publishing it themselves or by assembling a complete report from the available sources. Gatewatching allows journalists to connect the reader to the first-hand information. The hyperlinked environment of the Internet has also made it possible for reporters to refer directly back to their online sources, reducing the journalistic need to noticeably demonstrate transparency. However, regardless of inducing a possible shift from the role of gatekeeper to gatewatcher, Twitter has the possibility to alter the established norms and practices of journalism (Lasorsa, Lewis & Holton, 2011; Sherwood & Nicholson, 2011). Lasorsa, Lewis and Holton (2011) conducted a study on the extent to which Twitter may be changing journalistic norms and practices. Lasorsa et al. examined the Twitter accounts of 500 of the most followed journalists on Twitter, according to Muckrack.com. This group of 500 journalists worked for varying news organizations, such as national newspapers, local newspapers, national television broadcast news networks, cable news networks, online news websites and radio stations. Results showed that journalists were exhibiting non-traditional journalistic practices on Twitter. For example, journalists were sharing personal and opinionated information. This lessens the distinction between fact and opinion, as opposed to strictly abiding by the expectation that journalists should remain unbiased in their reporting (Broersma & Graham, 2013). In the study, journalists defended this intermingling of fact and opinion by emphasizing that news on Twitter is an "evolving story and that verification of sources and information takes place over time" (Broersma & Graham, 2013, p. 449). Lasorsa et al.'s study suggests that Twitter is an emerging communication space where news items can be shared along with personal updates. This is important for journalists because Twitter offers them a unique environment where they are free to communicate openly to a wide audience, without being constrained by organizational standards or traditional journalistic principles. Twitter is thus

12

allowing journalists to be "more open with opinions, more liberal in sharing their gatekeeping role and more thorough in being transparent about the news process" (Lasorsa et al., 2012, p. 24). Instances of personalization can be found in the tweets of journalists. Sherwood and Nicholson (2012) interviewed sports journalists in their study, which revealed that tweeting allowed journalists to showcase their personality and also gave them the ability to engage with readers. One sports journalist in the study noted that Twitter was a forum that allowed him to be less formal. The interviewee specifically mentioned that he tried not to be too serious on Twitter and noted that he thought Twitter was not a place for formalities (Sherwood & Nicholson, 2012). Thus, Sherwood and Nicolson's findings suggest that Twitter allows journalists to be less formal and show their own personalities; separate from the news organization they work for. Moreover, according to Hermida, Fletcher, Korell and Logan (2012), audiences prefer to follow individual over institutional Twitter accounts, which also highlights the importance of individualization within journalistic Twitter use. In contrast, Lasorsa et al. (2011) found that while some journalists habitually express opinion on Twitter, journalists who worked for elite news outlets, such as national newspapers, were less prone to relinquishing their gatekeeping role. They were also less likely to interact with other users by linking to external websites and sharing personal information. (Sherwood & Nicholson, 2012). As such, some journalists are not allowing Twitter to affect their roles as gatekeepers. Journalists are adopting these new social media platforms within the boundaries of traditional journalism (Sherwood & Nicholson, 2012). Research into journalism on social media shows that journalists and editors seek to retain a gatekeeping role, despite some opening up to the audience (Domingo, Quandt, Heinonen, Paulussen, Singer, & Vujnovic, 2008; Harrison,

13

2009; Hermida & Thurman, 2008). Hermida (2010) also suggests that journalists are not using social media to harness collective intelligence to verify information, as they still prefer to rely on elite, traditional sources that allow them to maintain their gatekeeping role. Interviews with journalists conducted by Hermida indicated that social media was a flexible tool that could be adapted to an individual's preferences and needs. This notion is further exemplified by Neuberger et al. (2013), who surveyed German news reporters from both print and broadcast journalism. In their survey findings, 58% of journalists rejected the contention that it is impossible to maintain journalistic standards when using a platform that only permits 140 characters of text. In this regard, the prevailing opinion is that tweets offer sufficient space for maintaining virtuous journalistic principles. The aforementioned studies indicate that Twitter has the ability to compromise journalistic norms and practices. However, these studies vary in findings, suggesting that journalists are using Twitter in different ways and it is up their personal discretion as to how they chose to uphold their role as gatekeeper while using social media. Now that journalistic uses of Twitter have been explored, individualistic and organizational uses of Twitter will be examined in the following sections. Use of Twitter by Individuals Individuals use Twitter in comparable ways to journalists but also in some ways that differ. Java et al. (2007) examined how and why an individual uses Twitter and presented a taxonomy of user intentions. Java et al. generated their data by monitoring Twitter's public timeline of recent updates for a period of two months. From 76,177 individual users for this data, there were a total of 1,348,543 tweets. The objective of a Twitter post was deciphered by the researchers. Each post was read and categorized and posts that were highly ambiguous were placed in the

14

"unknown" category. Based on this analysis, Java et al. indicate three factors motivating individuals to use Twitter: daily chatter (posts that talk about daily routines or what individuals were doing), conversations (tweets that started with the @ symbol followed by a username for reply) and sharing information and links (posts that contained some URL in them). This is significant to this research as sharing information can be considered relevant to journalism. Thus a blur between journalistic and individual uses of Twitter is evident in the description of individualistic uses of Twitter set forth by Java et al. Zhao and Rosson (2009) propose a lengthier portrayal of individualistic uses of Twitter. Their findings suggest that individuals use Twitter for a variety of social purposes including raising visibility of interesting material to one's social network, gathering useful information for one's profession or other personal interests, keeping in touch with friends, seeking help and opinions, releasing emotion stress and lastly commenting on private life events such as family gatherings. While some of Zhao and Rosson's findings differ from those of Java et al. (2007), such as using Twitter for emotional release, both findings suggest that individuals use Twitter as an information sharing and sending platform as well as a platform that allows one to keep in touch with other users. Both of these definitions suggest that sharing links and information as well as gathering useful information for one's professions are individualistic uses of Twitter. These two aspects of individualistic Twitter use correspond with how journalists use Twitter. Sharing information and links and gathering information for one's profession are analogous to news dissemination and crowdsourcing, which are two journalistic uses of Twitter. The intermingling of individualistic and journalistic Twitter uses is present within these two descriptions presented by Java et al. (2007) and Zhao and Rosson (2009). Thus, these two definitions suggest the potential for individualistic and journalistic Twitter uses being used in

15

conjunction with each other. Use of Twitter by News Organizations News organizations are embracing Twitter as a means of promoting news stories to their followers on a platform other than print or broadcast. Research demonstrates that the majority of newsrooms use Twitter as a promotional tool (Schultz & Sheffer 2010; Lysak, Cremedas & Wolf 2012). Predominantly, news organizations forward print and broadcast stories to their Twitter feeds. Research has found that the same news is being delivered on different platforms, in an attempt to help drive Twitter traffic to newsroom websites (Armstrong & Gao, 2010; Palser 2009; Papacharissi & Oliveira, 2012; Stassen, 2010). Most newsrooms are automatically feeding the headlines of their website news stories to their Twitter pages (Palser, 2009). These studies demonstrate that news organizations are using their Twitter accounts primarily for promotional purposes, specifically, to showcase newsroom websites. In order to drive users to the newsroom websites, newsrooms are disseminating news stories that link back to website content. Broersma and Graham (2013) examined nine news organizations during a period of four months to determine how links, news headlines, and mentions of individuals were employed within their tweets. They suggest that broadcast media are more inclined to employ multiple elements in tweeted stories (such as videos and audio recordings) when compared to print media. Canter (2014) concluded that the official Twitter accounts of newspaper organizations tended to post traditional automatic tweets, informal links to their website or share information rather than interact with readers. Both of these findings suggest that broadcast news organizations are more inclined to use interactive elements, just as photos and videos in their tweets (Burton & Soboleva, 2011), whereas print news organizations stray away from interactive features. Unlike individualistic use of Twitter, research demonstrates that news organizations are not

16

using Twitter to chat or have conversations. However, news organizations are using Twitter to disseminate news and to promote the news, which is similar to how individuals use Twitter to share information and report the news. Moreover, journalists use Twitter to share information and report the news as well, thus there are some similarities in how individuals, news organizations and journalists use Twitter. These definition overlaps may lead to possible blurring of personal and professional uses of Twitter and thus these definitions of Twitter use will be used to examine tweets from the Twitter accounts of local television news reporters. This MRP will explore how individual local television news reporters use their personal Twitter accounts for journalistic and/or individualistic purposes. The content of tweets from individual Twitter accounts will be analyzed to explore the ways in which personal Twitter accounts conform to the literature on how journalists use Twitter, and as such, to what extent the tweets from the personal accounts of local television news reporters blur the boundaries between professional and personal communication.

17

Research Questions As professional journalists, local television news reporters are using their personal Twitter accounts to tweet. While there is research that examines how journalists tweet in the in professional, journalistic context (Armstrong and Gao, 2010) and there is research about how individuals tweet about non-professional, personal topics (Java et al., 2007), there is no research that explores whether there is an intersection between professional and personal tweeting. This study addresses this gap by analyzing the tweets of local television news reporters who use their personal Twitter accounts for professional purposes. Therefore the research questions that this MRP will be examining are: RQ1. How do local television news reporters use their personal Twitter account for journalistic use? RQ2. How do local television news reporters use their personal Twitter accounts for individualistic use? RQ3. To what extent are journalistic and individualistic uses of Twitter blurred in the tweets from the personal Twitter accounts of local television news reporters?

18

Method Qualitative content analysis has been defined as "a research method for the subjective interpretation of the content of text data through the systematic classification process of coding and identifying themes or patterns" (Hsieh & Shannon, 2005). Qualitative content analysis research concentrates on the features of language as communication with consideration to the contextual meaning or content of the text (Budd, Thorp & Donohow, 1967; Lindvist, 1981; McTavish & Pirro, 1990; Tesch, 1990). This research does not simply involve counting words, but rather analysis involves examining the language in order to categorize large amounts of text into groupings that have analogous meanings (Weber, 1990). Text data can be "verbal, print, or electronic form and might have been obtained from narrative responses, open-ended survey questions, interviews, focus groups, observations or print media such as articles, books or manuals" (Hsieh & Shannon, 2005, p. 1277). Sample and Data Collection For the purposes of this MRP, the text is composed of the tweets of local television news reporters. A local television news reporter is a broadcast journalist who reports the local news during the news hour. In Toronto, Ontario, Canada, there are five major local television news stations: City News, Global News Toronto, Canadian Broadcasting Corporation Toronto (CBC Toronto), CTV Toronto and CablePulse 24 (CP24). City News is owned by Rogers Media, Global News Toronto is owned by Shaw Media, CBC Toronto is owned by the Canadian government and CTV and CP24 are owned by Bell Media. The news hour for City News is at 5:00 p.m., Global News is at 5:30 p.m., CBC News is at 5:00 p.m., CTV News is at 6:00 p.m. and CP24 is at 5:00 p.m. Therefore, the news hour in Toronto ranges from 5:00 p.m. until 7:00 p.m.

19

The data collection commenced by gathering the names of all Toronto local television news reporters that report for a local news station during the news hour. All names of local television news reporters in Toronto were then placed into a spreadsheet with their corresponding news station also noted. From those names, reporters were distinguished between those who had a Twitter account and those who did not. There were a total of 57 local television news reporters in Toronto (this excludes anchors and weather specialists, as they do not qualify as news hour reporters). Of those 57 local television news reporters, 51 of them had a personal Twitter account. Once it was determined that 51 local television news reporters had Twitter accounts, three reporters were selected from each local Toronto news television station (Global News, City News, CTV Toronto, CP24 and CBC Toronto) based on who had the highest number of total tweets, as well as who had the greatest number of followers. By taking into consideration the total number of tweets as well as number of followers, it was ensured that sufficient data would be collected from each Twitter account of the chosen local television news reporters. Daily tweets of the top three reporters from each station were tracked for two weeks. Each day, the total number of tweets from each of the top three reporters was recorded in a spreadsheet. The reporters with the most tweets in the two-week period from each television news station were selected for the final sample. The top Twitter users from each local television news station in Toronto are shown in Table 1 below: Table 1: Top Twitter Users From Each Local Television News Station In Toronto Name Jackson Proskow Steven D'Souza Avery Haines Katie Simpson Paul Bliss News Station Global News CBC News City News CP24 CTV News Total # of Tweets in 2 Weeks 179 179 127 503 76

20

Tweets were collected from March 31 until April 20 and archived into a spreadsheet. This spreadsheet also contained the name of the news reporter, Twitter handle, their affiliated news organization and the date of the tweet. By using this data collection method, effort was made to ensure that the data is representative and not unusual by collecting data for three weeks from each local news reporter from the five local television stations in Toronto. Originally, the plan was to collect data for four weeks. However, in order to ensure that that data was representative, the tweets from the fourth week were not included in the final data set. Mid-way through the fourth week, a breaking news story arose pertaining to Mayor Rob Ford's rehab departure. This news story was an isolated and unusual occurrence, which would disrupt the general news reporting practices of the five local television news reporters. However, the first three weeks provided sufficient data. The total number of tweets from March 31 until April 20, per reporter are shown in Table 2 below: Table 2: Total Number Of Tweets Per Reporter From March 31- April 20 Reporter Proskow D'Souza Haines Simpson Bliss Total Tweets Data Analysis After all tweets were recorded in the spreadsheet, the coding process occurred in three stages: coding for journalistic use, emergent coding for sub-codes of journalistic use and individualistic use and coding for differentiation between journalistic and individualistic use. The first qualitative content analysis occurred, coding for Twitter themes. Armstrong and Gao (2010) News Organization Global News CBC News City News CP24 CTV News Week 1 Week 2 Week 3 Total Total Total 89 67 26 54 24 18 65 79 56 34 Total # of Tweets 54 70 29 97 51 813 210 150 71 241 141

21

defined journalistic Twitter use as previewing published work, reporting the news, communicating with other journalists and finding story ideas and reaching news sources The tweets were first coded using Armstrong and Gao's description of journalistic Twitter use. Table 3 below shows the coding scheme that was used for the first round of coding on the data, using the following Twitter themes: previewing published work was labeled as Promotion and tweets that promoted news stories were coded as such. Reporting the news was labeled as News Dissemination and tweets that contained news stories were coded as such. Communicating with other journalists was labeled as Conversation, and tweets that demonstrated interaction between journalists were coded as such. Finally finding story ideas and reaching news sources was labeled as Crowdsourcing, and tweets that alluded to reporters reaching out for story sources were coded as such. Table 3: Journalistic Twitter Themes Theme Promotion Definition Previewing published work Reporting news stories Communicating with other journalists Reach news sources and to find more story ideas Sample The Open Streets initiative could shut down 10 km of Bloor Street. http://ow.ly/vA2c4 @JProskowGlobal reports. #Topoli RT BREAKING: Ont. Premier Kathleen Wynne has served Tim Hudak and Lisa MacLeod with libel notice over gas plant allegations. @JProskowGlobal the best criminal defence lawyer in Canada? Doing the twitter reach out: file your taxes online? worried you're going to get a letter from the CRA about stolen info? DM/Follow me.

News Dissemination Conversation Crowdsourcing

After coding the data for Journalistic Twitter themes, five main Twitter categories emerged in the: News Dissemination, Promotion, Conversation, Crowdsourcing and Individualistic. Four of these categories were based on the journalistic Twitter use definitions of Armstrong and Gao

22

(2010) and one additional category emerged in the data that was coded as Individualistic. These individualistic tweets contained personal musings usually reserved for individualistic use of Twitter as suggested by Java et al. (2007) and Zhao and Rosson (2009), such as posts that reveal how individuals go about their day-to-day lives. Upon completion of the first round of coding for Twitter themes, sub-codes in the data emerged, which will now be overviewed. While coding for News Dissemination, the data indeed reflected the sharing of news or current events and these tweets were coded as Reporting The News. However, tweets were also coded as Real-Time Reporting, which qualified as livetweeting events, where reporters would share what they were seeing and hearing at live events. Often reporters would describe their surroundings and quote speakers, similarly suggested in the definition of journalistic Twitter use as put forth by Neuberger et al. (2013). Table 4 below summarizes the News Dissemination category found within the data: Table 4: Journalistic Category of News Dissemination and Sub-Codes Category News Dissemination Code Definition Disseminating news stories Real-Time Providing live Reporting reports via Twitter, directly from where the events were taking place Reporting the Sharing the latest News news or current events Sample

On the Porter item, there are still 7 councillors waiting to ask questions of staff -- that's before speakers, motions & debate. Olivia Chow email to supporters soliciting donations: "Think of your gift as part of the say goodbye to Rob fund." #TOpoli

The coding for Promotion revealed that journalists were promoting their own newsroom's websites by referring and linking to newsroom website content and these tweets were coded as Promotion of Newsroom Website. However, other sub-codes emerged in the data within the

23

category of Promotion as well. The news reporters promoted the televised newscast, encouraging their followers to tune in which transpired into the code Promotion of Newscast. The reporters also promoted their own work ­for example, by retweeting compliments they received from fans about their stories and these tweets were coded as Promotion of Own Work. Table 5 below summarizes the Promotion category found within the data: Table 5: Journalistic Category of Promotion and Sub-Codes Category Promotion Code Definition Promoting and/or showcasing work Promotes own news story Sample

Promotion of Own Work

RT@CityAvery @City News Another great story tonight! Congrats to Peter...he should be very proud of himself and his accomplishments! RT Not near a TV? Watch Brendan Shanahan being introduced as Maple Leafs president here http://www.cbc.ca/1.2609174 Coming up on CBC Toronto at 5:30: Dramatic video showing the police interview with Jennifer Pan the night her mother was murdered #sl

Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of Newscast

Promotes newsroom website by linking to website content Promoted newsroom broadcasted newscast

Conversation tweets in the data did not reveal any sub-codes. Tweets in this category were coded as such if they were conversations taking place between two journalists. However, the term was broadened to include conversations between a journalist and their followers, discussing the news story of the journalist. Follow-up conversations pertaining to reporting was a journalistic use of Twitter suggested by Neuberger et al. (2013). Table 6 below summarizes the Conversation category within the data:

24

Table 6: Journalistic Category of Conversation Category Conversation Code Definition Communicating with other journalists and following up communication to about their reports with followers Sample @reporterdonpeat I guess that's better than taking a mile?

Moreover, there were no sub-codes for the theme of Crowdsourcing. The data was coded as such if the tweets from the reporters alluded to their need for a source of the story. Table 7 below summarizes the Crowdsourcing category: Table 7: Journalistic Category of Crowdsourcing Category Crowdsourcing Code Definition Reach news sources and to find more story ideas Sample Doing the twitter reach out: file your taxes online? worried you're going to get a letter from the CRA about stolen info? DM/Follow me.

Finally, while coding the data for Twitter themes, a new theme emerged from and was labeled Individualistic. Tweets were coded as Individualistic if they could not be categorized as one of the journalistic Twitter themes such as News Dissemination, Promotion, Conversation or Crowdsourcing. Sub-codes within Individualistic tweets also emerged, including codes for Personal Interest, Private Life and Daily Chatter. Tweets coded as Personal Interest alluded to the personal hobbies of the journalists, such as sports or music. Tweets were coded as Private Life when journalists would share emotional expressions or information usually reserved for friends and family such as holiday stories or impressions of family events. Daily Chatter tweets

25

were coded for when journalists' talked about daily routines or kept in touch with friends and family. From the literature, these codes related to individualistic use of Twitter. Java et al. (2007) suggested the discussion of one's daily routines as an individualistic use of Twitter. Moreover, Zhao and Rosson (2009) indicated that chatting with friends, showcasing information they personally deem interesting, revealing one's emotional state and commenting on impressions of private life event such as family gatherings were also individualistic uses of Twitter. Table 8 below summarizes the Individualistic category and its various sub-codes: Table 8: Individualistic Category and Sub-Codes Category Code Individualistic Definition Content of tweets could not be categorized as Journalistic and instead resembled Individualistic Twitter use Showcasing information the reporter found personally interesting Sample

Personal Interest

Private Life

Daily Chatter

My iPhone image of Mars last night (R) compared to a Hubble image of the same region (L). https://www.flickr.com/photos/41133 015@N00/13884168431/ ... pic.twitter.com/AhYe6Vp7XB Information usually The happy couple the night before the reserved for friends and wedding! family such as holiday pic.Twitter.com/RorSPW8JBi stories, impressions from family events or revealing one's emotional state Posts that keep in touch Today's TTC experiment: left 20 with friends or talk minutes late to skip to queen streetcar about daily routines rush. Much faster trip, no crowding, still made It to work on time.

26

Based on this first round of coding, it was evident that the tweets from the personal Twitter accounts of local television news reporters did not always qualify as Journalistic. Thus, once these categories and sub-codes were established in terms of Twitter themes, the data was then coded for the following Twitter uses: Journalistic, Individualistic and Individualized Journalistic. Each tweet was coded for the aforementioned uses, based on the journalistic Twitter use definitions put forth by both Armstrong and Gao (2010) and Neuberger et al. (2013) and the individualistic twitter use definitions of Java et al. (2007) and Zhao and Rosson (2009). The tweets that did not qualify solely as Journalistic or Individualistic, but rather a synthesis of the two uses, were coded as Individualized Journalistic. If a tweet disseminated the news, promoted the news, engaged in crowdsourcing, or lastly if a tweet alluded to a conversation between journalists or a user and journalist discussing a news story, then it was coded as Journalistic. If a tweet qualified as daily routines, keeping in touch with friends, releasing emotional stress, raising visibility of personal interests and commenting on private life events, then it was coded as Individualistic. If a tweet exemplified characteristics of both journalistic and individualistic uses of Twitter, then it was coded as Individualized Journalistic. Within the category of Individualized Journalistic, two sub-codes emerged in the data: Opinion-Based News and Personal Lives On Display. The former sub-code consisted of news stories that demonstrated the reporters' opinion of the news story. For instance, the following tweet from Jackson Proskow of Global News, highlights his personal opinion embedded in news dissemination: "A strange mob scene as people run to line-up to buy Bobbleheads and merchandise." Proskow demonstrates his personal opinion by suggesting that the mob is

27

"strange" but also engages in real-time reporting, by covering the Rob Ford mayoral convention he is in attendance for. The second sub-code within Individualized Journalists use is Personal Lives on Display. These were tweets that are work-related, but also put the personal lives of the journalists on display, such as revealing aspects of one's day-to-day life or private life. For example, Jackson Proskow of Global News tweeted: "(For the record, I will be at council a little later on today...)". This tweet fulfills journalistic use by promoting the location of his story. This tweet is also individualistic in use as Proskow is informing his followers of his daily whereabouts. Both of these two individualized journalistic sub-codes demonstrate personal opinions and/or information from the reporter. The tweets that were categorized as Individualized Journalistic were then re-coded to reflect these sub-codes. Table 9 below summarizes the coding scheme used to code these Individualized Journalistic tweets: Table 9: Individualized Journalistic Category and Sub-Codes Category Code Individualized Journalistic Definition Tweets used both journalistically and individualistically- either as news stories embedded with opinion or workrelated tweets where personal lives are on display News stories that demonstrated the reporters opinion or bias Work-related content, but also put the personal lives of the journalists on display, such as revealing aspects of one's daily chatter or private life Sample

Opinion-Based News

Personal Lives On Display

A strange mob scene as people run to lineup to buy Bobbleheads and merchandise. (For the record, I will be at council a little later on today...)

28

Table 10 below summarizes the coding scheme used to decipher between Journalistic, Individualistic and Individualized Journalistic uses of Twitter. Table 10: Categories of Journalistic, Individualistic and Individualized Journalistic Uses of Twitter Use Journalistic Definition Tweets used journalistically and coded as News Dissemination, Promotion, Conversation and Crowdsourcing Tweets used individualistically and coded as Daily Chatter, Personal Interest and Private Life Tweets used both journalistically and individualistically- either as news stories embedded with personal opinion or workrelated tweets where personal lives are on display Sample Mulcair says Conservatives have never respected personal information, says CRA shut down is the ultimate example of that. Smells like spring, feels very much like winter. #dlws Hmm. The Tories r changing the channel from the gas plant scandal to their alleged budget docmnt leak. Some peeps at QPark are wondering why

Individualistic

Individualized Journalistic

29

Findings and Discussion This section presents the findings and discussion of the qualitative content analysis conducted on the tweets of local television news reporters. This qualitative analysis aimed to answer the research questions by identifying themes of the tweets from the personal Twitter accounts of local television news reporters. Table 11 below summarizes the Journalistic, Individualistic and Individualized Journalistic tweets within the data. As demonstrated from these numbers, there were no visible similarities or patterns amongst the reporters in terms of how often they tweeted journalistically, individualistically or intermixing them both. Table 11: Journalistic, Individualistic and Individualized Journalistic Uses of Twitter
Proskow D'Souza Haines Simpson Bliss Total % of Total Tweets (n= 813)

Journalistic tweets Individualistic tweets Individualized Journalistic tweets

162 6 42

125 10 15

28 6 37

206 21 14

78 23 40

599 66 148

74% 8% 18%

The following section divides the findings into Journalistic, Individualistic and Individualized Journalistic uses of Twitter, examining the Twitter themes found in each of the aforementioned uses. RQ1. How do local television news reporters use their personal Twitter account for journalistic use? Armstrong and Gao (2010) identified four types of Twitter usage by journalists: News Dissemination, Promotion, Conversation and Crowdsourcing. The majority of the data (74%) was coded as Journalistic (599/813), suggesting that the majority of the tweets from the personal

30

Twitter accounts of local television news reporters were used journalistically. None of tweets coded as Journalistic alluded to aspects of individualization. For example, in this tweet, Jackson Proskow of Global News, includes information that is entirely related to a news event: "BREAKING> From the ITO, Rob Ford is "going mad" about the video. pic.twitter.com/7IPOfgaWF7". Similarly, Steven D'Souza, CBC News, tweeted: "Packed courtroom awaiting appearance of Chuang Li, suspect in yesterday's workplace stabbing. Court waiting for Mandarin interpreter". These are both examples of journalistic use of Twitter, as the main function of both tweets is to disseminate the news. Table 12 below shows the four major Twitter themes that were found in the tweets coded as Journalistic, as well as breaks down each category by journalist. These four themes used journalistically were: News Dissemination, Promotion, Conversation and Crowdsourcing. The data demonstrates that tweets coded as News Dissemination made up the majority of the Journalistic tweets, suggesting that local television news reporters use their personal Twitter accounts to tweet journalistically, and specifically, to tweet the news. However, there appears to be little similarity in terms of tweeting patterns among the reporters, suggesting that although Twitter is one platform, the same for all journalists, it was used to tweet journalistically in differing ways. For example, Jackson Proskow, Steven D'Souza, Katie Simpson and Paul Bliss all tweet the news the most within journalistic Twitter use, yet Bliss does not tweet promotionally to the same extent as his counterparts and Proskow does not use conversational tweets, whereas the remaining reporters do.

31

Table 12: Categories of Journalistic Twitter Use
Category
Proskow D'Souza

Haines

Simpson

Bliss

Total Tweets of Category

% of Journalistic Tweets (n= 599) 70% 25% 4% 1%

News Dissemination Promotion Conversation Crowdsourcing Total

117 44 0 1 163

81 41 1 2 12

2 22 2 2 28

156 40 8 2 206

63 4 10 1 78

419 151 21 8

% of Total Tweets (n= 813) 52% 19% 3% 1%

1.1 Journalistic Use of News Dissemination Within the tweets coded as Journalistic, 70% were coded as News Dissemination, making it the most prominent category of journalistic tweets. Table 13 below summarizes the News Dissemination category and its sub-codes according to each reporter's use. Within the News Dissemination category, there were two distinct patterns of Twitter use. The first was coded as Real-Time Reporting, which qualified as live-tweeting events, where reporters would share what they were seeing and hearing at live events. The second was coded as Reporting the News, which were tweets that shared the headlines of news or current events, synthesizing the news in a single tweet. Table 13: News Dissemination Sub-Codes Sub-Codes of Proskow D'Souza Haines News Dissemination Real-Time 84 49 Reporting Reporting the 33 32 News Total News Dissemination Simpson 2 0 86 70 Bliss 31 32 Total 252 167 419

32

1.1.1 Real-Time Reporting Jackson Proskow of Global News dominated the sub-code of Real-Time Reporting. Of Proskow's total tweets (n=210), 40% of them were coded as Real-Time Reporting, which was the largest percentage out of all of the reporters. Real-Time reporting is a distinct form of news dissemination that is unique to Twitter, as the platform allows for the instantaneous dissemination of what a reporter is seeing, hearing and experiencing. An example of Real-Time Reporting from Proskow is as follows: "Mammoliti: `the majority of the email's that I'm getting are from women who love the expansion.'" In this tweet Proskow is directly relaying word-forword what he is hearing from the speaker. This constitutes as Real-Time Reporting because Proskow is providing a live report directly from the event he is attending. Another example of Proskow's use of Real-Time Reporting is exemplified in his tweet: "At City Hall where Mayor Rob Ford silently walked to the elevator. He hurt his back lifting weights on Friday (according to his driver)." This tweet is another instance of Real-Time Reporting because Proskow is relaying what he is witnessing while at City Hall, immediately relaying this information to his followers via Twitter. A news beat is defined as particular topic or subject area that a reporter covers (Reich, 2012). Proskow's beat is city politics, which includes reporting on events at City Hall as well as all stories relating to Toronto Mayor Rob Ford. Proskow uses Real-Time Reporting to a large extent for his stories as he is constantly at City Hall, relaying what he is witnessing through his tweets. This is significant because Proskow's tweeting habits demonstrate how he uses his personal Twitter account primarily to disseminate the news, specifically to engage in Real-Time Reporting. Thus, Proskow is using his personal Twitter account as an extension of his professional news reporting. Proskow's use of Real-Time Reporting is distinct from the other

33

reporters as he is a beat reporter, focusing on City politics and thus real-time reporting lends itself well to his specific journalistic task of relaying all that he experiences while at City Hall. Neuberger et al. (2013) conducted a comprehensive newsroom survey completed by editors-in-chief of Internet news departments in Germany, including daily newspapers, weekly newspapers, TV/radio broadcasters and internet-only providers. The study by Neuberger et al. (2013) also found that German Newsrooms employed Real-Time Reporting on Twitter. News departments often provided live reporting of recurring events such as sports events and awards and presentations. Their study also suggested that during elections, live reporting is also a prominent use of Twitter. The survey findings of Neuberger et al. correspond with the findings of this study, as both suggest Real-Time Reporting on Twitter as an extension of journalistic practice. 1.1.2 Reporting The News Reporting The News was the other category of Journalistic Twitter use. Katie Simpson of CP24 tweeted the news the most out of her counterparts, as 30% (n=70) of Simpson's total tweets were coded as Reporting the News. Simpson states on her Twitter profile biography that she is a "Breaking news enthusiast". Simpson's beat is breaking news, which means she is constantly abreast of the latest news in order to disseminate information rapidly to her Twitter followers. An example of Simpson's use of Reporting the News can be seen in her tweet: "News release from Peel Region: POSSIBLE MEASLES EXPOSURE AT ULTIMATE SPORTSPLEX (RINK CITY) IN MISSISSAUGA ON MARCH 22, 2014." In this tweet, Simpson is reporting the news by releasing information about a news release from Peel Region. Another example can be seen in her tweet: "#BREAKING: One person stabbed at St. Roch Catholic SS in Brampton;

34

possibly 2nd vic. One person in custody, hunt on for second suspect." In this tweet, Simpson is sharing breaking news with her followers by reporting information about a stabbing in a school. Simpson, like Proskow, also demonstrates in her tweeting patterns that she too uses her personal Twitter account primarily to disseminate the news. However, she is disseminating the news differently than Proskow and the rest of the reporters because her beat is specifically breaking news. Of the tweets coded as Reporting The News, 28 contained the word "Breaking" at the beginning of the tweet and 27 of those tweets were from Simpson. Thus, Simpson is using her personal Twitter account to fulfill her journalistic task of sharing breaking news. Simpson's use of Twitter to report the news is unique to her own reporting beat and thus she is using Twitter to tweet journalistically in a different way than her counterparts. These findings suggest that journalists are usually able to uphold their roles as gatekeepers by tweeting impartial news. Within the tweets coded as Journalistic, reporters disseminated news stories that showed no instances of personalization, thus did not demonstrate any sense of bias. Local television news reporters also linked to stories composed by competing newsroom reporters within the category of News Dissemination. These tweets suggest that reporters are enacting their roles as gatewatchers (Bruns, 2005), as they do not necessarily have to promote their own news story as the most pertinent news. Rather, they are able to broadcast other news items that they deem suitable and acceptable news for their followers to consume. Even within a 140-character limit, journalists were able to employ the inverted pyramid style of reporting (Kerrick, 1959) through reporting the news tweets. Rather than the important information being at the head of the article, the significant material is located in the tweet. For example, D'Souza tweeted a headline of a news article and linked the remaining content of the article in the latter part of the tweet: "RT After major internet security flaw "Heartbleed", experts

35

advise: Wait a day then change all your passwords http://nyti.ms/1kp4Pje." The headline of this story, as in who, what, where, when why, is found in the body of this tweet. The information usually reserved for the remainder of the article is now linked in the tweet, allowing users to read the rest of the news story on the news organization's website. 1.2 Journalistic Use of Promotion Tweets coded as Promotion were the second most predominantly used category for all reporters. The category of Promotion consisted of tweets that allowed journalists to preview published work. Table 14 below summarizes the Promotion category and its sub-codes according to each reporter's use. Within the Promotion category, there were three patterns of Twitter use. The first was Promotion of Own Work, which was when a reporter promoted his or her own work. The second was Promotion of Newsroom Website which were tweets that contained newsroom website links, such as links to live streams or news stories. The final code was Promotion of Newscast, in which reporters promoted their newsroom's televised newscast, encouraging Twitter users to tune in. Table 14: Promotion Sub-Codes Sub-Codes of Proskow D'Souza Haines Simpson Bliss Promotion Promotion of 8 5 20 10 Own Work Promotion of 36 27 2 22 Newsroom Website Promotion of 0 9 0 8 Newscast Total Promotion Total 2 2 0 45 89 17 151

36

1.2.1 Promotion of Own Work Within the promotional category, Promotion of Own Work was the most frequent code. Avery Haines of City News was the reporter who promoted her stories the most by tweeting selfpromotions 20 times or 44% of all tweets coded as Promotion of Own Work. An example of Haines's self promotion is exhibited in the following tweet: "Her toddler was stabbed to death by a mentally ill neighbour. Meet the mum who wants CHANGE, not REVENGE. VIDEO: http://tinyurl.com/ohclky3." Haines's beat is human-interest stories and she has her own segment during the news hour called Inside Story. Haines uses her personal Twitter account to selfpromote in order to fulfill her journalistic task of promoting her human-interest segment on the news hour. 1.2.2 Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of Newsroom Website was another prominent code of journalistic use of Twitter. These tweets are distinct because they contain a link to the reporter's newsroom website. Reporters are able to use Twitter as a promotional tool by driving traffic to the newsroom website. All of the local television news reporters promoted their newsroom's website by linking to news stories. Other instances of website promotion were shown in tweets that promoted the live stream coverage of events on newsroom websites. Steven D'Souza of CBC News was the reporter who promoted his newsroom's website content the most out of all the reporters. Out of his total tweets, 18% of them (n=150) were coded as Promotion of Newsroom Website, and thus 18% of his tweets contained a link to the CBC website. Examples of how D'Souza promoted his newsroom's website are demonstrated in the following tweets: "Mississauga company fires flight instructor after CNN appearances on Malaysia Airlines story - Toronto - CBC News http://www.cbc.ca/1.2613065 ", and "You can

37

watch the Rob Ford official campaign launch LIVE here: http://www.cbc.ca/1.2613334". Through these tweets, D'Souza is leading those who follow his Twitter feed to his newsroom website, either to read a news story or to watch a live stream. Thus, D'Souza uses his personal Twitter account to promote his newsroom's website by circulating links. D'Souza heavily uses Twitter as a platform for promotion. Promoting stories on a news website is a practice of Twitter usually reserved for newsroom organizational uses of Twitter. Greer and Ferguson (2011) found that linked news stories were the most frequently occurring items on the Twitter homepages of news organizations. Moreover, research demonstrates that the majority of newsrooms use Twitter as a promotional tool (Schultz & Sheffer 2010; Lysak, Cremedas & Wolf 2012). The journalists examined in this study also used Twitter as a promotional tool at very high rates. These findings suggest that when local television news reporters are using their personal Twitter accounts to tweet journalistically, they are somewhat emulating the same tweeting practices of news organizations. 1.2.3 Promotion of Newscast In the data set, there were tweets coded as Promotion of Newscast, but only Steven D'Souza of CBC News and Katie Simpson of CP24 promoted their newsroom's televised newscast. For example, Simpson encouraged her Twitter followers to tune into CP24 in this tweet: "RT Mayor Ford is speaking with reporters at city hall. Tune into CP24 for LIVE coverage." The remaining journalists promoted their newsroom live stream by linking to the online content, but never promoted the broadcasted newscast. This suggests that the majority of the journalists are prioritizing the promotion of their newsroom's website over promoting the televised newscast.  

38

Greer and Ferguson (2011) found broadcast news stations rarely promoted their newscasts and news organizations were primarily interested in driving traffic to the newsroom website. Based on findings, the same organizational Twitter practices can be applied to the five examined local television news reporters. They too promoted their newsrooms website by linking to its content at higher rates and rarely promoted the televised newscast of their news organization. 1.3 Journalistic Use of Conversation All local television news reporters, except for Jackson Proskow of Global News, had tweets coded as Conversation. Tweets in the category of Conversation were coded as such if they were conversations taking place among journalists or between a journalist and their followers, discussing the news story of the journalist. Paul Bliss of CTV News had the most tweets coded as Conversation, as almost 50% of all tweets coded as Conversation were from Bliss's Twitter account. Selected conversations occurred between Bliss and a Twitter follower, in an attempt to follow up communication pertaining to a news story. These conversations were classified as journalistic use of Twitter, suggested by Neuberger et al. (2013). The other type of conversations that Bliss participated in were conversations between himself and other journalists, which is a journalistic use of Twitter presented by Armstrong and Gao (2010). Bliss was the most social on Twitter due to his high rates of conversational tweets. Bliss, unlike his counterparts, often engaged in conversations and focused more on interacting with reporters and his followers than on other journalistic uses such as Promotion or News Dissemination. For example, Bliss had a conversation with one of his followers about the statistics he had used for a story: ".@RobLearn I got the numbers from the sentence directly below the chart you tweeted. Now you can be sure. pic.twitter.com/USabuZJyL5".

39

These tweets coded as Conversation demonstrate that journalists, and specifically Bliss, are using their personal Twitter accounts to have conversations pertaining to their news stories, either engaging in conversations with other journalists or their Twitter followers. Bliss's substantial use of Twitter as a mode of conversation highlights his use of Twitter as an extension of his journalistic task to converse with other journalists and the public. Tweets coded as Conversation also appeal to the notion of journalistic transparency, which is a norm that the profession strives to uphold (Kovach & Rosenstiel, 2001). By engaging in conversations with fellow journalists, in public on Twitter as well as with Twitter followers who consume news stories, journalists are able to remain transparent about where they gather their facts and how they present news stories. Within the data, there were demonstrated instances of journalists interacting with one another with regards to the same news story. For example when Avery Haines tweeted at Toronto Sun reporter Don Peat: "@reporterdonpeat I guess that's better than taking a mile?". These two were engaged in a conversation pertaining to the Toronto City Hall budgets in which both of them were reporting on. There were also occurrences of conversations among journalists and their Twitter followers who were asking for clarification on sources and facts presented in the story. Thus, these types of conversations from the personal Twitter accounts of local television news reporters exemplify the journalistic norm of transparency. As suggested by the study of Lasorsa et al. (2012), journalists used Twitter as an opportunity to provide transparency. The findings of Lasorsa et al. demonstrate that journalists can use Twitter to convey information about their job, engage in discussions about their reporting as well as link to information in which they attained for their news story. These Twitter practices uphold the journalistic norms of transparency. Moreover,

40

these journalistic tweets coded as Conversation align with the conversational style of communication afforded by a personal public, as described by Wu et al. (2011). 1.4 Journalistic Use of Crowdsourcing All of the crowdsourcing tweets in the data were coded as Journalistic. These tweets qualified as crowdsourcing as they were asking for the opinions of the public through Twitter about news-related issues. Although crowdsourcing comprised a small percent of the overall data (1% of Journalistic tweets), all of the reporters employed crowdsourcing at least once in their tweets for journalistic purposes. For example, two of the tweets coded as Crowdsourcing were requesting public opinion, such as using an opinion poll. Others included asking for a photo as well as seeking a source for a story. Even though all of the journalists used a tweet to engage in crowdsourcing at least once, they all employed them in different ways. For example, Paul Bliss of CTV News asked for his followers to use a specific hashtag when replying to his request for an opinion poll, while Katie Simpson of CP24 asked her followers to private message her on Twitter if they qualified as a suitable source for a story she was working on. Thus, although the journalists all use their personal Twitter accounts for crowdsourcing, they do so varyingly. Moreover, the journalistic use of crowdsourcing on Twitter also upholds the norm and practice of journalistic transparency, as these tweets allow Twitter users to see how and where a journalist compiled their information for a news story. Broersma and Graham (2013) and Hermida (2010) suggest that journalists use Twitter to generate leads, find sources, and contribute content. Thus, these researchers emphasize the importance of Twitter as a crowdsourcing tool for journalists. However, crowdsourcing was the most infrequently used code for journalistic use in this study. This finding is consistent with the findings of Neuberger et al. (2013). Their survey found that only 12% of the news departments

41

used Twitter to find sources and stories. Thus, crowdsourcing in their survey was not a prominent journalistic use of Twitter, consistent with the findings within the data of this study. Neuberger et al. (2013) suggest that Twitter, compared to other computer-based research tools, is relatively unimportant for investigative purposes. In terms of finding story ideas, Neuberger et al. indicate that journalists use other social media platforms such as blogs over Twitter to find story sources. For checking facts and figures, Neuberger et al. suggest that journalists use search engines and online journals. Neuberger et al. refer to Twitter as being a tool for soft research goals, such as gaining a sense of public moods or trends, but not for gathering facts and background information or crosschecking information for news stories. RQ2. How do local television news reporters use their personal Twitter accounts for individualistic use? Individualistic use of Twitter was enacted by all of the reporters. All of these instances reveal that journalists are not using their personal Twitter accounts exclusively to tweet journalistically. Journalists, at times, are using their personal Twitter accounts to tweet personal information, which is non-journalistic in nature. As such, when using their personal Twitter accounts, journalists do occasionally cross over the boundaries from journalistic use into individualistic use. There were 66 instances (or 8%) of individualized content in the data. Within the category of Individualistic Use of Twitter, there were three distinct patterns of Twitter use. The first was coded as Personal Interest, qualifying as tweets that revealed the reporters' hobbies and/or interests. The second code was Daily Chatter and these were tweets where the reporter would share the events of their day-to-day lives, such as where they were going or what they were doing, or keeping in touch with friends. The third and final individualistic use was coded as

42

Private Life, which consisted of tweets where a reporter would share information usually reserved for friends or family. Of note, three out of the five reporters tweeted individualistic content at higher rates than other journalistic uses of Twitter on weekends. The individualistic tweets on weekends alluded to reporters' personal lives, outside of the office. These tweets allow the journalists' Twitter followers to view the reporters as every-day, regular citizens. Table 15 below breaks down the individualistic uses of Twitter by each local television news reporter, revealing a lack of consistency among the reporters in terms of how they tweeted individualistically. The data demonstrates that Paul Bliss of CTV News used his personal Twitter account for individualistic purposes to the greatest extent compared to his counterparts. Thus, Bliss was the most individualistic in his use of Twitter. Table 15: Individualistic Twitter Use
Category
Proskow D'Souza

Haines

Simpson

Bliss

Total Tweets of Category

% of Individ ualistic Tweets (n= 66)

% of Total Tweets (n= 813)

Personal Interest Daily Chatter Private Life Total

1 3 2 6

6 4 0 10

3 3 0 6

1 8 12 21

19 3 1 23

30 21 15 66

45% 32% 23%

4% 3% 2%

Individualistic uses of Twitter allowed followers to gain insights into the reporters' personal hobbies and interests such as astronomy, television shows, sports, film and travel. Paul Bliss of CTV News prominently disseminated information about his personal interests, in particular, his fascination with astronomy. In fact, 100% (n=19) of Bliss's tweets coded as Personal Interest pertained to space and astronomy. From these tweets, it became apparent that Bliss was passionate about astronomy, as he frequently tweeted about this interest. The other

43

reporters tweeted about their hobbies and interests too; however, not to the same extent as Bliss. For example, from the tweets categorized as Individualistic, one can possibly conclude that Katie Simpson of CP24, enjoys basketball ("wethenorth not #wearenorth #fail #sloganmelting"), Steven D'Souza of CBC News, likes soccer ("Why is there no @torontofc on the radio?"), Jackson Proskow of Global News, relishes travel ("Soaking up the sunshine in Niagara this weekend") and Avery Haines of City News enjoys humourous cat videos (elly.com/1IPSQU6 Cat vs coon. Part 1. VIDEO). Through individualistic uses of Twitter, reporters were able to engage in non-journalistic practices such as wishing their followers a happy holiday, as seen in a tweet by Steven D'Souza of CBC News: "Happy Easter!". Reporters were also able to vent their personal thoughts, as demonstrated by Katie Simpson of CP24: "Ok cold...you win ..." By using Twitter individualistically, these tweets demonstrate that the local television news reporters are members of the community in which their followers live in, and they too experience the same holidays, weather troubles, etc. as others residing in the region. When reporters used Twitter individualistically, they revealed information about their private lives. Katie Simpson from CP24 was the reporter who most notably tweeted about her personal life. For example, in one tweet, Katie Simpson of CP24 publicized that she was at a friend's wedding: "Amazing wedding! Congrats Jen & Shep! pic.twitter.com/UOhgWvDKRG". Simpson dominated the Private Life code. Topics of her private life tweets included bachelorette parties, birthday parties, weddings and family time. These tweets coded as Private Life gave Simpson's Twitter followers a glimpse into her life outside of the office and allowed them to see the personal side of Simpson. These individualistic uses of Twitter align with the findings of both Java et al. (2007) and

44

Zhao and Rosson (2009). These researchers suggest that individuals use Twitter to discuss the daily routines of their lives, chat with friends, showcase information deemed interesting, release emotional stress and comment on impressions of private life events. Each one of these proposed categories of individualistic use of Twitter were coded in the data set of this study, thus aligning with the findings of the two aforementioned studies. None of the these individualistic categories were described in the literature as uses relating to journalists or news organization, thus none of these categories are expended beyond the scope of individualistic use (Palser 2009; Papacharissi & Oliveira 2012; Schultz & Sheffer 2010; Stassen 2010). Tweets coded as Individualistic are informal in approach, framing journalists as ordinary individuals rather than authoritative gatekeepers who control access to the news. Being "human" is an essential component in creating one's personality on social media (Marwick & boyd, 2011). Based on these findings, by using their personal Twitter accounts, these journalists are able to appear more human by sharing morsels of information about their family and social lives (Cozma & Chen 2013; Lasorsa, Lewis, & Holton 2012). As demonstrated by tweets coded as Personal Interest, Daily Chatter and Private Life, the journalists' Twitter followers were able to observe how these reporters live their lives outside of work. Free online news websites have created economic turmoil for the news industry. This upheaval in journalism has caused the termination of numerous paid journalist jobs (Sheffer & Schultz, 2012). Thus, newspaper reporters must be more attuned to the changing environment and ways of maintaining relevance in a digital age. As competition grows, reporters are beginning to understand the importance of their own individualistic voice as journalists. By tweeting as individuals, reporters are able to deviate from the traditional norms and practices of journalism and move away from the customary approach of presenting the neutral face of the

45

news organization they work for (Sheffer & Schultz, 2012). Instead, journalists can begin to share aspects of their personal lives with their followers through their individualistic Twitter practices (Canter, 2013). RQ3. To what extent are journalistic and individual uses of Twitter blurred in the tweets from the personal Twitter accounts of local television news reporters? At times, tweets demonstrated instances of journalistic as well as individualistic uses of Twitter in the same tweet. When both uses of Twitter were present in the tweets, they were coded as Individualized Journalistic, alluding to both uses employed in the tweet. Within the data set, 148 of the total tweets (or 18%) were coded as using Twitter in an individualized journalistic way. This makes up almost one fifth of the data. In these tweets the journalists engaged in journalistic uses of Twitter, such as News Dissemination or Promotion. However, concurrently, these tweets demonstrated instances of individualistic uses of Twitter by infusing personal opinion in the message or revealing aspects of the journalist's personal life. Paul Bliss of CTV News enacts an example of a tweet coded as Individualized Journalistic: "There should be a mechanism in the Legislature that FORCES politicians to answer direct questions..and not deflect onto message track." While Bliss is tweeting journalistically about politics in this tweet, he is also tweeting individualistically by infusing his personal opinion as to how the government should function. Thus, this tweet is an example of when journalistic and individualistic uses of Twitter become blurred. Another example of individualized journalistic use is demonstrated by Jackson Proskow of Global News: "While working on a decidedly non-Rob Ford story about traffic today, Rob Ford & driver pulled up at the traffic light I was standing at. I gave them a wave. They waved back, and rolled down the window to say hi. Sometimes Toronto feels like a really big small town."

46

This tweet demonstrates journalistic use as Rob Ford stories and Toronto city politics are Proskow's beat. However, this tweet also employs individualistic use of Twitter as Proskow is communicating to his followers aspects of his personal life, specifically the daily happenings of his life when he saw Rob Ford while they were both stuck in traffic. Thus, this tweet is being deployed for both journalistic and individualistic intentions. Even within the 140-characters of a tweet, Twitter seems to provide opportunities for the local television news reporters to tweet simultaneously as both journalists and individuals. Table 16 below shows the breakdown of each reporter's use of individualized journalistic tweets. This data reveals that the reporters blur individual and journalistic uses of Twitter in two ways: the first coded as Opinion-Based News, which qualifies as infusing personal opinions into news stories. The second coded as Personal Lives On Display, which were tweets that revealed aspects of their personal lives in a work-related context. Table 16: Reporters' Use of Individualized Journalistic Tweets
Category
Proskow D'Souza Haines Simpson Bliss Total % of Individualized Journalistic Tweets (n=148) % of Total Tweets (n= 813)

OpinionBased News Personal Lives on Display Total

30 12 42

9 6 15

23 14 37

11 3 14

21 19 40

94 54 148

64% 36%

12% 7%

Based on the data, reporters seem to tweet their personal opinions within news stories at a higher rate than displaying their personal lives in work-related tweets. Notably, Proskow and Haines did not frequently use Twitter individualistically, but did tweet individualized journalistically at high rates. Thus, suggesting that both Proskow and Haines were more prone to

47

blur journalistic and individualistic use rather than using Twitter solely as an individual. Moreover, Bliss tweeted both individualistic and individualized journalistic content at similarly rates, demonstrating that Bliss employs individualistic uses of Twitter to a great extent within the tweets of his personal Twitter account. Most notably, Avery Haines of City News tweeted individualized journalistically at a higher rate than solely journalistically, as 52% of her total tweets (n=71) were coded as Individualized Journalistic. This reveals that Haines does not uphold journalistic norms on Twitter to the same extent as her counterparts and that Haines uses her personal Twitter account to blur journalistic and individualistic uses more than any other reporter. 3.1 Opinion Based News From the tweets coded as Individualized Journalistic, 64% of them consisted of personal opinion embedded in a news story. These tweets appeared to be disseminating the news, however, upon closer inspection, these tweets also alluded to the personal opinion of the news reporter. Thus, these tweets were a blur of both journalistic and individualistic uses of Twitter. An example of this type of tweet can be seen when Jackson Proskow of Global News tweeted: "Err, happy Monday? RT @AnthonyFarnell: Tomorrow's forecast about as miserable as it gets by mid April standards." In this tweet, Proskow is completing two tasks: he is relaying the weather forecast to his followers (disseminating the news) while adding his personal opinion on he feels about this weather forecast ("Err, happy Monday?") Proskow's individualistic use of Twitter is seen within those three words, which add opinion to what might otherwise be a journalistic practice of sharing the weather forecast. Paul Bliss of CTV News enacts another example of personal opinion within a news story in his tweet: "Ont to invest $150mil for tech in classrooms. And, this sure does snd like elxn

48

speech. Long, considering it's not a crowd of party faithful". While engaging in the journalistic practice of real-time reporting and tweeting about a cabinet meeting, Bliss also adds his personal judgment to the tweet by labeling a speech as an "election speech". In this tweet, Bliss is disseminating the news, but also suggesting his personal opinion of the speech, therefore blurring the journalistic and individualistic uses of Twitter. A final example of personal opinion on a news item is demonstrated when Katie Simpson of CP24, tweeted: "Lots of swear words in the ITO.... #robford #topoli #jestsayin" about an Information To Obtain document pertaining to the Rob Ford drug use allegations. Although there may indeed be swear words in the document, this is her opinion of the document and not news directly pertaining to the document. Journalists have a responsibility to uphold the role of nonpartisan gatekeeper of the news. However, in these individualized journalistic tweets, reporters are showcasing their personal bias of the news stories, thus challenging their professional roles as objective gatekeepers. The conception of impartiality, where journalists eliminate their personal opinions from the news, has been a fundamental standard in the journalism profession for years (Kovach & Rosenstiel, 2001; Schudson, 2001). There have been designated spaces in the media for news reporting and separate areas for opinion and commentary. However, the unstructured, open space of Twitter facilitates the public expression of personal commentary within a personal public (Lüders, 2008), thus allowing the blend of both reporting and interpretation. Tweets that demonstrate personal opinion mixed with a news story align with the findings of Lasorsa et al. (2011). Their research revealed biases in journalistic reporting on Twitter. The results of Lasorsa et al. as well as the results of this study demonstrate instances where journalists exhibit non-traditional journalistic practices on Twitter. Journalists defend this

49

intermingling of fact and opinion by emphasizing that news on Twitter is a story that evolves over time and the verification of sources and information takes place as time progresses (Broersma & Graham, 2013). Thus, the nature of Twitter as a platform for sharing information encourages this mixing of fact and opinion in the tweets from the personal Twitter accounts of local television news reporters. Journalists who tweet from their personal Twitter accounts are able to take advantage of the neutral platform of Twitter. By doing so, they do not face the same necessity to uphold their roles as gatekeepers, as they would if writing from an organizational Twitter account (Lasorsa et al., 2012). 3.2 Personal Lives On Display The remaining tweets coded as Individualized Journalistic were used to showcase aspects of the personal lives of the local television news reporters, while still being journalistic in their intentions. For example, Jackson Proskow of Global News, tweeted: "Have we reached "peak beard?" Shave it ain't so. http://bbc.in/1m74rpD ". This tweet demonstrates Proskow's personal interest to his own facial hair, but this tweet is also used journalistically as it disseminates a news story from the BBC. Proskow's beat is politics, thus this tweet about personal hygiene is journalistically off-topic. However it does highlight his personal humour and what he deems personally relevant, as he is personally vested in his own beard. Within the same tweet, Proskow's followers attain a glimpse of his personal interests, as well receive a news story. Another example of a tweet showcasing the personal life of a reporter, while also being journalistic is when Avery Haines of City News tweeted: "So proud to accept 2 RTDNA awards on behalf of the most excellent @CityNews team. pic.twitter.com/C6EnrDUbDI". Journalistically, Haines is promoting City News as a successful news organization in this tweet. However, she is also individualistically revealing her personal and emotional pride upon

50

acceptance of the award. Thus, in this single tweet, Avery is tweeting journalistically by promoting the news organization she works at, and also individualistically, by sharing her personal sense of satisfaction. These types of individualized journalistic tweets reveal personal aspects of the reporters, as well fulfill journalistic uses of Twitter. In these tweets, journalists share information that did not pertain to their news beat but instead revealed aspects of their personal lives. Twitter, as a social media platform, can be used as personal media (Lüders, 2008), where users have a large degree of control over what they communicate and how they do so. Thus, journalists are able to select and present information of personal relevance. As Neuberger et al. (2013) suggest, the decision to tweet stories that showcase one's personal life may be based on their perceptions of their Twitter audience, and what the journalist believes his or her followers want to know about. Twitter offers journalists a unique environment where they are able to communicate freely without being constrained by their organizational standards or traditional journalistic principles. Twitter is thus allowing journalists to be more liberal with their thoughts and opinions (Lasorsa et al., 2012), permitting journalists to take advantage of this method of personal expression and not necessarily stay on-topic journalistically (Hermida, 2013). These individualized journalistic tweets demonstrate how journalists are engaging in Twitter's affordance as a personal public (Lüders, 2008), where information is selected by criteria of personal relevance, rather than journalistic significance (Wu, Hofman, Mason & Watts 2011).

51

Implications This study examined the personal Twitter accounts of local television news reporters and has various implications for research on journalistic Twitter use. The first implication is that previous research assumes that all journalists use Twitter in the same way (Lasorsa et al., 2011; Singer, 2005; Sherwood and Nicholson, 2012). However, this study highlights the differences among the reporters in terms of their journalistic Twitter use. For example, some journalists use their personal Twitter accounts to promote the news, whereas others partake in conversations. Reporters have found different ways to use Twitter, depending on his or her reporting beat or how they use Twitter to fulfill a journalistic task. Another implication is that there are distinct benefits for journalists to use their own personal Twitter accounts. For instance, by tweeting under their own name and not the designation of their newsroom, journalists are able to personalize their content. This is demonstrated in both the categories of Individualistic Twitter use and Individualized Journalistic Twitter use. The final implication of this study is that individuals find their own socially constructed ways of using Twitter, regardless of the functions and features attributed to the platform. This implication is supported by the social construction of technology theory, as put forth by Pinch and Bijker (1984). This theory argues that rather than technology regulating human activity, human actions shape technology. As demonstrated by the findings of this study, each reporter used Twitter in differing ways and it was their human activity that managed how they used Twitter. Moreover, boyd & Ellison (2007) suggest that although Twitter has consistent technological features, their uses and practices vary. The five examined local television news reporters in this study demonstrated these varying techniques by their differing uses of Twitter.

52

Conclusion The findings from this study suggest that journalists do not exclusively use their personal Twitter accounts to tweet journalistically, individualistically or as a synthesis of both categories. As demonstrated in the data, instances of all three types of Twitter use were revealed. Of the data set, 74% of the tweets from the personal Twitter accounts of local television news reporters were coded as Journalistic, 8% of the tweets were coded as Individualistic and 18% of the tweets blurred journalistic and individualistic use. Moreover each reporter used their personal Twitter accounts in very distinct and diverse ways. For example, Jackson Proskow of Global news used Twitter as an extension of his reporting beat and thus engaged in Real-Time Reporting most frequently. Katie Simpson of CP24 used her Twitter account to report the news as well as breaking news. Steven D'Souza of CBC News promoted news content at a high rate, using links as a method of newsroom website promotion. Avery Haines did not use her personal Twitter account to tweet journalistically, but mostly tweeted individualized journalistic content and finally, Paul Bliss used his personal Twitter account more socially than others, either by engaging in journalistic conversations or individualized uses such as sharing personal interests at high rates. This study on the content of the tweets from journalists' personal Twitter accounts reveals that a number of tweets extend beyond factual news stories. The findings of this study demonstrate how journalists are negotiating a platform where the differentiation between professional and personal communication fluctuates, and the roles of journalist and individual are sometimes blurred. Even within the bounds of journalistic twitter use, this study demonstrates variation. This diversification in journalistic Twitter use suggests that Twitter is a communication platform that makes it possible for individuals to interpret professional norms of

53

practice differently. Specifically, these individual reporters had their own accounts and found ways to adapt Twitter to their own personal and professional needs. This study suggests that local television news reporters are primarily using their personal Twitter accounts to tweet journalistically. Thus, they are abiding to the traditional norms and practices as set forth by professional journalism. Journalists on Twitter are able to maintain their roles as non-partisan gatekeepers, as well as demonstrate transparency in their newsgathering. Individualistic uses of Twitter from the personal accounts of local television news reporters are also highlighted in this study. These journalists were able to share personal information with their followers, such as personal hobbies, interests, thoughts and emotions, as well as instances of their day-to-day lives and insights into their private lives. Thus, individuals such as journalists can use Twitter as a platform to foster personal expression. Finally, through the blurring of journalistic and individualistic uses of Twitter, this study demonstrates that journalists mixed facts with opinions and also shared news stories that may not have been journalistically on-topic to their reporting beat, but rather of relevance to their personal lives. These findings suggest that social media may have a variable influence on the traditional gatekeeping role assumed by journalists. Based on this study, journalists are using their personal Twitter accounts in varying ways. The majority of these local television news reporters primarily used Twitter to tweet and promote the news. However, there were also manifestations of journalistic conversations and crowdsourcing. Thus, news reporters are using their personal Twitter accounts to tweet journalistically, but there is variation in how they use Twitter for journalistic purposes. When using Twitter individualistically, journalists are having personal conversations as well as remarking on their daily routines, personal hobbies and interests and private lives.

54

References Armstrong, C., & Gao, F. (2010). Now tweet this: How news organizations use Twitter. Electronic News, 4(4), 218-235. Baym, N. K. (2010). Personal connections in the digital age. Cambridge: Polity. Bhagwat, S., & Goutam, A. (2013). Development of social networking sites and their role in business with special reference to Facebook. Journal of Business and Management, 6(5), 15-28. boyd, D. M. & Ellison, N. B. (2007). Social Network Sites: Definition, History and Scholarship. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(1), article 1. Boyle, K., & Zuegner, C. (2012). News staffs use twitter to interact with readers. Newspaper Research Journal, 33(4), 6-19. Budd, R. W., Thorp, R. K., & Donohew, L. (1967). Content analysis of communications. New York: Macmillan. Brabham, D. C. (2008). Crowdsourcing as a model for problem solving an introduction and cases. Convergence: the international journal of research into new media technologies, 14(1), 75-90. Broersma, M., & Graham, T. (2013). Twitter as a news source: How Dutch and British newspapers used tweets in their news coverage, 2007-2011. Journalism Practice, 7(4), 446-464. Bruno, N. (2011). Tweet first, verify later: How real-time information is changing the coverage of worldwide crisis events. Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism Bruns, A. (2011). How Long Is A Tweet? Information, Communication & Society, 1-29.

55

Burgess, J., & Bruns, A. (2012). Twitter archives and the challenges of" Big Social Data" for media and communication research. M/C Journal, 15(5). Burton, S., & Soboleva, A. (2011). Interactive or reactive? Marketing with Twitter. Journal of Consumer Marketing, 28(7), 491-499. Canter, L. (2013). The interactive spectrum: The use of social media in UK regional newspapers. Convergence, 19(4), 472-495. Cozma, R., & Chen, K. (2013). What's In A Tweet? Journalism Practice, 7(1), 33-46. Cremedas, M., & Lysak, S. (2011). New Media Skills Competency Expected of TV Reporters and Producers: A Survey. Electronic News, 5(1), 41-55. Domingo, D., Quandt, T., Heinonen, A., Paulussen, S., Singer, J., & Vujnovic M. (2008). Participatory journalism practices in the media and beyond: An international comparative study of initiatives in online newspapers. Journalism Practice, 2(3), 326-342. Ellison, N. B., & Boyd, D. (2013). Sociality through social network sites. The Oxford handbook of internet studies, 151. Ellison, N.B., Steinfield, C., & Lampe, C. (2007). The benefits of Facebook "friends": social capital and college students' use of online social network sites. Journal of ComputerMediated Communication, 12(4), 1143 ­ 1168. Farhi, P. (2009). The Twitter explosion. American Journalism Review, 21(3), 26-31. Greer, C., & Ferguson, D. (2011). Following Local Television News Personalities on Twitter: A Uses and Gratifications Approach to Social Networking. Electronic News, 5(3), 145-157. Greer, J., & Yan, Y. (2011). Newspapers Connect with Readers Through Multiple Digital Tools. Newspaper Research Journal, 32(4), 83-97.

56

Harrison, J. (2010). User-generated content and gatekeeping at the BBC hub. Journalism Studies,11(2), 243-256. Hermida, A., & Thurman, N. (2008). A clash of cultures: The integration of user-generated content within professional journalistic frameworks at British newspaper websites. Journalism Practice, 2(3), 343-356. Hermida, A., Fletcher, F., & Korell., & Logan, D. (2012). Share, Like, Recommend: Decoding the Social Med News Consumer. Journalism Studies, 13(5-6), 815-824. Hermida, A. (2013). #Journalism: Reconfiguring Journalism Research About Twitter, One Tweet at a Time. Digital Journalism, 1(3), 295-313. Hermida, A. (2010). From TV to Twitter: How ambient news became ambient journalism. M/C Journal, 13, 1-8. Hermida, A. (2010a). Twittering the News: The Emergence of Ambient Journalism. Journalism Practice, 4(3), 297-308. Hoffman, D., & Novak, T. (1996). Marketing in hypermedia computer-mediated environments: conceptual foundations. Journal of Marketing, (60) 3, 50-68. Honey, C., & Herring, S. C. (2009, January). Beyond microblogging: Conversation and collaboration via Twitter. In System Sciences, 2009. HICSS'09. 42nd Hawaii International Conference on (pp. 1-10). IEEE. Hsieh, H. F., & Shannon, S. E. (2005). Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. Qualitative health research, 15(9), 1277-1288. Jameson, D. A. (2014). Crossing Public-Private and Personal-Professional Boundaries How Changes in Technology May Affect CEOs' Communication. Business and Professional Communication Quarterly, 77(1), 7-30.

57

Java, A., Song, X., Finin, T., & Tseng, B. (2007) Why We Twitter: understanding microblogging usage and communities. Paper presented at the Joint 9th International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, San Jose, CA. Kane, K., Robinson-Combre, J., & Berge, Z. L. (2010). Tapping into social networking:: Collaborating enhances both knowledge management and e-learning. Vine, 40(1), 62-70. Kovach, B., & Rosentiel, T. (2001). "The Elements of Journalism". New York: Crown Publishers. Kerrick, J. S. (1959). The Inverted Pyramid Style and Attitude Change. Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 36(4), 479-482. Kwak, H., Lee, C., Park, H., & Moon, S. (2010, April 26-30). What is Twitter, a social network or a news media? Paper presented at the 19th international conference on WWW, Raleigh, NC, USA. Lasorsa, D., Lewis, S., & Holton, A. (2011). Normalizing Twitter. Journalism Studies, 13, 19-36. Lerman, K., & Ghosh, R. (2010). Information Contagion: An Empirical Study of the Spread of News on Digg and Twitter Social Networks. ICWSM, 10, 90-97. Lindkvist, K. (1981). Approaches to textual analysis. In K. E. Rosengren (Ed.), Advances in content analysis (pp. 23-41). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. Lüders, M. (2008). Conceptualizing personal media. New Media & Society,10(5), 683-702. Lysak, S., Cremedas, M., & Wolf, J. (2012). Facebook and Twitter in the Newsroom: How and Why Local Television News is Getting Social With Viewers? Electronic News, 6(4), 187207. Marwick, A., & boyd, D. (2011). To See and Be Seen: Celebrity Practice on Twitter. Convergence: The International Journal of Research into New Media Technologies. 17(2),

58

139-158. McTavish, D., & Pirro, E.-B. (1990). Contextual content analysis. Quality and Quantity, 24, 245265 Meikle, G., & Young, S. (2012). Media convergence: Networked digital media in everyday life. Palgrave Macmillan. Messner, M., Linke, M., & Esford, A. (2011). ``Shoveling Tweets: an analysis of the 390 microblogging engagement of traditional news organizations'', paper presented to the International Symposium on Online Journalism, Austin, TX, April. Neuberger, C., vom Hofe, H., & Nuernbergk, C. (2013). The Use of Twitter by Professional Journalists: Results of a Newsroom Survey in Germany. Weller, K., Bruns, A., Burgess, J., & Mahrt, M, Twitter and Society(346-257). New York: Peter Lang Publishing Palser, B. (2009). Hitting the tweet spot. American Journalism Review, 31, 54. Papacharissi, Z. (2012). Without you, I'm nothing: Performances of the self on Twitter. International Journal of Communication, 6, 1989-2006. Papacharissi, Z., & de Fatima, O. (2012). Affective News and Networked Publics: The Rhythms of News Storytelling on #Egypt. Journal of Communication, 62(2), 266-282. Pfeil, U., Arjan, R., & Zaphiris, P. (2009). Age differences in online social networking: A study of user profiles and the social capital divide among teenagers and older users in MySpace. Computers in Human Behavior, 25, 643-654. Pinch, T. J., & Bijker, W. E. (1984). The social construction of facts and artefacts: or how the Sociology of science and the sociology of technology might benefit each other. Social Studies of science, 399-441.

59

Powell, J. (2009). 33 million people in the room: How to create, influence, and run a successful business with social networking. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Financial Times Press/Pearson. Reich, Z. (2012). Different practices, similar logic: Comparing news reporting across political, financial, and territorial beats. The International Journal of Press/Politics, 17(1), 76-99. Schudson, M. (2001). The Objectivity Norm in American Journalism. Journalism Studies, 2(2), 149170. Sheffer, M. & Schultz, B. (2010). An Exploratory Study of How Twitter Is Affecting Sports Journalism. International Journal of Sport Communication, 3, 472­484. Schultz, B., & Sheffer, M. L. (2012). Personal Branding Still in Future For Most Newspaper Reporters. Newspaper Research Journal, 33(4). Sherwood, M., & Nicholson, M. (2013). Web 2.0 platforms and the work of newspaper sport journalists. Journalism, 14(7), 942-959. doi:10.1177/1464884912458662 Singer, J. (2005) The political j-blogger: `Normalizing' a new media form to fit old norms and practices. Journalism, 6(2), 173­198. Soloski J (1989) News reporting and professionalism: some constraints on the reporting of the news. Media, Culture & Society 11: 207­228. Stassen, W. (2010). Your news in 140 characters: Exploring the role of social media in journalism. Global Media Journal: African Edition, 4, 1-16. Tapscott, D. (2008). Grown up digital: How the next generation is changing your world. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. Tesch, R. (1990).Qualitative research: Analysis types and software tools. Bristol, PA: Falmer Tufekci, Z. (2011). New media and the people-powered uprisings. Technology Review.

60

Wasike, B. (2013). Framing News in 140 Characters: How Social Media Editors Frame the News and Interact with Audiences via Twitter. Global Media Journal, 6(1), 5-23. Weber, R. P. (1990). Basic content analysis. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. Wu, S., Hofman, J. M., Mason, W. A., & Watts, D. J. (2011, March). Who says what to whom on twitter. In Proceedings of the 20th international conference on World wide web (pp. 705-714). ACM. Zhao, D., & Rosson, M. B. (2009, May). How and why people Twitter: the role that micro-blogging plays in informal communication at work. In Proceedings of the ACM 2009 international conference on Supporting group work (pp. 243-252). ACM.

61

Appendix A: Tweets from Local Television News Reporters
Name Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Twitter Handle JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal News Organiz ation Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Date 31Mar14 31Mar14 Tweet Postal rate jumps 35% today http://globalnews.ca/news/1240400/ postal-rate-jumps-35-today/ ... `Look at how low he set the bar:' Anything But Rob Ford campaign begins http://globalnews.ca/news/1241292/l ook-at-how-low-he-set-the-baranything-but-rob-ford-campaignbegins/ ... RT Here's how it can look like when engineers are working on the Radio antenna on the Empire State Building. The Calgary Sun wins it for best April Fools day joke: http://www.calgarysun.com/2014/03 /31/meet-the-calgary-suns-newboss ... Police positively identify body of missing Whitby man Jeffrey Boucher http://globalnews.ca/news/1243288/ police-positively-identify-body-ofmissing-whitby-man-jeffreyboucher/ ... RT Mayor Rob Ford more than an hour late for city council meeting that deliberates on Porter's jet proposal. #TOpoli RT Mayor Ford's chief of staff says Rob Ford "isn't feeling well, hoping he will be in for the afternoon session" of council #TOpoli (For the record, I will be at council a little later on today...) At City Hall where Mayor Rob Ford silently walked to the elevator. He hurt his back lifting weights on Friday (according to his driver) Doing quick release of 'holds' before the Porter debate resumes. On the Porter item, there are still 7 councillors waiting to ask questions of staff -- that's before speakers, motions & debate. Toronto council to discuss recall legislation for elected officials http://globalnews.ca/news/1243354/t oronto-council-to-discuss-recalllegislation-for-elected-officials/ ... Journalis tic/Indivi dualistic Journalisti c Journalisti c Category Promotion Code Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of Newsroom Website

Promotion

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

31Mar14 01Apr14 01Apr14

Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of Newsroom Website

JProskowG lobal

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14

Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Personal Lives On Display Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Promotion of Newsroom Website

62

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 02Apr14 02Apr14 02Apr14 02Apr14 02Apr14 02Apr14 02Apr14 02Apr14 02Apr14

Mammoliti: "the majority of the email's that I'm getting are from women who love the expansion" Cllr Peter Milczyn "I don't have any lavalife or Ashley Madison emails to read you...." RT Liberal MP Karygiannis resigns, plans to run for Toronto city counil http://wp.me/p2Y4rw-5dEA Toronto City Council now looking at the food truck issue Cllr Mike Layton interrupts. Asks the Mayor be ordered to remove his "FORD FOR MAYOR" bumper sticker from the clip board he's carrying Earlier Mayor Ford was asked what his position was on food trucks. He said "I'll tell you later..." PSA-style ad puts Rob Ford's Words in the Mouth of a Child: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v= 63zuzSuPwH4&app=desktop ... $4M requested to shore up Toronto pot hole repair costs http://globalnews.ca/news/1245736/ 4m-requested-to-shore-up-torontopot-hole-repair-costs/ ... Should Toronto launch a bit to host the 2026 World Cup? http://globalnews.ca/news/1246337/ should-toronto-launch-a-bit-to-hostthe-2026-world-cup/ ... WATCH: video puts Rob Ford's words in the mouth of a child http://globalnews.ca/news/1245835/ psa-style-video-puts-rob-fordswords-in-the-mouth-of-a-child/ ... RT Rob Ford is lone vote against motion to name prominent street after Nelson Mandela. #TOpoli By my count, there are currently 46 candidates registered to run for Mayor of Toronto. http://app.toronto.ca/vote/searchCan didateByOfficeType.do?criteria.offi ceType=1 ... OUCH. What's more likely to happen? Being struck by lightning or the Leafs making the playoffs? http://globalnews.ca/news/1246518/ blog-whats-more-likely-to-happenlightning-strike-or-leafs-making-theplayoffs/ ... Tomorrow Olivia Chow will apparently be on BBC News. Rob Ford votes against honouring Nelson Mandela, then asks for revote

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting Opinion Based News Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of Newsroom Website Opinion Based News Real-Time Reporting Opinion Based News

JProskowG lobal

Journalisti c

Promotion

JProskowG lobal

Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto

02Apr14

Individualize d Journalistic

Opinion Based News

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

02Apr14 02Apr14

Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n Promotion

Real-Time Reporting Promotion of Newsroom

63

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

02Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14

JProskowG lobal

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

http://globalnews.ca/news/1246727/ rob-ford-votes-against-honouringnelson-mandela-then-asks-for-revote/ ... #topoli #robford It's kind of like 'Free Willy,' but with a lobster. http://globalnews.ca/news/1246755/l obster-found-abandoned-in-ontarioparking-lot-may-get-flight-home-toWATCH: Bill Clinton jokes about Rob Ford on Jimmy Kimmel show http://globalnews.ca/news/1247825/ bill-clinton-jokes-about-rob-ford-onjimmy-kimmel-show/ ... Mayor Ford still not at city hall -we're told he's on the way (tho council is still meeting) Apparently Mayor Ford is now here -- came straight up to council, but is no longer in his seat. On The Star report about the OPP and Project Brazen 2 Doug Ford thanked the opp "for doing a proper investigation..." Doug Ford wouldn't say whether the mayor had ever been subject to an extortion attempt I asked Doug Ford if the mayor had "opened himself up" to an extortion attempt - He said "man, you're good at spinning that" Press Gallery Prez @DavidNickle writes about Safety at City Hall: the three-sided story http://www.insidetoronto.com/newsstory/4445145-the-city-safety-atcity-hall-the-three-sided-story/ ... Council has decided to vote now on BMO field expansion... here we go. Deputy Mayor Norm Kelly has asked council to reopen the Mandela & Olympics motions so the Mayor can fix his votes from yesterday. Cllr McConnel suggests a "timed" vote to allow the Mayor to reconsider his 'no' vote on Mandela/Olympics from yesterday Council votes 34-9 on re-opening Mandela vote Council votes 38-5 to re-open vote congratulating Canada's olympic/paralympic athletes Council now re-voting on the Mandela/Olympics motions There are currently *4* city councillors on their feet figuring out

Website

Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

Opinion Based News Promotion of Newsroom Website Opinion Based News Opinion Based News Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Opinion Based News Reporting The News

Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News

03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr-

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio

Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting

64

w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14

how to re-vote / objecting to re-vote, etc. Adam Vaughan challenges the chair -- Shiner rises on a point of order -then Fletcher stands up. Cllr Fletcher interrupts the vote: "if you make a mistake.. fix it at the time, that's what we do" HERE. WE. GO. Voting on the Mandela motion. Second time a charm: Council votes UNANIMOUSLY in favour of Nelson Mandela motion. Council now votes UNANIMOUSLY in favour of olympic/paralympic athletes, after Mayor Ford "corrects" yesterday's NO vote. Mayor Rob Ford rises to "thank all the councillors for their support" Davis rises to question acceptable practice on when you must ask to revote/correct a vote. Davis: "We have given an opportunity for a member of this chamber to correct.. .what was not a misunderstanding in my opinion" "put the fangs back in!" shouts Mammoliti at Davis. Cllr Davis asks the city clerk to go on the record with a ruling on when a vote can be re-opened/corrected and now we're back on to the food truck debate. BREAKING > judge lifts the publication ban on remaining Project Brazen 2 documents. BREAKING> Newly released court docs outline threats allegedly made by Lisi during attempt to recover Ford video pic.twitter.com/mMGWhqTiCH READ MORE: Rob Ford `going mad' amid `crack video' allegations: documents http://globalnews.ca/news/1248461/ rob-ford-going-mad-amid-crackvideo-allegations-documents/ ... Meanwhile Rob Ford is posing for pictures in his office lobby. pic.twitter.com/Aba2fZ4dsQ BREAKING> From the ITO, Rob Ford is "going mad" about the video. pic.twitter.com/7IPOfgaWF7 Doug Ford says he believes the

n Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Opinion Based News Opinion Based News Real-Time Reporting

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News Reporting The News

JProskowG lobal

Journalisti c

Promotion of Newsroom Website Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News Real-Time

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global

03Apr14 03Apr14 03-

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News

65

Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14

mayor was a victim of extortion. I asked Doug Ford why he claims to have never discussed the crack video with the mayor. He suggested that I should run for mayor. Toronto Police spokesperson says Project Brazen 2 investigation is still ongoing READ THE DOCS: Rob Ford `going mad' amid `crack video' allegations: documents http://globalnews.ca/news/1248461/ rob-ford-going-mad-amid-crackvideo-allegations-documents/ ... Mayor Ford had nothing to say as he left his office. Toronto Police Spokesperson: ""Project brazen 2 is an ongoing investigation. It's not over." OPP confirm Project Brazen 2 effectively 'stalled' by lack of further evidence but TPS says investigation still ongoing. we basically don't have any further role to play at this point" an OPP spokesperson told Global News Toronto cops: "ongoing investigation, its not over. When it is we expect we'll sit down with OPP and the crown to decide on the next steps" Clear as mud, right? The take-away is that the investigation is still ongoing - Evidence to date has not warranted additional charges. Who's in charge of Rob Ford `crack video' investigation? Police don't agree http://globalnews.ca/news/1247900/ opp-hands-project-brazen-back-totoronto-police-report/ ... NEW: Spokesperson for the crown says police are responsible for investigating and laying criminal charges. CROWN: "The role of the Crown is to provide legal advice to police if requested. [no] comment on whether legal advice has been sought" CROWN: " it is police who decide whether an investigation will continue or be concluded." And finally, from the crown: "We do not comment on the status of police investigations." Get your 'brelly ready. Significant rainfall heading toward southern Ontario http://globalnews.ca/news/1249006/

c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n Promotion

Reporting Opinion Based News Real-Time Reporting Promotion of Newsroom Website Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Opinion Based News Promotion of own work

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Promotion of Newsroom Website

66

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

03Apr14 04Apr14 04Apr14 04Apr14 04Apr14

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto

04Apr14

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

04Apr14 04Apr14 04Apr14 04Apr14 04Apr14 04Apr14 04Apr14

significant-rainfall-heading-towardsouthern-ontario/ ... RT Restaurant owner's defamation lawsuit against Rob Ford headed to Appeal Court http://ow.ly/vplnl #TOpoli RT @jamesarmstrong7: Word of the day is a good one: omphaloskepsis pic.twitter.com/C6SWmPUz7u" Food trucks: Council adopts new rules but with some restrictions http://globalnews.ca/news/1249634/ food-trucks-council-adopts-newrules-but-with-some-restrictions/ ... Olivia Chow email to supporters soliciting donations: "Think of your gift as part of the say goodbye to Rob fund." #TOpoli New Attack ad aimed at John Tory. Nearly identical content to last Chow 'reality check' email https://www.youtube.com/watch?v= _Bt3gQBWWT0&feature=youtu.be ... Mayor Rob Ford to hold re-election fundraiser in Vaughan: http://www.yorkregion.com/newsstory/4448631-toronto-mayor-robford-to-host-re-election-fundraiserin-vaughan/ ... RT @annhui: Exclusive: Mayor Ford has been approached to do a reality show: http://bit.ly/Oi8DnB Project Runway Extension #cityhallrealityshows RT But we are looking at around 2028 before a DRL opens (if ever). RT Ballpark cost of the eastern leg of a downtown relief line would be $3.2b, according to a briefing by transit experts. RT I will be at Rogers Centre tonight watching @BlueJays beat the Yankees in the home opener. #GOJAYSGO #TOpoli #Toronto Is there a cat walking on a keyboard at TTC control @bradttc? pic.twitter.com/IpaXBp9TcA Mayor Rob Ford approached for reality show -- Vote for your favourite #cityhallrealityshows idea http://globalnews.ca/news/1251293/ mayor-rob-ford-approached-to-starin-a-reality-tv-series-report/ ... ...

Journalisti c Individual istic Journalisti c

Promotion

Individualist ic Promotion

Promotion of Newsroom Website Personal Interest Promotion of Newsroom Website Reporting The News Reporting The News

Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n

Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n

Reporting The News

Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Promotion

Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic Crowdsourci ng

Promotion of Newsroom Website Opinion Based News Opinion Based News Opinion Based News Reporting The News Personal Lives On Display Crowd Sourcing

67

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

04Apr14 07Apr14

JProskowG lobal

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

07Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

07Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14

I hear Moron St. is really up and coming MT @tpsofficerrob: Going to @BlueJays game - you don't want one of these pic.twitter.com/S9sd18aN7g" In which the New York Times Ethicist tackles the motives behind the Rob Ford selfie. http://mobile.nytimes.com/2014/04/ 06/magazine/the-selfishselfie.html?_r=0&referrer= ... "What happened Saturday night is not uncommon for someone who is running for office" says Frank Di Giorgio of Mayor Rob Ford "To be brutally honest, I thought he was in a state where he could drive" says Di Giorgio of the Mayor Major gridlock expected as city outlines road reconstruction plan http://globalnews.ca/news/1255397/ major-gridlock-expected-as-cityoutlines-road-reconstructionplan/ ... While working on a decidedly nonRob Ford story about traffic today, Rob Ford & driver pulled up at the traffic light I was standing at. I gave them a wave. They waved back, and rolled down the window to say hi. Sometimes Toronto feels like a really big small town. The rain is almost here: http://globalnews.ca/toronto/weather /CAXX0504/radar ... Today's lesson from the internets. Be careful what you crop. pic.twitter.com/QKqUsA7BT2 Smells like spring, feels very much like winter. #dlws Liberal party to form the next provincial government in Quebec http://globalnews.ca/news/1255466/ quebec-election-outcome-far-fromcertain-following-viciouscampaign/ ... RT @Global_Montreal: Global News is now projecting the @LiberalQuebec party will form the next government in Quebec #QC2014 MT @1800222tips: Know him? Anonymous tips 1-800-222-8477. Wanted for pushing person off Main Street subway platform pic.twitter.com/yV25KQZ7Qb Today's TTC experiment: left 20 minutes late to skip to queen

Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n

Personal Lives On Display Reporting The News

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Promotion of Newsroom Website Personal Lives On Display Personal Lives On Display Promotion of Newsroom Website Personal Lives On Display Daily Chatter Promotion of Newsroom Website Reporting The News

Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual istic Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

Individualize d Journalistic Individualist ic Promotion

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko

JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News

07Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr-

Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualist ic

JProskowG lobal

Journalisti c

Reporting The News

JProskowG lobal

Individual istic

Daily Chatter

68

w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w JProskowG lobal

Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14

JProskowG lobal

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

JProskowG lobal

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

JProskowG lobal

streetcar rush. Much faster trip, no crowding, still made It to work on time. Jimmy Kimmel's documentary on Rob Ford in the wild: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v= WCusrXNN3U4&feature=youtu.be ... Rob Ford calls Bloor Street closure for Open Streets initiative `chaos' http://globalnews.ca/news/1257671/ rob-ford-calls-bloor-street-closurefor-open-streets-initiative-chaos/ ... Interesting. Canadian NEXUS Card holders will now have to use the US pre-clearance (fingerprint) machines at airports. No more iris scans. Psychologist: "Why your selfies with Rob Ford are encouraging him" http://globalnews.ca/news/1257254/ why-your-selfies-with-rob-ford-areencouraging-him/ ... Is Loblaw finally ready to sell groceries online? http://globalnews.ca/news/1258164/i s-loblaw-finally-ready-to-sellgroceries-online/ ... The newest member of Rob Ford's campaign team? Ben Johnson. #topoli Ben Johnson & a Trailer Park Boy working on Ford campaign MT @reporterdonpeat: "Full support!" pic.twitter.com/HHAFtAz0by Doug Ford angered over fake `win a date' with his daughter contest http://globalnews.ca/news/1258436/ doug-ford-angered-over-fake-win-adate-with-daughter-contest/ ... RT The Open Streets initiative could shut down 10 km of Bloor Street. http://ow.ly/vA2c4 @JProskowGlobal reports. #Topoli The newest member of Rob Ford's campaign team? Ben Johnson http://globalnews.ca/news/1258553/t he-newest-member-of-rob-fordscampaign-team-ben-johnson/ ... Caught up with an old friend for dinner last night. pic.twitter.com/czHFXYVnCC Rob Ford talks transit: More subways, no more streetcars http://globalnews.ca/news/1260779/ rob-ford-talks-transit-moresubways-no-more-streetcars/ ... Mayor Rob Ford: 'I'll tell you one thing, I won't get in a streetcar." http://globalnews.ca/news/1260779/ rob-ford-talks-transit-moresubways-no-more-streetcars/ ...

Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

Opinion Based News Promotion of own work Opinion Based News Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of Newsroom Website Reporting The News Reporting The News Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of own work Promotion of Newsroom Website Private life Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of Newsroom Website

Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

Journalisti c

Promotion

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

Journalisti c Journalisti c

Promotion

Promotion

Individual istic Journalisti c

Individualist ic Promotion

Journalisti c

Promotion

69

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

09Apr14 09Apr14 10Apr14

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Rob Ford plays soccer, scores two goals on young goalie http://globalnews.ca/news/1260958/ rob-ford-plays-soccer-scores-twogoals-on-young-goalie/ ... RT @AnthonyFarnell: Tomorrow's balmy high of +17 will be the warmest it's been since Halloween day. RT Peak at 4 new @TOMayorFord bobbleheads @3rd Ed., Special Edition, @jimmykimmel , Hollywood #RobFordBobblehead #TOpoli pic.twitter.com/KrLzYKNOWQ With Mayor Ford at the launch of a youth cricket tournament. pic.twitter.com/qZyIMV7tlg Meanwhile... RT @Soknacki2014: The most high tech thing the Mayor is involved in shouldn't be surveillance. #topoli pic.twitter.com/aMsiPD45CV Quite the scrum with Mayor Ford. He says he filmed a new YouTube video with Jimmy Kimmel yesterday. Ford says his campaign has raised a lot of money but won't release specifics. Speaking with reporters, Mayor Ford hinted that some sort of weight loss / fitness challenge is in the works. Says he's down 40 lbs. Thinking about my colleagues in public broadcasting. Not an easy day. `I was in a drunken stupor': Veep star quotes Rob Ford in defense of nude photo http://globalnews.ca/news/1263055/i -was-in-a-drunken-stupor-veep-starquotes-rob-ford-in-defense-of-nudephoto/ ... CBC cuts 657 jobs and slashes $130 million from its budget http://globalnews.ca/news/1263054/ cbc-cuts-657-jobs-and-slashes-130million-from-its-budget/ ... Waiting for Olivia Chow to speak to reporters. Now hearing Mayor Ford may be holding a 2:30 press conference as well. Olivia Chow: I am asking the people to tell me what infuriates them about gridlock in the city. Where are the traffic jams...? Chow: next week I will announce a way to move people faster.

Journalisti c

Promotion

Promotion of Newsroom Website Reporting The News Reporting The News

Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n

Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

Reporting The News Opinion Based News Opinion Based News Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Personal Lives On Display Promotion of Newsroom Website

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14

Journalisti c

Promotion

Promotion of Newsroom Website Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n

70

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 11Apr14 11Apr14 11Apr14 11Apr14

"What infuriates drivers?" Asks Chow. pic.twitter.com/GVPorxF8tB Chow says she endorses a handgun ban in Toronto. "I don't understand why people need handguns in the city" Olivia Chow stunned as she hears reports about Jim Flaherty. RT Former finance minister Jim Flaherty passes away: reports http://ow.ly/vEGe3 #cdnpoli RT LIVE STREAM: Jim Flaherty passes away at 64: reports http://ow.ly/vEGhC #cdnpoli http://ow.ly/vEH9u RT Devastated to hear news of my friend Jim Flaherty passing. My prayers go out to Christine Elliot & family. The Ford family is heart broken Mayor Rob Ford has cancelled a planned press conference on city business. Waiting at his office to see if he will speak. "I am shattered by the news of Jim Flaherty's sudden passing." Says John Tory in a statement. RT @TorontoComms: #CityofTO flags at civic bldgs will be flown at half-mast to recognize the passing of hon. Jim Flaherty." We're told Mayor Ford will make a statement about Jim Flaherty shortly. Mayor Ford visibly emotional as he speaks about Jim Flaherty. pic.twitter.com/RF5LkmRi2T Mayor Ford's voice is quivering as he reads this statement. "He kept the country on track" Mayor Ford fighting back tears. "We love you Jim. We'll miss you." There's a new Ford Nation video out. This one, unofficial - feat. an auto-tuned @robyndoolittle http://youtu.be/JF9jsI8id7E (h/t @cecchini640) Mayoral candidate Karen Stintz will be holding a 10am annct about her plans to use technology to reduce congestion. Karen Stintz wants to use U of T research into 'smart traffic lights' to cut travel times by 25% "He will be missed" says Stintz of Jim Flaherty

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of Newsroom Website Reporting The News

Promotion

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Opinion Based News Reporting The News Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

71

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

11Apr14 11Apr14 11Apr14 11Apr14

JProskowG lobal

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

11Apr14 11Apr14 11Apr14

JProskowG lobal

JProskowG lobal

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

11Apr14 11Apr14 12Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14

JProskowG lobal

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

"Our current Mayor's solution to congestion is to cancel the $1.2bln streetcar order" says Stintz. RT @m_layton: Against the advice of Toronto Public Heath, Ex Place board voted 4-3 to no longer host electronic music events. Giorgio Mammoliti just put out a press release about EDM at Exhibition Place. Titled (in all caps) "LET'S ALL TAKE A CHILL PILL FOR NOW" New York Times article on the "Dreaming of Rob Ford" monologue that will open in a former adult cinema http://mobile.nytimes.com/blogs/arts beat/2014/04/11/mike-daisey-willpresent-dreaming-of-rob-fordonstage-in-torontofestival/?partner=rss&emc=rss ... RT @abrasigndesign: Mayor Rob Ford Loves Pitas & Abracadabra! #BOOM! http://mylc.co/EjqkI pic.twitter.com /XTLEXPHpAW RT State funeral will be held for Jim Flaherty Wednesday in Toronto http://globalnews.ca/news/1264776/ ottawa-mourns-following-suddendeath-of-jim-flaherty/ ... Are we the only ones who read the memo? RT @MarkCarcGlobal @ConsumerSOS & @JProskowGlobal have the same fashion sense pic.twitter.com/9CE2t8pgry MT @Teriyaki_Exp: Look who stopped by to help us open our brand new location in Toronto Rob Ford is on board http://fb.me/6udyTp4Al Rob Ford's a celebrity, so how do other candidates get attention? http://globalnews.ca/news/1266181/ rob-fords-a-celebrity-so-how-doother-candidates-get-attention/ ... RT @michellejobin: Severe thunderstorm WARNINGS now in effect for Windsor & SarniaLambton areas http://bit.ly/1ez9wzf Err, happy Monday? RT @AnthonyFarnell: Tomorrow's forecast about as miserable as it gets by mid April standards. Stop automatically disclosing suicide attempts: privacy czar to cops http://globalnews.ca/news/1268606/ suicide-attempt-police-disclosurecpic-cavoukian/ ...

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n

Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News Reporting The News

Journalisti c

Reporting The News

Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

Personal Lives On Display Promotion of Newsroom Website Personal Lives On Display

Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic

Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

Opinion Based News Promotion of own work Promotion of Newsroom Website Opinion Based News Promotion of own work

Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Promotion

Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

72

Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto

14Apr14

Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto

14Apr14

Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto

14Apr14

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

14Apr14 14Apr14

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 15Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Here's the documentary I did on 'suicide profiling' earlier this year for @GlobalTV16x9 http://globalnews.ca/news/1147336/ suicide-profiling-at-us-borderinvestigated/ ... Jimmy Kimmel appears on Rob Ford's show, dressed as Rob Ford, when he appeared on Kimmel's show: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v= 6zzh3DUGwIY&list=UUc-15ND8ry-tpHV49CGUiw ... AMBER ALERT> Missing 8 yearold boy in Mississauga. - Picture & details: http://globalnews.ca/news/1269017/ peel-police-looking-for-boy-insuspected-parental-abductioncase/ ... "Six Degrees of David Soknacki" https://www.youtube.com/watch?v= bnQgRZCBzh0 ... GRRRRR.... Don't put away your winter jackets yet: Snow, ice on its way http://globalnews.ca/news/1269412/ dont-put-away-your-winter-jacketsyet-snow-ice-on-its-way/ ... MT @JeremyGlobalTV: BREAKING: Structural collapse @ gas stn, Argentia Rd/Winston Churchill Blvd. High winds. pic.twitter.com/kcRjRDq6Ys" RT Developing story: http://ow.ly/vM8ai Missing boy found safe in Vaughan. RT UPDATED: http://ow.ly/vM87m Wynne plans to spend $29B on transit but won't divulge revenue tools yet It's a little misty out there right now. RT We're currently experiencing an outage in the west end & are investigating the cause. Details to follow as they become available. #darkto Have we reached "peak beard?" Shave it ain't so. http://bbc.in/1m74rpD RT Now I'm off to the Globe and Mail to join their investigative team. I'm so excited for the new challenges coming my way. Toronto's executive committee to consider pay raises next week http://globalnews.ca/news/1274419/t

Journalisti c

Promotion

Promotion of own work

Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n

Reporting The News

Journalisti c

Promotion

Promotion of Newsroom Website

Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic

Reporting The News Opinion Based News

News Disseminatio n Promotion

Reporting The News

Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual istic Journalisti c

Promotion

Individualist ic News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of Newsroom Website Daily Chatter Reporting The News

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Personal Lives On Display Opinion Based News Promotion of own work

73

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14

orontos-executive-committee-toconsider-pay-raises-next-week/ ... Mayor Ford says it's "not a very good day" as he walks past reporters. He's heading to Jim Flaherty's funeral later. The mayor is wearing a green tie in honour of his good friend, Flaherty. Rob Ford, Doug Ford and Diane Ford will all be attending Jim Flaherty's funeral today. #topoli Mayor Ford, his wife Renata and Stockwell Day all just left the Mayor's office for Flaherty funeral. Live coverage: Jim Flaherty's state funeral http://globalnews.ca/news/1274551/l ive-coverage-jim-flahertys-statefuneral/ ... "We're not sending a rocket to Mars ... we're just opening a few streets to people" says the backer of Open Streets (Bloor) project. Today: Rob Ford launches campaign with first rally. Tory, Chow holding policy announcements. Flight MH370: Canadian flight simulator company fires instructor who appeared on CNN http://globalnews.ca/news/1275811/ flight-mh370-canadian-flightsimulator-company-fires-instructorwho-appeared-on-cnn/ ... Sarah Thomson issues press release in support of marijuana legalization, while simultaneously vowing not to smoke crack cocaine if elected. RT @STARHistoricPix: 10/23/73 Unfinished @TourCNTower in fog. The #CNTower, seen from the top of #CommerceCourt. At the congress centre ahead of Rob Ford's campaign launch. They're already blasting "eye of the tiger" Ford campaign launch includes this fire truck. "Saving the taxpayers from getting burned" Randy Ford is personally setting up balloons for the stage. Ford campaign launch has capacity of 5,000 So. Many. Bobbleheads.

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News Real-Time Reporting Promotion of Newsroom Website Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News Promotion of Newsroom Website

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News

17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr-

Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio

Real-Time Reporting Personal Lives On Display Opinion Based News Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Opinion Based News Real-Time Reporting

Rob Ford novelty foam finger.

74

w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 Ford for mayor travel/beer cups Doug Ford says Rob bought the fire truck at auction for $4,000 Here's the size of the venue tonight. The back of the Ford for Mayor bumper stickers includes a list of accomplishments. The firefighters union is very unhappy with Ford's use of a fire truck as a prop. Thousands expected at Rob Ford reelection campaign launch tonight http://globalnews.ca/news/1276347/t housands-expected-at-rob-ford-reelection-campaign-launchtonight/ ... The Congress Centre is actually full of volunteers already working on Ford's campaign. Doug & Randy have their hands full too. I've spotted a number of staff from the Mayor's office and Doug Ford's council office at the campaign venue this afternoon Bobblehead sales now underway. More staff from the Mayor's office have arrived Rob Ford's lawyer, Dennis Morris, just arrived The Mayor's chief of staff just arrived. Ford merchandise. Only the bumper stickers are free. A strange mob scene as people run to line-up to buy Bobbleheads and merchandise. RT @bjonah84: This is the line for Rob Ford bobble heads. Rob Ford bobblehead line https://vine.co/v/M1MLQZZYbiX Campaign merchandise madness! https://vine.co/v/M1MlBD3gpPp Chow fundraising email: "I'm sure you thought Ford would be gone by now. Arrested, maybe. Or shamed Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News Promotion of Newsroom Website Real-Time Reporting Opinion Based News Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Opinion Based News Reporting The News Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto

17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14

Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n

75

out of the campaign" Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal Global News Toronto Global News Toronto 17Apr14 17Apr14 RT Ford Nation prepares to party at Ford's campaign launch. http://ow.ly/vUtQO @JProskowGlo bal reports. #TOpoli Alas, I've left the Ford campaign launch for the evening but @PeterKimGlobal has you covered! Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual istic Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Promotion Promotion of own work Opinion Based News

Individualize d Journalistic

Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko w Jackson Prosko wl Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza

JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal JProskowG lobal CBCSteve CBCSteve

Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto Global News Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto

17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 19Apr14 31Mar14 31Mar14 31Mar14 31Mar14 31Mar14 31Mar14 01Apr14

RT Vine video: rob ford selfie https://vine.co/v/M1OibEu5gFl #to poli RT Rob ford has his own mic flash #topoli at rob ford campaign launch. RT In the middle of the Rob Ford's launch speech. Soaking up the sunshine in Niagara this weekend Mayoral hopeful Ari Goldkind says council should vote against Porter expansion #sl Ari Goldkind says people should be asking about rumoured Porter IPO and what CEO Robert Deluce has to gain financially from expansion RT Bye-bye Bixi: Retooled bikesharing service unveiled today http://bit.ly/1hU9Vgj Norm Kelly on Porter debate going to council tomorrow "I think the votes are there yes" #sl MT: "@CanBball: WIGGINS PRESS CONFERENCE LIVE AT 3 P.M. ET http://ow.ly/vdLOL " Mayor Ford says he doesn't want to see Porter debate pushed back a year, wants city to move ahead and give temp permits to start expansion You can watch a live stream of today's council meeting here. It's just getting under way: http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toro nto/airport-expansion-proposal-atpivotal-point-porter-ceo-says1.2593848 ... #cbcto Disappointed by the How I Met Your Mother Finale? This article explains where they went wrong http://m.hitfix.com/whats-alanwatching/series-finale-review-howi-met-your-mother-last-forever-howthey-conned-us-all/2 ... (h/t @NeedlesOnNews)

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualist ic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

Reporting The News Reporting The News Real-Time Reporting Private Life Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Promotion of Newsroom Website Real-Time Reporting Promotion of Newsroom Website Real-Time Reporting Promotion of Newsroom Website

CBCSteve

CBCSteve CBCSteve

News Disseminatio n Promotion

CBCSteve

News Disseminatio n Promotion

CBCSteve

Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto

01Apr14

Individual ized Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic

Personal Lives On Display

76

Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve CBCSteve

CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto

01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 02Apr14 02Apr14 02Apr14 02Apr14 02Apr14 03Apr14

CBCSteve CBCSteve

at siomo I was going to send this to you directly. I had the same reaction as you last night Jim Karygiannis is now a former Scarborough MP - announces he'll run for Toronto Council in Ward 39 (Mike Del Grande's ward) #sl atJustinJWright22 thanks for helping us out! RT All of the motions on Billy Bishop Airport are posted under "Motions (City Council)": http://ow.ly/vjBia #TOcouncil #TOpoli Anyone else notice the strange move by the penalty box official when the camera came on him? https://vine.co/v/MeUrIgVKVeF atRominaOliverio ha, first time I've noticed it RT UPDATE: Massive 8.0 magnitude earthquake off #Chile triggers tsunami wave activity of up to 6.3 feet: warning centre. http://bit.ly/1onCprD Avoid eastbound Gardiner at all costs right now. Traffic at a standstill because of car fire at Strachan. Traffic diverting at Jameson A quick look at the slow-moving traffic on the Gardiner thanks to a car fire #sl https://vine.co/v/MeVKYen70LF Coming up on CBC Toronto at 6: How a Toronto company's technology could have helped find, and possibly prevent, the disappearance of #MH370 John Tory to make policy announcement tomorrow morning at 8:30 a.m. #sl RT The world's oceans are being threatened by floating trash. See our infographic explaining the problem here: pic.twitter.com/MhAXCXDaoK Follow my colleague @jlancasterCBC who's tweeting out details from the latest police ITO's on the Rob Ford/Lisi investigation RT #CBCNews Exclusive: #RobFord probe results in no charges. Crown tells #Torontopolice and #OPP no evidence to lay further crack video charges RT #TorontoPolice say Project Brazen probe ongoing despite

Individual istic Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualist ic News Disseminatio n Crowdsourci ng Promotion

Daily Chatter Real-Time Reporting Crowd Sourcing Promotion of Newsroom Website Personal Interest Daily Chatter Promotion of Newsroom Website Reporting The News

Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto

Individual istic Individual istic Journalisti c

Individualist ic Individualist ic Promotion

CBCSteve CBCSteve

Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto

Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto CBC Toronto

Journalisti c Journalisti c

Reporting The News Promotion of newscast Reporting The News Reporting The News

CBCSteve

Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve CBCSteve

CBC Toronto CBC Toronto

Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto

Journalisti c

Promotion of Newsroom Website Reporting The News

Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto

03Apr14 03Apr-

Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio

Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto

Journalisti c

Reporting The News

77

14 Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza CBCSteve CBC Toronto CBC Toronto 03Apr14 04Apr14 06Apr14

CBCSteve

Crown/ OPP advice not enough evidence for more #RobFord crack video charges. #topoli Rob Ford crack video probe halted by OPP for lack of evidence Toronto - CBC News http://www.cbc.ca/1.2596914 This video sums up Winter in Canada perfectly: Jumpin Jesus! http://youtu.be/dB5cgwTY5ME Interesting read for WWE fans (past and present): What ever happened to Shane McMahon? http://www.buzzfeed.com/golianopo ulos/how-pro-wrestlings-scion-isfighting-to-make-it-on-hisown?s=mobile ... Coming up on CBC Toronto at 6: a preview of summer construction season. Spoiler alert: prepare for congestion in other congestion news, TTC will shut down Dundas and Spadina for 2-3 weeks starting July 14th Toronto reveals list of major 2014 road projects http://fw.to/AGpZVkD RT Quebec election: Liberals win majority http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/mon treal/quebec-votes-2014/quebecelection-liberals-win-majority1.2601555?cmp=rss&utm_source=t witterfeed&utm_medium=twitter ... RT Follow @CBCMontreal for riding-by-riding results on Twitter; full map & coverage http://bit.ly/1g1DI9I British transit expert David Quarmby offering his thoughts on lessons Toronto can learn from London. Story on CBC @ 6 pic.twitter.com/4ZyS9ceQxX David Quarmby, who helped design London's transit agency TFL, takes a ride on the Streetcar #sl pic.twitter.com/ckgxGGLok9 avid Quarmby says a single fate system and one integrated agency overseeing transit and roads is key to moving people efficiently RT @cbcsteve You mean a single fare system, right Steve? David Quarmby says a single fare system and one integrated agency overseeing transit and roads is key to moving people efficiently Quarmby getting an authentic

n Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Promotion Promotion of Newsroom Website Opinion Based News Personal Lives On Display

Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic

Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto

Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto

07Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Promotion

Promotion of newscast Reporting The News Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of Newsroom Website

CBCSteve CBCSteve

News Disseminatio n Promotion

CBCSteve

Promotion

Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto CBC Toronto

07Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08-

Journalisti c Journalisti c

Promotion

CBCSteve

Promotion

Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of newscast Reporting The News Real-Time Reporting Conversati on Real-Time Reporting Real-Time

Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Conversatio n News Disseminatio n News

CBCSteve

CBCSteve CBCSteve

CBCSteve

78

D'Souza

Toronto

Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09-

Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve CBCSteve

CBC Toronto CBC Toronto

Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto

Toronto transit experience: we just got short-turned and had to board another streetcar pic.twitter.com/1oVjvh9OaE Next stop on the Quarmby transit tour, a ride on the GO Train pic.twitter.com/1t9nVizf9s Coming up on CBC Toronto at 6: British transit consultant David Quarmby shares lessons London learned that could help GTA transit #sl Ben Johnson, Trailer Park Boys' Sam Losco join Rob Ford campaign http://fw.to/WzYmI2d RT Game of Thrones renewed for 5th, 6th seasons: http://www.cbc.ca/1.2603031 pic.t witter.com/JqxnmnpGwS David Quarmby to talk transit with board of trade - Toronto - CBC News http://www.cbc.ca/1.2603285 RT After major internet security flaw "Heartbleed", experts advise: Wait a day then change all your passwords http://nyti.ms/1kp4Pje Police on scene of multiple stabbing at obuilding at Yonge and York Mills. 4 people taken to hospital. 1 arrested #sl pic.twitter.com/xlWARdofiQ Forensic team has arrived on scene at stabbing at Yonge and York Mills #sl pic.twitter.com/vqnh3MixiA Police say employees at company on 5th floor subdued stabbing suspect. Say suspect stabbed fellow employees #sl Police say suspect is 45 years old and in custody #sl Police say one victim is 32 year old female in critical condition #sl Employees starting to trickle out of building. One woman says she's been through too much today to talk #sl RT 4 stabbed in Yonge/York Mills office in Toronto - Toronto - CBC News http://www.cbc.ca/1.2603977 Company where stabbing took place releases statement, says suspect was a former employee #sl Company statement: At approximately 9:30 a.m. today, four Ceridian employees were attacked by a former employee at our Toronto office #sl Ceridian is the parent company of

c

Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

Reporting

Journalisti c Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting Promotion of newscast Promotion of Newsroom Website Opinion Based News Promotion of own work Reporting The News Reporting The News

Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Promotion

CBCSteve

Individualize d Journalistic Promotion News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News

CBCSteve CBCSteve

CBCSteve

Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve CBCSteve

CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Promotion of own work Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting

CBCSteve CBCSteve CBCSteve

CBCSteve CBCSteve CBCSteve

Steven

CBCSteve

CBC

Journalisti

Real-Time

79

D'Souza Steven D'Souza CBCSteve

Toronto CBC Toronto

Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 10Apr14

Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto CBC Toronto

CBCSteve

Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto

CBCSteve

CBCSteve

Dayforce where the stabbing took place earlier today #sl Company: As you might imagine, this is a very difficult time. The entire Ceridian family is shocked and deeply saddened by this incident. Police have just removed what we believe to be the suspect's vehicle from parking garage #sl pic.twitter.com/94ozf36lUP BREAKING: Chuang Li, 47, of Mississauga is facing 11 charges including 3 counts of attempted murder after stabbing at North York office #sl Police say 3 of 4 injured remain in hospital. The woman has lifethreatening injuries, two men have non-life-threatening injuries. #sl Rob Ford said in the 2010 campaign he wanted to phase out streetcars within 10 years, so he's staying consistent RT Asafa Powell, former 100 metre record holder, banned from competing 18 months due to doping offence. Story soon at http://www.cbc.ca/sports Packed courtroom awaiting appearance of Chuang Li, suspect in yesterday's workplace stabbing. Court waiting for Mandarin interpreter #sl CBC to cut 657 jobs, will no longer compete for professional sports rights http://fw.to/CV8BcJi RT Jim Flaherty, former finance minister, dead at 64 http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/jim -flaherty-former-finance-ministerdead-at-64-1.2605728?cmp=rss ... RT Dellen Millard, accused in Tim Bosma death, faces 2 more murder charges http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/ham ilton/news/dellen-millard-accusedin-tim-bosma-death-faces-2-moremurder-charges1.2605741?cmp=rss ... Chuang Li makes brief appearance in Finch court, case held over until tomorrow to allow him to get lawyer #sl Mayor Rob Ford 'devastated' by death of Jim Flaherty - Toronto CBC News http://www.cbc.ca/1.2605828 RT Devastated to hear news of my friend Jim Flaherty passing. My

c Journalisti c

Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

Reporting Real-Time Reporting

Journalisti c Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News Promotion of Newsroom Website Reporting The News

Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto

10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14

Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n Promotion

Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto CBC Toronto

Journalisti c Journalisti c

CBCSteve

Promotion

Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of Newsroom Website

Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto

Journalisti c

Promotion

Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto

10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr-

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n Promotion

Reporting The News Promotion of Newsroom Website Reporting The News

CBCSteve

CBCSteve

News Disseminatio

80

14 Steven D'Souza CBCSteve CBC Toronto 10Apr14

Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto

10Apr14

prayers go out to Christine Elliot & family. The Ford family is heart broken RT Jim Flaherty: See how Canadians paid their respects via @CBCNews -> http://ow.ly/vEWTr Watch/follow @CBCTheNational tonight for more. RT Full interview with CBC president & CEO Hubert Lacroix on the #CBCCUTS http://cbc.sh/a50ytKM pic.twitter.com/JL19vLrtVt RT #TMLtalk News: Brendan Shanahan named President and Alternate Governor of Toronto Maple Leafs http://bit.ly/Qd0gLl #NHL RT Hear from Shanahan, Leiweke and Nonis Monday at 11am. Watch live on @Leafs_TV or here http://bit.ly/XYtJEM . #TMLtalk A great call to arms by @JianGhomeshi: Q Essay: It's time to defend public broadcasting http://www.cbc.ca/q/blog/2014/04/1 1/public-broadcasting-q-jianessay/ ... RT Justice John McMahon sentenced Nahom Tsagazab to 11yrs & 5 months in jail for firing his gun 11 times during mass shooting on Danzig. #sl Scott Russell reminds us that CBC isn't out of the sports game yet: http://www.cbc.ca/sportscontent/opinion/2014/04/cbcshould-remain-canadas-olympicbroadcaster.html ... Lots of talk today about intelligent traffic signals. I featured the U of T technology in a special series last year: http://www.cbc.ca/toronto/features/s tuckintraffic/ ... Why is there no @torontofc on the radio? Volunteers piling sandbags to head north of Belleville where flooding is a problem #sl Volunteers loading sand bags on to pallets for easier distribution on site #sl https://vine.co/v/MJiYY1n3Jbv Some of the 500 tonnes of sand used here to stem the flood waters #sl This was a lovely front yard in Foxboro until the flooding hit #sl

n Journalisti c Promotion Promotion of newscast

Journalisti c

Promotion

Promotion of Newsroom Website Opinion Based News Opinion Based News Opinion Based News

Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto

11Apr14 11Apr14 11Apr14

Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic

Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto CBC Toronto

CBCSteve

Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto

11Apr14 11Apr14

News Disseminatio n Promotion

Reporting The News

Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto

Journalisti c

Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of own work

Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto

11Apr14

Journalisti c

Promotion

Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve CBCSteve CBCSteve CBCSteve CBCSteve

CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto

12Apr14 13Apr14 13Apr14 13Apr14 13Apr14

Individual istic Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualist ic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n

Personal Interest Reporting The News Reporting The News Reporting The News Reporting The News

81

Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve CBCSteve

CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto

11Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 13Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14

Reading is different online than off, experts say http://wapo.st/1ihiKRD Jimmy Kimmel Visits Rob Ford's YouTube show http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6 zzh3DUGwIY&sns=tw ... John Tory says he supports a downtown relief line, says Olivia Chow will delay by reopening Scarb subway debate #sl John Tory says he'll wait until after Premier Wynne's speech today and provincial budget before releasing his plan to pay for DRL #sl Chow campaign release on Tory's newser this morning: Says still no specifics on DRL and Tory afraid to stand up to Rob Ford #sl RT #Leafs Bernier will have sports hernia surgery Wednesday in Montreal. Injury suffered in LA game in March. RT It's more than a game. It's the Cup! Check out CBC's schedule for the First Round of the #stanleycup playoffs: http://bit.ly/1kOqWQm RT 1/2 Touring Visioneering Corp, 3rd generation #Toronto family business started by a Holocaust survivor,employing 350. Brendan Shanahan on Leafs: "Nothing we say here matters. It's about the work we put in, it's all about the results" Tim Leiweke: "This is Brendan's team and at the end of the day he makes all the decisions" #sl Dave Nonis: "We have to get better ... We're not deep enough, we have to draft better, we have to develop better" When asked who gets the final say on decisions with the Leafs, Nonis says, "I have a boss, and it's Brendan" Shanahan on analytics "If there's information out there and you choose to ignore it, that's a mistake by you" Not near a TV? Watch Brendan Shanahan being introduced as Maple Leafs president here http://www.cbc.ca/1.2609174 Coming up on CBC Toronto at 5:30: Dramatic video showing the police interview with Jennifer Pan the night her mother was murdered #sl Downtown pig slaughterhouse on hold, residents breathe easier http://www.cbc.ca/1.2609580

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

Reporting The News Reporting The News Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News Promotion of Newsroom Website Reporting The News Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of newscast Promotion of Newsroom

CBCSteve

CBCSteve

CBCSteve

CBCSteve

CBCSteve

CBCSteve

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

CBCSteve

CBCSteve CBCSteve

CBCSteve

CBCSteve

CBCSteve

CBCSteve

Promotion

CBCSteve

Promotion

82

Website Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza CBCSteve CBCSteve CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 14Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 16Apr14 RT Jim Flaherty's flag-draped casket arrives in #Whitby ahead of today's visitation #cbcto Mayor's Chief of Staff says Rob Ford will be attending Jim Flaherty visitation today and the funeral tomorrow #sl Here's a screen grab of the Ford campaign launch flyer #sl RT Suspect in #Calgary stabbing is son of senior police officer: CBC RT #Toronto's Transportation services has filled approximately 154,312 potholes to date this year. #TOpoli Rob Ford arrives at City Hall, brushes by reporters as we ask him about Council pay hike coming to Exec Committee next week.#sl RT Breaking: @SousaCharles announces budget date is May 1st. Which we kinda already knew. #onpoli #sl RT Breaking: Kathleen Wynne is suing PC leader Tim Hudak and other parties for $2M #onpoli #sl Jennifer Pan interrogation video played at 'home invasion' trial Toronto - CBC News http://www.cbc.ca/1.2610178 City councillors snub proposed pay raise - Toronto - CBC News http://www.cbc.ca/1.2611409 RT 22-year-old Matthew Douglas de Grood of Calgary has been charged with 5 counts of 1st-degree murder @CalgaryPolice #calgarystabbing The Leafs will pick 8th overall in the 2014 NHL Draft RT #BPDSafetyPublicAlert: To ease fears & concerns relating to backpacks - #BPD again discouraging their use at this year's #BostonMarathon. RT Massive power outages in a big section of the city. You out? Tweet us a photo @CBCToronto #darkTO #cbcto RT Watch CBC News Now with Ian Hanomansing on location in the Brentwood neighbourhood in Calgary at 8 pm/ET. RT At this stage 45,275 tickets remain. Limited availability for Match 6, 7, 9, 15, 16, 18, 22, 28, 32, 38, 41, 44 Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News Opinion Based News Reporting The News Reporting The News Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News Reporting The News Promotion of own work Promotion of own work Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News Reporting The News

CBCSteve

CBCSteve CBCSteve

CBCSteve

CBCSteve

CBCSteve CBCSteve

CBCSteve CBCSteve

Promotion News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Crowdsourci ng Promotion

CBCSteve CBCSteve

Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto

Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c

Crowd Sourcing Promotion of newscast Opinion Based News

CBCSteve

CBCSteve

Individualize d Journalistic

83

http://www.FIFA.com/tickets Steven D'Souza CBCSteve CBC Toronto 16Apr14 RT Getting into the mind of a homegrown terrorist http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/hom egrown-terrorist-toronto-18-bombplotter-saad-khalid-recalls-hisradicalization-1.2532671 ... The new Raptors promo video is epic: #WeTheNorth: http://youtu.be/oucrrfvBAus Mississauga company fires flight instructor after CNN appearances on Malaysia Airlines story - Toronto CBC News http://www.cbc.ca/1.2613065 The Leafs aren't in the playoffs but their spirit of defensive responsibility lives on in this HabsLightning game Here's a fixed link to the awesome Raptors promo video I tweeted earlier #WeTheNorth http://youtu.be/I9xnS9EJmRU Clear what candidates see as key issue in #voteto. Olivia Chow and John Tory to make announcements on traffic flow and gridlock today #sl Raptors GM says he's surprised the team has made it to the playoffs #sl Ujiri on Brooklyn possibly tanking " we haven't lost one second of sleep" worrying about what the Nets are doing #sl Coach Casey talking about different intensity level his team will face during playoffs #s Coach Casey says success for this team came more quickly thanh he expected #sl Casey on Nets possibly tanking to play Raptors, didn't think they did, but if so, "careful what you wish for" #sl Demar DeRozan says the playoffs aren't rocket science or trigonometry, the Raps will figure it out #sl Amir Johnson sporting one of the new Northern Uprising shirts #sl RT In case you missed it, Canadian Nik Stauskas said Tuesday he'll declare for the NBA draft after 2 Michigan seasons: http://cbc.ca/1.2611290 Coming up on CBC Toronto at 6: The Raptors players and GM talk about the new #WeTheNorth Journalisti c Promotion Promotion of Newsroom Website Opinion Based News Promotion of Newsroom Website Personal Lives On Display Opinion Based News Reporting The News

Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto

16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 16Apr14 17Apr14

Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto

Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto

CBCSteve

CBCSteve

Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve CBCSteve

CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of newscast

CBCSteve CBCSteve CBCSteve

CBCSteve

CBCSteve CBCSteve

Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto

Journalisti c

Promotion

84

campaign and the playoffs #sl Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza CBCSteve CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 19Apr14 19Apr14 19Apr14 17Apr14 19Apr14 Rob Ford speaking to crowd at campaign launch: "this is so much better than speaking to a wall of reporters..." Ford: "there's been some rocky moments over the past year" ... "none of us can go through life without making mistakes" Ford: "Friends, I love, I love our city and I love being your mayor" The crowd is now chanting "Rob Ford forever" Ford: "Together we have saved the taxpayers a billion dollars!" Ford: "with all of you by my side, we have derailed the gravy train, eliminated waste and made government more accountable" Ford: If this was a marathon friends, I'd say we're at the halfway point, we've covered a lot of ground, but folks we have a long way to go Ford: "The people of Toronto deserve nothing less than accessibility, transparency and accountability" Ford promises to be the most open, honest, fair, hard-working Mayor that Toronto has ever seen Ford: "The people know when you call Mayor Ford Rob, Mayor Rob Ford will personally return your call" You can watch the Rob Ford official campaign launch LIVE here: http://www.cbc.ca/1.2613334 Watching the Raptors in a packed sports bar in Montreal. Team overcoming so opening jitters, starting to settle in #rtz Wife to me on Kevin Garnett: "why does the tall scary guy look so mad?" Drake on Raptors broadcast: "Jaz-Z is somewhere eating a fondue plate" what does that even mean? Tonight on @CBCTheNational the Raptors are re-writing the image of basketball in Canada as they return to the playoffs #WeTheNorth It's all about the Raptors "@TrendsToronto: 'refs', 'fondue', 'garnett' & 'deron' are now trending in #Toronto http://trendsmap.com/ca/toronto " Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual istic Individual istic Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Promotion of Newsroom Website Personal Interest Personal Interest Personal Lives On Display Promotion of newscast Personal Lives On Display

CBCSteve

CBCSteve CBCSteve CBCSteve CBCSteve

CBCSteve

CBCSteve

CBCSteve CBCSteve

CBCSteve

CBCSteve

Individualist ic Individualist ic Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

CBCSteve CBCSteve

CBCSteve

CBCSteve

Individualize d Journalistic

85

Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza

CBCSteve

CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto

19Apr14 19Apr14 19Apr14 19Apr14

CBCSteve

Jack Armstrong points out no foul calls against Nets in 4th. Not making excuses, Nets were better team today, but that's not right RT Rubin 'Hurricane' Carter dead at 76 - World - CBC News http://www.cbc.ca/1.2616026 RT Paul Pierce, on if he'd ever played w/out a shot clock: 'I don't remember. Because I'm a dinosaur.' RT Raptors GM could face NBA fine after f-bomb chant http://www.cbc.ca/sports/basketball/ nba/masai-ujiri-raptors-gm-couldpay-price-for-f-bomb1.2615643?cmp=rss ... Happy Easter! Mystery solved. The woman sitting courtside at yesterday's Raptors game wearing an Indian outfit was @ReetuGupta_EGH RT Didn't want to miss game one. Gunned it after a wedding to #Raptors game. Rockin Indian clothes. # dedicated #proudIndian A great recap of this week's Game of Thrones (spoiler alerts abound) http://nyti.ms/1njidWs atreporterdonpeat I guess that's better than taking a mile? The "dumb jock" stereotype is about to get a big ol slap in the face as a pro football player takes his IQ to the US. InsideStory @CityNews I officially declare Peter Dyakowski to be genetically GREEDY. Beauty. Brawn AND Brains? Mensa+Jeopardy+Ticat=InsideStory @citynews. RT @CityAvery @CityNews Another great story tonight! Congrats to Peter...he should be very proud of himself and his accomplishments! RT VIDEO: CityNews reporter @stellaacquisto w/ how YOU can participate in #speakerscorner: http://ow.ly/vjvPU RT Ford is on one of his votingagainst-things runs right now; he's lost votes 40-1, 36-1, 39-1, 38-3 in the last few minutes. hmmmm. I left it at work. I'll let you known tomorrow! @SueVint

Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

Personal Lives On Display Promotion of Newsroom Website Real-Time Reporting Promotion of Newsroom Website Daily Chatter Daily Chatter Personal Interest Personal Interest Conversati on Promotion of own work Opinion Based News Opinion Based News Promotion of Newsroom Website Real-Time Reporting Personal Lives On Display

CBCSteve CBCSteve

News Disseminatio n Promotion

Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Steven D'Souza Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines

CBCSteve CBCSteve

CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto CBC Toronto City News City News City News

20Apr14 20Apr14 20Apr14 20Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14

Individual istic Individual istic Individual istic Individual istic Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualist ic Individualist ic Individualist ic Individualist ic Conversatio n Promotion

CBCSteve

CBCSteve CityAvery CityAvery

CityAvery

Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News

Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News

Avery Haines Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News City News

02Apr14 02Apr14

Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic

CityAvery

86

Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News City News City News City News City News

02Apr14 02Apr14 02Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 05Apr14 05Apr14 05Apr14 05Apr14 05Apr14 06Apr14 06Apr14 06Apr14

wow. Really? @TalboTime

CityAvery CityAvery CityAvery

Thanks...Felt like a sparkle day! @ArleneArls2 RT The Inside Story: 300-pound CFLer shatters dumb jock stereotype http://ow.ly/vjDts @CityAvery Jimmy Kimmel takes another stab at RoFo. Now BILL Clinton is piling on too. (Via @citynews) http://ow.ly/vnA9w With the click of a button this Hamilton man makes dreams come true for sick children across North America. InsideStory @CityNews @CityThe5 RT @CityAvery @CityNews @CityThe5 Absolutley incredible man ... thank you for being you! The gift you give is priceless, I assure you. RT @CityAvery @CityNews @CityThe5 wow what a story!! Loved it!! A link to his website would be great thx I see snowflakes. Ugh. or giving us the finger. @digitalterry

Individual ized Journalisti c Individual istic Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Individualist ic Promotion Promotion

Personal Lives On Display Daily Chatter Promotion of own work Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of own work Opinion Based News Opinion Based News Daily Chatter Personal Lives On Display Personal Lives On Display Personal Lives On Display Personal Lives On Display Opinion Based News Personal Lives On Display Personal Lives On Display

CityAvery

Promotion

Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News

Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual istic Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Individualist ic Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic

Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News City News City News City News City News City News

CityAvery CityAvery

CityAvery

CityAvery

CityAvery

Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News

So proud to accept 2 RTDNA awards on behalf of the most excellent @CityNews team. pic.twitter.com/C6EnrDUbDI Last time I checked my paycheque I didn't notice anything except money coming OFF--not money going in! @FemaleMontie @CityNews I know. I know. But sometimes the left-wing right-wing, no-wing conspiracy theorists are fun to poke. @dcrocock @FemaleMontie @CityNews Nothing about this feels right. How? Why? pic.twitter.com/yXF72QDknS

Avery Haines Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News City News

RT @CityAvery I agree what hell are those farmers doing!!!! Those poor hens :-( don't know. I need answers. @smmcalinden @JBaratt

CityAvery

87

Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News

06Apr14 03Apr14 08Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 11-

Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News City News City News City News City News City News City News

CityAvery CityAvery CityAvery CityAvery

RT @CityAvery I'm old. When I was a kid, it was exciting when Mum cracked a double yolk egg! Now you can get a whole carton of them?? *gasp!* RT The Inside Story: Hamilton photographer helps turn dreams into reality for sick children http://ow.ly/vpxvK @CityAvery RT The Inside Story: Fitness guru Tony Little's big life http://ow.ly/vA9q9 @CityAvery elly.com/1IPSQU6 - Cat vs coon. Part 1. VIDEO http://telly.com/1IPSQVF - Coon vs cat. The sequel. VIDEO. So tragic and sadly so common. It's something few will talk about. You must meet Evelyn tonight. @ladykitchenless @CityNews RT @CityAvery @CityNews we have had two of those situations in the last little while here in my town. So sad. RT CityAvery @CityNews My grandfather was a farmer & his loss of motor control was severe; we were frankly amazed he had enough to use the gun Grandparents are more likely to die from suicide than teens. An 80 yr old exposes a startling statistic+shares her brush w/death. @CityNews @LoriTriano Please could you follow me so i can send you a direct message. Thanks! RT @CityAvery that was a wonderful piece you did on suicide among the elderly. Well done. Thank you. Tonight: @CityNews at 6 MT @CityAvery 'Grandparents more likely to die from suicide than teens. 80 yr old exposes startling statistic.' RT @CityNews @CityAvery So sad that they think its their only option, and nobody notices the mental illness. Seniors should be cherised RT Shocking statistics on tonight's Inside Story @CityAvery re: Seniors/Suicide. Seniors are at risk. We need to do something about MentalHlth. RT The Inside Story: One woman's fight to shed light on seniors and suicide http://ow.ly/vFnq8 @CityAvery RT @diana_ellsworth @CityAvery

Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual istic Individual istic Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

Personal Lives On Display Promotion of own work Promotion of own work Personal Interest Personal Interest Opinion Based News Opinion Based News Opinion Based News Promotion of own work Crowd Sourcing Opinion Based News Promotion of own work Opinion Based News Opinion Based News Promotion of own work Opinion

Promotion Individualist ic Individualist ic Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

CityAvery

CityAvery

Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News

Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines

CityAvery CityAvery

City News City News City News City News City News

Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual

Crowdsourci ng Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

CityAvery

CityAvery

Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

CityAvery

Avery Haines Avery

CityAvery

City News City

CityAvery

Individualize

88

Haines

News

Apr14 10Apr14

Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News

Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News

11Apr14 11Apr14 11Apr14 14Apr14

Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News

Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News

Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News

Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News

11Apr14

Avery Haines Avery Haines

CityAvery CityAvery

City News City News

15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14

@CityNews the 2 members of our small community had terminal illness - wonder if there is a link? Both grandpas RT Cc: @CaringCop RT @CityNews: The Inside Story: One woman's fight to shed light on seniors and suicide http://ow.ly/vFnq8 @CityAvery ^sm RT @caringcop: Subject we do not talk about - #seniors & #suicide. 80yr old tells her story #MentalHealth @CityAvery http://ow.ly/vGtEH RT Whoa! The most famous desktop wallpaper ever is actually a real, unaltered photo! http://slate.me/1gi0oTx pic.twitter.c om/ncBwi94Tlr The RTDNA lifetime achievement award goes to:@AgarNT1010. Proud to have been ur @newstalk1010 partner for so long. pic.twitter.com/Peg2xBeCOH RT @janeatmosaic from @mosaichomecare likes @Baycrest @CityAvery http://www.baycrest.org/news/baycr est-launches-mental-health-websitefor-seniors-with-depression/ ... RT Powerful interview by @CityAvery with @Baycrest volunteer & her fight with late-life #depression. http://www.citynews.ca/2014/04/10/ the-inside-story-one-womans-fightto-shed-light-on-seniors-andsuicide/ ... Ho ho ho. pic.twitter.com/cdTmtr5kog "My kids were at the finish line". A blind runner who survived #BostonMarathonBombing wants the nightmares to stop.InsideStory @CityNews RT @CityAvery this winter is like a mother inlaw visiting from out of town that has over extended her stay by 3 months. #BeatItYaOldBat ;) i liked you (past tense) @ChoChoNews It's on tonight during the 6+11pm news. @privacyforonce @CityNews "My kids were at the finish line". A blind runner who survived #BostonMarathonBombing wants

ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

d Journalistic Promotion

Based News Promotion of own work

Journalisti c

Promotion

Promotion of own work Personal Lives On Display Personal Lives On Display Opinion Based News

Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic

Promotion

Promotion of own work

Individual istic Journalisti c

Individualist ic Promotion

Personal Interest Promotion of own work Personal Lives On Display Personal Lives On Display Promotion of own work Promotion of own work

Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News City News City News City News

CityAvery

CityAvery CityAvery

Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Promotion Promotion

89

the nightmares to stop. @CityNews Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines CityAvery CityAvery City News City News City News City News City News City News City News City News City News City News 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 16Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Aprhope you saw we aired your very funny tweet a couple of times on @CityNews ! @Zero_Ego RT @ramavery. #tvstar #blindrunner @cityavery great interview tonight RT @CityAvery @citythe5 @CityNews an amazing story wish her well in all her marathons. RT @Iabonig @CityAvery @CityThe5 @CityNews Great story about and wish her well. Thanks! A preview is coming up on @citythe5 ! @Iabonig @CityNews my pleasure! Can't wait to see the doc and follow the Bruce trail adventure. @lilight Hey cool!! Watching a great story on @City_tv with @ramavery about her Boston experience .......so strong!! RT Thx @CityAvery for the gr8 boston story on blind runner @ramavery http://tinyurl.com/mhv7pxm RT MPP Christine Elliott has just arrived for her husband's funeral #Flaherty pic.twitter.com/tYzY4sDZHt Her toddler murdered by a schizophrenic neighbour, Lori has become an unlikely advocate for the mentally ill. InsideStory @CityNews at 6+11. <3"@TheSpec: Mahoney: "I choose to live" says CHCH TV reporter on her battle with cancer http://buff.ly/Qgl98v pic.twitter.co m/5dzcXbmRPV" Her toddler was murdered by a schizophrenic neighbour+Lori's become an unlikely advocate for the mentally ill. InsideStory @CityNews @ 6+11 RT @CityAvery @CityNews I'll bet she's an amazing advocate! Her story will be so compelling! Gov't still not doing enough for mentally ill! RT @cityavery Hi! Tonight's story is thought provoking; the law can't be black & white & must deal with each case individually. Tough reality. RT @CityAvery They need 2 change the terminology. Im not a Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Crowdsourci ng Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Promotion Conversatio n Individualize d Journalistic Promotion Crowd Sourcing Opinion Based News Opinion Based News Opinion Based News Promotion of own work Conversati on Opinion Based News Promotion of own work Real-Time Reporting Promotion of own work Opinion Based News Promotion of own work Opinion Based News Opinion Based News Opinion Based

CityAvery

CityAvery

CityAvery CityAvery CityAvery

CityAvery

CityAvery

News Disseminatio n Promotion

CityAvery

Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News

Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News

Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News

Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized

Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d

Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News

Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News

90

14 Avery Haines CityAvery City News 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 18Apr14 31Mar14 31Mar14 31Mar14 31Mar14 31Mar14 31Mar14 31Mar14 31Mar14 31Mar14

Avery Haines Avery Haines Avery Haines

CityAvery CityAvery

City News City News City News

victim of a crime - Im a survivor!! Victim has a stigma! Dont pitty celebrate life RT @CityAvery We dont say people are victims of Cancer - They fight & survive! Same goes for survivors of crime! #BeenThere #NotAVictim thanks. @BCGB . @AndreiaX http://telly.com/1IVADMM - This may be a first for Yonge/Dundas square! Her toddler was stabbed to death by a mentally ill neighbour. Meet the mum who wants CHANGE, not REVENGE. VIDEO: http://tinyurl.com/ohclky3 RT @CityAvery @CityNews I cannot fathom the strength it takes to recover from the death of a child much less make a positive of this tragedy. Calgary killer's dad:"A love for your child is unconditional." Reposting this VIDEO about suffering sins of yr child: http://tinyurl.com/qxow9ep One of our camera operators in #Toronto spotted a new election campaign that just popped up in Trinity Bellwoods Park. Three pics to follow New anti-Ford poster 1 pic.twitter.com/Q7lwFe3z2d New anti-Ford poster 2 #topoli pic.twitter.com/BZhYz8eSSl New anti-Ford poster 3 #topoli #robford pic.twitter.com/fIxKPArGbB Photos courtesy Ken Enlow, working in our Toronto newsroom this morning. RT Katie Simpson, @katiesimpson24 is now trending in Canada http://trendsmap.com/ca RT Katie Simpson, @katiesimpson24 is now trending in #Toronto http://trendsmap.com/ca/toronto @michaelhayes if they're real, I'll be shocked. Tag on them links to an anti-ford website. RT Washington? RT @TrendsDC: Katie Simpson, @katiesimpson24 is now trending in #DC

Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual istic Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Individualist ic Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

News Opinion Based News Daily Chatter Personal Lives On Display Promotion of own work Opinion Based News Promotion of own work Opinion Based News Reporting The News Reporting The News Reporting The News Opinion Based News Promotion of own work Promotion of own work Conversati on Opinion Based News

CityAvery

Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News

Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

Avery Haines

CityAvery

City News

Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n

KatieSimps on24

CP24

Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti

Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic Promotion Promotion

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24 CP24 CP24

CP24 CP24

CP24 CP24

Conversatio n Individualize d Journalistic

91

http://trendsmap.com/us/washington Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n KatieSimps on24 CP24 31Mar14 31Mar14 31Mar14 31Mar14 31Mar14 31Mar14 31Mar14 31Mar14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 RT BREAKING- Ontario NDP have just walked out of Question Period. They're furious Premier Wynne not present to discuss gas plant emails 3onpoli RT #BREAKING: NDP walks out of leg during question period #onpoli RT NDP are furious Premier Wynne not present to discuss gas plant emails #onpoli RT Tory David Tillson lauds party for firing Dimitri Soudas for helping his "girlfriend" & Tory MP Eve Adams in nomination fight. #cdnpoli Asked Minister James Moore about firing of Dimitri Soudis as CPC exec director. Says "hire on merit, fire on performance". RT Congratulations @CP24 for passing 500,000 followers. The most followed newsroom in Canada! @MaraMontalbano sure. I'm hosting a bachelorette party next weekend...this news release may change our plans.... #pandaparty pic.twitter.com/Z0jaEarPPG RT "The most stupidest decision #Toronto could ever have made" Cllr Giorgio Mammoliti if council rejects airport expansion #TOpoli RT BREAKING: Durham police say the coroner's office has confirmed that a body found in Whitby on Saturday is missing teacher Jeffrey Boucher. RT Where's Rob Ford? No sign of the Mayor one hour into council meeting where fate of the Porter jets proposal will be decided. #TOpoli RT No sign of Rob Ford or Doug Ford at city hall this morning. #topoli pic.twitter.com/UixjfxRw7n RT Eve Adams should stay in her current riding, nomination challenger says http://ow.ly/vjyes #cdnpoli RT Free Press reporter Morris Dalla Costa was ejected from WFCU Centre prior to Game 7 tonight between the #LdnOnt Lightning & Windsor Express. RT UPDATE: According to NBL's commissioner, who didn't intervene, the Express were displeased with Dalla Costa's coverage of the series

c Journalisti c News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion Reporting The News

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24 CP24

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Reporting The News Reporting The News Reporting The News

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual istic Journalisti c Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting Promotion of Newsroom Website Conversati on Private Life Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News

CP24

CP24 CP24

Conversatio n Individualist ic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

CP24

CP24

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Promotion of Newsroom Website Reporting The News

CP24 CP24

CP24

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n

KatieSimps on24

CP24

Journalisti c

Reporting The News

92

#ldnont Katie Simpso n KatieSimps on24 CP24 01Apr14 News release from Peel Region: POSSIBLE MEASLES EXPOSURE AT ULTIMATE SPORTSPLEX (RINK CITY) IN MISSISSAUGA ON MARCH 22, 2014 "Visitors to the Ultimate Sportsplex, also known as Rink City Sportsplex on March 22, may have come into contact ..." "...with a patron from a neighbouring business that has been diagnosed with measles." @bridgeshealthca I'm in Ottawa working with my colleagues @CTVNationalNews for a bit. Happy birthday to my puppy! To mark the day, she ate garbage from a melting snow bank and barfed in her bed. Yay? pic.twitter.com/3375PpCUGd @AMNobrega answer to that is two tweets back! RT NBL of Canada Commissioner defends decision to boot longtime London Free Press sports reporter from arena. http://www.am980.ca/2014/04/02/re porter-ejected-windsor-arena/ ... #ldnont RT Mike Layton interrupts council food truck speech to demand Mayor put away clipboard with Ford Nation campaign sticker pic.twitter.com/k30G5wAmIU RT @CTVNews Extended: MP Eve Adams blocks gas station with car: http://ow.ly/vmN4X pic.twitter.com /aZ4u0QeYgF RT Exclusive: Families of fallen soldiers invited to Ottawa service must pay own way http://www.ctvnews.ca/politics/fami lies-of-fallen-soldiers-invited-toottawa-service-must-pay-own-way1.1758517 ... #cdnpoli RT EXCLUSIVE: Families of fallen soldiers invited to Ottawa service must pay own way. @RichardMadan reports http://www.ctvnews.ca/politics/fami lies-of-fallen-soldiers-invited-toottawa-service-must-pay-own-way1.1758517 ... #cdnpoli Officials say shooter at Fort Hood served in Iraq. He was diagnosed with PTSD. He's not being id'd because next of kin have not been told Journalisti c News Disseminatio n Reporting The News

Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24

01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 02Apr14

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual istic

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Conversatio n Individualist ic

Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Conversati on Private Life

CP24 CP24 CP24

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24

Journalisti c Journalisti c

Conversatio n News Disseminatio n

Conversati on Reporting The News

Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n

KatieSimps on24

CP24

02Apr14 02Apr14 02Apr14

Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n Promotion

Reporting The News

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24

Journalisti c Journalisti c

CP24

Promotion

Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of Newsroom Website

Katie Simpso n

KatieSimps on24

CP24

02Apr14

Journalisti c

Promotion

Promotion of Newsroom Website

Katie Simpso n

KatieSimps on24

CP24

02Apr14

Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n

Real-Time Reporting

93

Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24

02Apr14 02Apr14 02Apr14

RT Widower of Canadian soldier says it's his duty to speak out about wife's suicide http://ow.ly/vn35U Officials clarify shooter was undergoing PTSD diagnosis. Say it is a lengthy process. Say he was depressed, had anxiety. RT .@OmarSachedina's EXCLUSIVE tonight: Widower of Cdn soldier speaks out about her suicide http://ow.ly/vn4dS pic.twitter.com/ U3FLvtSgss RT .@KatieSimpson24 has this story tonight: One-third of young Canadians with humanities degree overqualified: StatsCan http://www.ctvnews.ca/business/one -third-of-young-canadians-withhumanities-degree-overqualifiedstatscan-1.1757140 ... RT More on @RobertFife's story tonight about Conservative MP Eve Adam's dispute over $6 car wash http://ow.ly/vn4o9 pic.twitter.com/ HhmvBcUNVU RT Bill Clinton tells Jimmy Kimmel that Rob Ford has destroyed every stereotype about Canadians. @stephaniesmyth @SimonOstler as opposed to a boiling pot of water? stephaniesmyth @SimonOstler did you expect this? Because we all know what happened with this #pinchy pic.twitter.com/j4x1enZuwT @stephaniesmyth @SimonOstler Simpsons spoiler from 1998 Homer eats his pet lobster Pinchy. RT BREAKING Judge lifts publication ban on remaining Project Brazen 2 documents #TOpoli #RobFord RT BREAKING: Sources tell CTV that Mayor Rob Ford is unlikely to face any criminal charges in the Project Brazen 2 investigation. RT Elena Basso of Ford to drug dealing associate Syad "I told you guys from the beginning, he's a big fucking idiot." http://on.thestar.com/1mN0YMQ Lots of swear words in the ITO.... #robford #topoli #jestsayin'

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Promotion

CP24

News Disseminatio n Promotion

Promotion of Newsroom Website Real-Time Reporting Promotion of newscast

CP24

Katie Simpso n

KatieSimps on24

CP24

02Apr14

Journalisti c

Promotion

Promotion of own work

Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n

KatieSimps on24

CP24

02Apr14 02Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14

Journalisti c

Promotion

Promotion of newscast Reporting The News Daily Chatter Daily Chatter

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24 CP24

Journalisti c Individual istic Individual istic

News Disseminatio n Individualist ic Individualist ic

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24

Individual istic Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualist ic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n

Daily Chatter Reporting The News Reporting The News Real-Time Reporting

CP24

CP24

KatieSimps on24

CP24

Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Opinion Based News Real-Time Reporting

KatieSimps on24

CP24

RT Newly unveiled court documents detail "extreme efforts" by Ford's friend Lisi to retrieve alleged crack

94

video, lawyer Peter Jacobsen says. Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n KatieSimps on24 CP24 03Apr14 03Apr14 RT "You're fucking dead & everybody on your block is dead" Sandro Lisi to the Juiceman: Brazen 2 docs allege http://ow.ly/vozOv #TOpoli RT defamation lawsuit against Rob Ford headed to Appeal Court http://www.cp24.com/news/defamat ion-lawsuit-against-rob-fordheaded-to-appeal-court1.1759150 ... RT Cllr Frank Di Giorgio says he thinks Rob Ford's chances of reelection have improved. #topoli. RT UPDATED: Judge lifts publication ban on police documents detailing Ford investigation http://www.cp24.com/news/judgelifts-pub-ban-on-police-documentsdetailing-ford-investigation1.1759324 ... RT TOP STORY tonight from @RichardMadan: Gov't to cover families' travel expenses to Afghan mission tribute http://www.ctvnews.ca/canada/govt-to-cover-families-travel-expensesto-afghan-mission-tribute1.1759522 ... @RichardMadan's story tonight is a must watch. http://www.ctvnews.ca/canada/govt-to-cover-families-travel-expensesto-afghan-mission-tribute1.1759522 ... Canadian economy creates nearly 43,000 jobs. Unemployment rate drops from 7% to 6.9% RT DEVELOPING story here: Unemployment rate falls to 6.9 per cent in March http://ow.ly/vqvd0 RT #BREAKING - Premier Wynne has served Tim Hudak and MPP Lisa MacLeod with a libel notice over gas plant allegations. RT BREAKING: Ont. Premier Kathleen Wynne has served Tim Hudak and Lisa MacLeod with libel notice over gas plant allegations. This one takes all of the pillows and all of the blankets. pic.twitter.com/7VuxFlYHx8 RT Early morning run in Ottawa! Got another tourist to take my pic. http://instagram.com/p/maGRvigOal / @hmilne1 how is it that the one weekend you're in Ottawa I'm not there! #sadpanda Journalisti c Promotion Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of Newsroom Website Real-Time Reporting Promotion of Newsroom Website

KatieSimps on24

CP24

Journalisti c

Promotion

Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24

03Apr14 03Apr14

Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n Promotion

Katie Simpso n

KatieSimps on24

CP24

03Apr14

Journalisti c

Promotion

Promotion of Newsroom Website

Katie Simpso n

KatieSimps on24

CP24

03Apr14

Journalisti c

Promotion

Promotion of Newsroom Website Reporting The News Promotion of Newsroom Website Reporting The News Reporting The News Private Life Private Life Daily Chatter

Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24

04Apr14 04Apr14 04Apr14 04Apr14 04Apr14 05Apr14 05Apr14

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual istic Individual istic Individual istic

News Disseminatio n Promotion

CP24

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualist ic Individualist ic Individualist ic

CP24

CP24 CP24

CP24

95

Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24 CP24

05Apr14 05Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14

And if begins pic.twitter.com/wyo8Aa54ZC This dog feels so much shame. pic.twitter.com/67aPXOWzz4 City officials confirm Rob Ford went to his office post Leafs game Saturday. Asked security to call him a cab at 130am via @jcrandles_cp24 The Mayor arrived at his office 10p. City official believes he was alone in his office until 130am. Mayor asked security to call him a cab RT Rob Ford LIVE on CP24 says he WASN'T DRUNK Friday or Saturday night #TOpoli RT Ford says he believes that he was refused access to the lounge because of his vote against providing MLSE with a loan to expand BMO Field. RT When Ford was asked if he was drinking or doing drugs, he started to walk away saying 'you guys ask stupid questions' #TOpoli Dozens gather in Ottawa to mark the 20th anniversary of the Rwandan genocide. pic.twitter.com/lJTcRjj0Hz RT BREAKING: CTV projects Liberals win Quebec election RT @CTVNews: BREAKING: CTV projects Quebec Liberals win majority http://ow.ly/vxt6H #qc2014 RT A PQ supporter was just saying the result is a "disaster" pic.twitter.com/OCN6aRU3fJ RT #WendyFreeman #CTVNewsPrez wins. #WCT women of the year! pic.twitter.com/7c0UhkU0uR Eight-month old Charles is named after his uncle, killed 20-years ago in Rwanda. His family's story @CTVNationalNews pic.twitter.com/WGWmrSEM0K RT Mayor Ford is speaking with reporters at city hall. Tune into CP24 for LIVE coverage. RT Mayor Rob Ford brings out 10,000 eggs he planned to hand out at Beaches Easter parade. #topoli #robford pic.twitter.com/lsshCS353Y Doug Ford confirms to @CP24 the "win a date with Krista Ford" contest is fake. Facebook page NOT associated with mayor. Doug is not

Individual istic Individual istic Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualist ic Individualist ic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

Private Life Private Life Reporting The News Real-Time Reporting Promotion of newscast Real-Time Reporting

CP24

CP24 CP24

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News Promotion of Newsroom Website Reporting The News Real-Time Reporting Promotion of newscast Promotion of newscast Real-Time Reporting

CP24

CP24 CP24

CP24 CP24

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

CP24

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24

Journalisti c Journalisti c

Promotion News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n

KatieSimps on24

CP24

Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting

96

happy. Katie Simpso n KatieSimps on24 CP24 08Apr14 RT Ford left with 10,000 candy eggs after politicians barred from Easter parade. http://www.cp24.com/news/politicia ns-banned-from-beaches-easterparade-amid-election-campaign1.1766043 ... pic.twitter.com/cvJJw54rHJ RT Former Olympian Ben Johnson is apparently visiting Mayor Ford. Both are expected to speak outside his office soon. RT Mayor Rob Ford announces Ben Johnson & a Trailer Park Boys actor is working on his campaign team #TOpoli pic.twitter.com/H708vheYwo RT Ben Johnson and a Trailer park boy are on Mayor Ford's campaign team RT Former Olympian Ben Johnson is with Mayor Rob Ford. Ford tells reporters Johnson is helping out with a few campaign events. RT When asked about Johnson's previous drug scandal, Ford interrupted the reporter to say he supports the former athlete 100 per cent. RT Ben Johnson is part of Mayor Ford's campaign team. Didn't say what role he'll play/address obvious similarities btwn their personal stories RT The Toronto Maple Leafs have been officially eliminated from playoff contention following a 3-0 loss to the Tampa Bay Lightning. RT Tonight's loss combined with the Columbus win eliminates the #Leafs from playoff contention. #TMLtalk RT Emergency personnel are responding to reports of a stabbing at a building on Yonge Street, north of Wilson Avenue/York Mills Road. RT Aerial footage from Chopper 24 shows paramedics loading a victim into an ambulance outside the building on Yonge Street. RT Police say at least two people were injured in an apparent stabbing at an office building on Yonge Street, north of Wilson/York Mills. RT UPDATE: Toronto police investigating reports of uptown stabbings. Latest details here: http://ow.ly/vBnyz pic.twitter.com/t aal8xKU9g Journalisti c Promotion Promotion of Newsroom Website

Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24

08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14

Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n

Reporting The News Reporting The News

CP24

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Reporting The News Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting

CP24

KatieSimps on24

CP24

Journalisti c

Reporting The News

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24

Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Reporting The News Opinion Based News Reporting The News Reporting The News Reporting The News Reporting The News

CP24

CP24

CP24

CP24

CP24

97

Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso

KatieSimps on24

CP24

09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr-

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24

CP24

CP24

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24

CP24

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24

CP24

CP24

CP24 CP24

CP24 CP24

on @ctvnewschannel #Toronto Police say the stabbing suspect in custody is a male in his 30s. Say 3 taken to hospital, 1 by emergency run RT #BREAKING: EMS now tell @cp24 4 ppl taken to hospital; 2 serious condition male in 40s taken into custody #Toronto RT EMS says four patients in office building stabbing all taken to trauma centre. Two had life-threatening injuries, two had serious injuries. RT #EXCLUSIVE shot of man in police custody following #Toronto stabbing: http://ow.ly/vBE8R pic.twitter.com/ TbUO0MDeuh RT Doug Ford LIVE on CP24 defending Ben Johnson on the Rob #Ford team...saying we welcome everyone #TOpoli NDP Leader Tom Mulcair on CRA shutdown says Conservatives are 'poor public managers'. Says they've never cared about services for the public Mulcair says if they've introduced a system that isn't well enough protected, it is their fault (on CRA shutdown). Mulcair says Conservatives have never respected personal information, says CRA shut down is the ultimate example of that. RT "I don't know why you guys focus on the little stuff like who is donating money" Doug Ford tells reporters. #topoli #Toronto Police update on the office stabbing LIVE @CP24 and @ctvnewschannel RT Police say that employees subdued a suspect until police arrived. He was then taken into custody. RT The Rob Ford Must Go protesters getting creative with their signs pic.twitter.com/lMtlfTKT04 RT Rob Ford soccer skillz #TOpoli pic.twitter.com/fL7mnjIFaX Mulcair just said that. RT Mulcair just referred to Minister Pierre Poilievre as a "lightweight" in Question Period #cdnpoli Statment from CRA says that online services should resume over the

Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio

Reporting The News

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Reporting The News Reporting The News Reporting The News

Journalisti c Journalisti c

Reporting The News Real-Time Reporting

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Promotion of newscast Reporting The News Reporting The News Opinion Based News Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News Real-Time Reporting

CP24 CP24 CP24

98

n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 CP24

14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 09Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14

CP24

CP24

CP24

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24

CP24

CP24

CP24

Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24

10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24

weekend. System shut down because of heartbleed bug. Canadian Bankers Association: The online banking applications of Canadian banks have not been affected by the Heartbleed bug. RT New info from police: stabbing suspect is 47, was being fired when he stabbed 4 Ceridian employees. 2 most seriously injured are superiors. RT Here's #LPC Wayne Easter dancing like a chicken in HoC #cdnpoli https://vine.co/v/M560JQgIVTW RT What is going on with @VIA_Rail crossings in #Ottawa? This sent to @CFRA Snow this afternoon @ctvottawa pic.twitter.com/zW5epvV7Aw RT My meeting with Rob Ford yesterday was about how I can help him get into shape for his campaign this fall. #RobFord #Toronto On @CTVCanadaAM @RobertFife reports Patrick Brazeau is in police custody. Arrested this morning following a domestic dispute. RT Brazeau is facing charges of assault, possession of cocaine and uttering threats, and he remains in custody, CTV News reports. RT Peak at 4 new @TOMayorFord bobbleheads @3rd Ed., Special Edition, @jimmykimmel , Hollywood #RobFordBobblehead #TOpoli pic.twitter.com/KrLzYKNOWQ CP: CBC News says CBC/Radio Canada is eliminating 657 positions over 2 years. RT Police guard in front of former FinMin Jim Flaherty's Ottawa condo. Statement expected shortly #cdnpoli pic.twitter.com/pup7dOJQfJ RT Conservative MPs have gathered just outside the chamber #cdnpoli RT CTV's @RobertFife confirms that former finance Minister Jim Flaherty has passed away. Very sad news. RT MPs on both sides of the aisle are shaking hands and hugging each other. Statement on the death of Jim Flaherty. pic.twitter.com/sYBZqGZDUS RT Nasdaq commemorates Jim Flaherty at Times Square today because of his contribution to global

n Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News Personal Lives On Display Reporting The News

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Reporting The News Promotion of newscast Reporting The News Reporting The News

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n

Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n

Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News Reporting The News Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News

CP24 CP24 CP24

99

Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24

10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 10Apr14 11Apr14 11Apr14 11Apr14 11Apr14 11Apr14 11Apr14

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24

CP24

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24 CP24

economy. pic.twitter.com/7SHKtPvxnJ RT PM will address caucus in the Reading Room in 5 minutes statement only, no questions. RT OPS responded to a medical call at 12:27pm today on Cumberland Street. We can now identify victim as Jim Flaherty, with family permission. RT Sorry the NASDAQ Flaherty photo wsa from March 28 when he resigned - they should do it again today. @CTVNews RT Harper says news of Flaherty's sudden and unexpected death came as a "terrible shock." http://www.cp24.com/video?clipId= 68597 ... RT Coroner van pulls up at Flaherty condo #cdnpoli pic.twitter.com/pMOXU3i50l RT Mayor Ford about to talk. #topoli An emotional Mayor Ford speaks about passing of Jim Flaherty. "I can never thank him enough for his friendship, loyalty through the years." Ford on Flaherty: "Canada would not be where it is today without the efforts of Flaherty." Ford's voice quivered with emotion as he expressed his "deep sadness" at the death of Flaherty who was a close family friend. The Ford Nation video featuring Jimmy Kimmel will not be released today out of respect for Jim Flaherty, Doug Ford tells CP24. RT The flag on Parliament Hill still at half mast today in honour of the late Jim Flaherty #cdnpoli pic.twitter.com/6UkIDOGsGe RT Flowers have been placed on top of Jim Flaherty's empty HoC desk as MPs pay tribute to his memory #cdnpoli via @SimonOstler The CN Tower will be lit in green tonight, in honour of Jim Flaherty. Funeral details for Jim Flaherty should be finalized by this afternoon, according to Kellie Leitch. Visiting my parents. Don't think my mom bought a big enough bag of croutons. Beer is for scale (and for later) pic.twitter.com/8Gqvk8h59h

Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

Reporting The News Reporting The News

Journalisti c Journalisti c

Reporting The News Promotion of Newsroom Website Reporting The News Reporting The News Real-Time Reporting

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualist ic

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual istic

Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News Reporting The News Reporting The News Reporting The News Private Life

CP24

CP24

CP24

CP24 CP24

CP24

100

Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n

KatieSimps on24

CP24

11Apr14 11Apr14 12Apr14 12Apr14 12Apr14 13Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24 CP24

RT PHOTO: CN Tower lit up in green as a tribute to the late Jim Flaherty pic.twitter.com/Mjid8iX0AW @CTVToronto The happy couple the night before the wedding! pic.twitter.com/RorSPW8JBi The bride!! pic.twitter.com/ClIPHYrcl5 If anyone ever wonders why I'm the way I am....my mother's photobomb explains it all. pic.twitter.com/CERy3uQBSp They still do the locomotion, even tho it isn't 1992 b pic.twitter.com/v0GDlNPP7D Amazing wedding! Congrats Jen & Shep! pic.twitter.com/UOhgWvDKRG Jimmy Kimmel Ford Nation episode. Mayor laughs at 'too drunk to know what happened' references http://m.youtube.com/watch?sns=tw &v=6zzh3DUGwIY ... Kimmel: I was so drunk I don't know what happened that night. Mayor Ford: laughs, I've used that excuse one too many times myself. #ToPoli RT #AMBERALERT: OPP have issued an Amber Alert for missing child Matthew Zhang. Police say he was last seen with his mom pic.twitter.com/zNVF2tavB6 PM holding photo op with John Baird, Minister of Foreign Affairs, as well as the Ambassadors of Ukraine, Estonia, Poland and Latvia. Doing the twitter reach out: file your taxes online? worried you're going to get a letter from the CRA about stolen info? DM/Follow me. RT Just spoke with @KatieSimpson24 about CRA, SIN numbers, and my fears of having to re-convince my parents that online filing is ok. RT Canadians fall victim to a widespread internet bug. @KatieSimpson24 has the details at 11pmET. RT Five dead in stabbing in northwest Calgary http://ow.ly/vO0pB via @CTVCalgary RT Visitation today in Whitby, Ont., for former finance minister Jim Flaherty http://www.cp24.com/news/visitatio

Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n Individualist ic Individualist ic Individualist ic Individualist ic Individualist ic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Crowdsourci ng Crowdsourci ng

Reporting The News

Individual istic Individual istic Individual istic Individual istic Individual istic Journalisti c

Private Life Private Life Private Life Private Life Private Life Reporting The News

CP24 CP24 CP24

KatieSimps on24

CP24

Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting

KatieSimps on24

CP24

Journalisti c

Reporting The News

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Reporting The News Crowd Sourcing Crowd Sourcing

CP24

CP24

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Promotion

Promotion of own work Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of Newsroom Website

CP24

Promotion

CP24

Promotion

101

Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24

15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14

CP24 CP24

Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie

KatieSimps on24

CP24

15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 16-

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24

CP24 CP24

n-today-in-whitby-ont-for-formerfinance-minister-jim-flaherty1.1775606#ixzz2ywhp3aws ... pic.twitter.com/k87eiojins RCMP say they asked CRA to delay release of information about stolen social insurance numbers. CRA was aware of stolen social insurance numbers on Friday, public not notified until Monday. RCMP says they asked for delay. RCMP asked for the delay to advance their investigation and mitigate further risk. RT Senate Legal Affairs cmtte report on Fair Elections Act. #cdnpoli http://www.parl.gc.ca/Content/SEN/ Committee/412/lcjc/rep/rep06apr14e.htm ... RT #BREAKING: One person stabbed at St. Roch Catholic SS in Brampton; possibly 2nd vic. One person in custody, hunt on for second suspect RT #BREAKING: St. Roch Catholic SS in lockdown after stabbing; area schools in hold and secure @CP24 Calgary Police send out news release saying 1130MT/130ET news conference on the multiple stabbing. RT Worried about a stolen SIN? Here's what to do: http://ow.ly/vOmyf RT Hey! @RobertFife is in Toronto and made it to our afternoon story meeting. @CTVNationalNews pic.twitter.com/MmkfijxASY RT Ethics Commish says she received news from RCMP they are not charging Wright, says she is "reviewing the matter", no more comment #cdnpoli RT @CTVNews: STORY Mounties drop investigation into Wright's $90,000 cheque to Duffy: http://ow.ly/vPprn #cdnpoli PMO: We are pleased the RCMP has made progress in their work. The PMO will continue offering every possible assistance to the investigation RT Wright statement: "I believed that my actions were always in the public interest and lawful." #cdnpoli Pierre Poilievre confirms he did recieve a death threat in the mail. RCMP investigating. Mike Duffy releases statement on

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Promotion of Newsroom Website Reporting The News

Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Reporting The News Reporting The News Promotion of Newsroom Website Promotion of Newsroom Website Reporting The News

CP24

Promotion

CP24

News Disseminatio n Promotion

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24

Journalisti c Journalisti c

CP24

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News

Promotion of Newsroom Website Real-Time Reporting

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps

CP24 CP24 CP24

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti

Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time

102

Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n

on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 CP24 CP24 CP24 CP24

Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14

CP24

Nigel Wright as RCMP announces they won't pursue charges against former PMO chief of staff. Duffy: After consulting my legal team; I have concluded that it would be inappropriate.... Duffy: ...for me to comment while these matters are under study by the RCMP. At St. James Cathedral ahead of Jim Flaherty's state funeral pic.twitter.com/qHcD3X8NzT Lots of security downtown Toronto. Mourners gathering quite early at St James Cathedral, some tell me they're worried about getting a seat Also spotting lots of suits with green ties having lunch on King Street. Mourners are making their way into the overflow tents outside of St. James Cathedral. Church holds 600. Up to 1000 allowed in tents. The overflow tents outside of St James Cathedral for guests at Jim Flaherty's funeral. pic.twitter.com/wUlrhLP9az Lisa Raitt, Peter Kent, heading into the church. Peter MacKay here too. Peter MacKay gets choked up remembering his friend Jim Flaherty. Becomes emotional when speaking about Flaherty's plans for the future NDP leader Tom Mulcair just arrived. Wearing a green. Councillor Doug Ford, his mother Diane, shake hands with Peter MacKay before heading into the church. Premier Kathleen Wynne has arrived. Mayor Ford is here. Green tie. Mayor Ford and his wife Renata enter the church. pic.twitter.com/gbhkj3YMvW Former Prime Minister Brian Mulroney just arrived. pic.twitter.com/DxcaRhGmsS Prime Minister Stephen Harper and his wife arrive. pic.twitter.com/Y1mS4M8Scj Jim Flaherty's there sons, widow, arrive at St. James Cathedral. pic.twitter.com/kTTCtZ05VQ

c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n

Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Opinion Based News Opinion Based News Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting

CP24

CP24

CP24 CP24

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting

CP24 CP24 CP24 CP24 CP24 CP24

103

Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24 CP24

16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14

CP24 CP24 CP24

CP24

CP24 CP24 CP24 CP24

Honour Guard with Jim Flaherty's casket. pic.twitter.com/KgHxyPt4dH Prime Minister now paying tribute to Jim Flaherty. Says what a sad time it is in the life of our country. PMSH: this has been a traumatic event for many. Says we have lost a partner in politics, family has lost a partner in life Flaherty's casket as it was carried into the church. pic.twitter.com/P5HVaDuIQ6 PMSH: he could be hard headed, but soft hearted. Said he loved jokes about his own shortness. RT PM jokes that he envied Flaherty's ability to get his political enemies to like him, jokes he can't even get his friends to like him. RT A photo of #JimFlaherty 's widow Christine Elliott and their three sons at his state funeral. pic.twitter.com/gwmoPb6BMU pic.twitter.com/CSPwwseD98 pic.twitter.com/CSPwwseD98 Back to Ottawa. RT We're on the air in the eastern time zone in just a few minutes. Join @LisaLaFlammeCTV at 11. #CTVNationalNews RT So yesterday Chairman of US Joint Chiefs of Staff in Ottawa meeting with CDS. Today CDS and PM have a photo op... Hmmm... PM says at the request of NATO, Canada will be sending 6 CF-18s to Eastern Europe. Concerned about what's happening with Ukraine. RT "I want to go to Ottawa and make sure that we un-elect Stephen Harper and that we elect Justin Trudeau," Vaughan says. RT Vaughan will be running as a Liberal candidate in federal byelection in Trinity-Spadina, he confirms. RT Doug de Grood: We will never recover from this. We hope some day we will have answers for why this happened. RT #Breaking: RCMP to address Netherlands investigation relating to Amanda Todd case at 5 p.m. Members of Todd family to attend.

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual istic Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualist ic Promotion

Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Daily Chatter Promotion of newscast Opinion Based News Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News

CP24

Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n

CP24

CP24

CP24

CP24

CP24

104

Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24 CP24

17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 17Apr14 18Apr14 18Apr14 18Apr14 18Apr14

@JProskowGlobal the best criminal defence lawyer in Canada? Ok cold...you win ... RT Laureen Harper wears kitty ears at Internet cat video festival in Toronto.#justforcats pic.twitter.com/m3goTlLFeK RCMP say in 2010, police looked into allegations Amanda Todd was being harassed. Investigation expanded after her death in 2012. RCMP confirming a Dutch citizen arrested in the Netherlands, charged in connection with Amanda Todd investigation. Male, 35, facing a number of charges, relating to extortion and child pornography. Name of suspect not being released. RCMP saying they told Amanda Todd's parents about the arrest 2 hours ago. Amanda Todd's mother says this is truly a day she's been waiting for. Says she always knew what her daughter said was the truth. Amanda Todd's dad says he's glad a suspect has been arrested, hoping some justice will be had. RCMP won't say when the suspect in the Amanda Todd case was identified. RCMP confirm all 5 charges laid today are related to the Amanda Todd case. RCMP not releasing many details, saying they do not want to harm the integrity of the Dutch investigation. RCMP not releasing many details, saying they do not want to harm the integrity of the Dutch investigation. RCMP say in BC, 30-40 officers involved in the Amanda Todd investigation alone. Laureen Harper heckled at Cat Film Festival event: http://www.ctvnews.ca/canada/activi st-heckles-laureen-harper-at-torontofestival-for-online-cat-videosRT PMO says it is 'disappointed that politics continue to delay a decision on Keystone XL." #cdnpoli "Sorry Air Canada, this is a fail" https://www.youtube.com/embed/Pg Dizh4DMno ... I've got an exclusive coming up @CTVNationalNews about the suspect in the Amanda Todd

Journalisti c Individual istic Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Conversatio n Individualist ic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

Conversati on Daily Chatter Reporting The News Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Promotion of Newsroom Website Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Promotion of own work

CP24

CP24

CP24

CP24 CP24

CP24 CP24 CP24 CP24 CP24 CP24 CP24

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24 CP24

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion

105

investigation. Tune in. Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n KatieSimps on24 CP24 18Apr14 18Apr14 Exclusive: Police have linked suspect facing charges in Amanda Todd case to 10 Canadian victims, 100 victims world wide. @CTVNationalNews More: CTV News learns that the suspect in the Amanda Todd case is linked to 10 Canadian victims, 100 worldwide http://www.ctvnews.ca/canada/manarrested-in-amanda-todd-case-mayhave-exploited-10-canadians1.1782624 ... RT .@KatieSimpson24's EXCLUSIVE story tonight: Police link man accused of tormenting Amanda Todd to 10 Canadian victims http://ow.ly/vWpqq @Bullying_org it did! You're in there twice! @Bullying_org link is in your email! Days like this I miss Toronto. #wearenorth RT @katiesimpson24 it's #WeTheNorth! But the mix up is understandable given that we all tweeted the heck out of #WeAreWinter wethenorth not #wearenorth #fail #sloganmelting RT Air Canada apologizes for the "totally unacceptable mishandling of our passengers' baggage captured on video" http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=PgD izh4DMno ... RT Air Canada: We are in the process of identifying employees involved whose employment will be terminated pending outcome of our investigation RT Air Canada: Their actions contravened our baggage handling procedures which require gatechecked bags to be hand carried to the ramp RT Vancouver police investigating report of a #dog-napping from downtown tattoo store. Owners say '#Chloe' taken Thurs. pic.twitter.com/OPUohAU7WW View from the office. Pic looks better because I haven't figured out how to turn the lights on in the bureau yet.... Journalisti c News Disseminatio n Promotion Reporting The News

KatieSimps on24

CP24

Journalisti c

Promotion of own work

Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n

KatieSimps on24

CP24

18Apr14 18Apr14 19Apr14 19Apr14 19Apr14 19Apr14 19Apr14

Journalisti c

Promotion

Promotion of own work Conversati on Conversati on Daily Chatter Daily Chatter

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24 CP24 CP24

Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual istic Individual istic

Conversatio n Conversatio n Individualist ic Individualist ic

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24

CP24 CP24

Individual istic Journalisti c

Individualist ic News Disseminatio n

Personal Interest Reporting The News

Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n

KatieSimps on24

CP24

19Apr14 19Apr14 19Apr14 19Apr14

Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic

Real-Time Reporting

KatieSimps on24

CP24

Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting

KatieSimps on24

CP24

Journalisti c

Reporting The News

KatieSimps on24

CP24

Individual ized Journalisti c

Personal Lives On Display

106

pic.twitter.com/4gL2CUO5P0 Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Katie Simpso n Paul Bliss KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 CP24 19Apr14 19Apr14 19Apr14 20Apr14 20Apr14 20Apr14 20Apr14 20Apr14 31Mar14 31Mar14 31Mar14 31Mar14 31Mar14 31Mar14 31Tonight on @CTVNationalNews I speak with the father of Rehtaeh Parsons about the new charges over alleged threats against him. The father of Rehtaeh Parsons tells me he's "speechless" about new charges, and link to his daughter's cyber-bullying investigation. Coming up at 11pmET RT @SandieR_ctv: More anguish for the father of Rehtaeh Parsons. @KatieSimpson24 pic.twitter.com/LSwc221EOd Pot rally on the Hill. Food trucks nearby are doing well today. pic.twitter.com/QMPu5r8lr7 his gentlemen says he hopes to win the contest "biggest bag on the hill". It's a contest he just made up, right now pic.twitter.com/mGnsxTUuyb This is the legalize pot crowd on the hill today. pic.twitter.com/xTrS1oOiT6 Is this legit? RT @kimballb: Mayor Rob Ford at #coachella #topol pic.twitter.com/BUCeNbWp8Q This man wanted me to take a selfie with him. I declined...... pic.twitter.com/d0fsZjwutH BREAKING- Ontario NDP have just walked out of Question Period. They're furious Premier Wynne not present to discuss gas plant emails 3onpoli MORE- As NDP storm out of Legislature, Tory @MacLeodLisa zings "typical-when the going gets tough, the NDP get going." Even Lib MPPs clapped "They don't give a damn about facts"- LibHouse Ldr about Tory gas plant accusations. PCs call deleted emails "a secret diabolical mission" So-it was Ont Lib Party decision 2 cancel gas plants b4 elxn. AND Ont Lib Party hired I-T expert 2 delete gas plant emails in Preem's office @QQ_ZZZ. Yes. Libs say the I-T company had contract with the Party from 2010 - 2013. Billed $160,000 in that time. #onpoli @QQ_ZZZ. NO !!!!!! Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Promotion Promotion of own work Promotion of own work Promotion of own work Opinion Based News Opinion Based News Real-Time Reporting Conversati on Personal Lives On Display Reporting The News

CP24

Promotion

CP24

Promotion

KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 KatieSimps on24 BlissBlogs

CP24

CP24

CP24 CP24 CP24

Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n Conversatio n Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic Conversatio n Individualize d Journalistic Individualize

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual

Opinion Based News Real-Time Reporting Opinion Based News Conversati on Personal Lives on Display Opinion

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV

BlissBlogs

BlissBlogs

BlissBlogs

BlissBlogs

Premier Wynne ups the ante. Her

107

Bliss Paul Bliss BlissBlogs

Toronto CTV Toronto

Mar14 31Mar14 31Mar14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

BlissBlogs

BlissBlogs

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

BlissBlogs

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

BlissBlogs

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

lawyer firing off legal letter to PC Leader Hudak re: allegations she ordered gas plant emails deleted. Premier Wynne suggests she's not running from Question Period grilling on gas plant emails by touring in Sault. She's back to QP tomorrow. Cease &desist letter sent by Premier's lawyer 2 PC Ldr Hudak demanding "full & unqualified apology" "public retraction" re: gas plant claims BREAKING- Ont Tories claim to have budget leak & Wynne gameplan. Say Ont budget is May 1 with $5B new spending. #onpoli MORE-hydro bill news! PC budget leak info claims Liberals to end the hated "debt retirement charge" on electricity bills in Jan '16 #onpoli BREAKING-NDP threaten to use Speaker's Warrant & use the power of law to force computer expert named in gas plant scandal to testify @ cmtee Alleged "budget leak"says Libs to dbl grants 4 Srs, invest $$ in school nutrition prgms, cover more in-vitro trtmnts, up tax child benefits Hmm. The Tories r changing the channel from the gas plant scandal to their alleged budget docmnt leak. Some peeps at QPark are wondering why The Premier seems happy to be fielding Tory questions about her budget. #onpoli 20 minutes into Question Period ..still no gas plant question from Tories to the Premier. PCs r focusing on their alleged budget leak info. There should be a mechanism in the Legislature that FORCES politicians to answer direct questions..and not deflect onto message track. @downsdispatch. I understand if they dodge MY questions ..but in the House, it's really noticeable when they dodge during Question Period. @KatieFranzios. You mean they aren't ? :) You mean sneakers? Heh. "@AshleyroweCTV: @blissblogs forgot his work shoes today. Check out his fancy kicks. pic.twitter.com/v48NtyTcHt"

ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic

Based News Real-Time Reporting

Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Reporting The News Reporting The News Reporting The News

Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting Opinion Based News Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting

Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c

Personal Lives on Display Personal Lives on Display Personal Lives on Display Personal Lives on Display

BlissBlogs

108

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

01Apr14 01Apr14 01Apr14

@IvyCTV @AshleyroweCTV. Haha. Drive Clean fees dropped $5 today. The cut is designed to make the despised program revenue-neutral (as in, no profit for govt). #onpoli THIS was awesome. Thx to Prof Paul Delaney 4 allowing me @YorkU telescope. Tx to @ArtOfPhysics @aggrey87 for hosting pic.twitter.com/nQJdFFMSVF Just took this with my lousy bbrry camera and my telescope. Still kinda pretty. #astronomy #downtownviews pic.twitter.com/H7DczjQYcu Lawyer for former McGuinty Chief of Staff whose bf was hired to delete emails ..states the OPP claim she's not cooperating is false. RT LIVE NOW: OPP officer testifies about alleged deletion of emails regarding cancelled gas plants: http://ow.ly/vnSo3 OPP say key players in gas plant email deletion scandal refused to speak to police, including McGuinty chiefofstaff, dpty ChfofStff & her bf Lawyer for I-T savvy boyfriend of McGuinty's former Dpty Chief of Staff has now contacted QPark committee demanding he testify. #gasplants "We had good cooperation from government officials" says OPP Detective who is probing deleted gas plant emails in Office of Premier Ontario RT Traders On Alert for Hefty Storage Report; May Called 5 Cents Higher http://dlvr.it/5JWLG7 Chair of QPark committee threatens to "seize" cell phones in room if they go off .. citing "parliamentary procedure." #onpoli #cellphones OPP Detective says no evidence Premier Wynne oversaw any deletion of gas plant emails. #onpoli Woah.. RT @HowsonCraig: So if you draw a wig onto a £10 note it looks a bit like Amy Winehouse pic.twitter.com/TAceVtdrth .@zuraidahCTV starts the read on this segment of our script for @CTVToronto Noon news. Chat with us #talkbacktoronto pic.twitter.com/AkGsIbmceq

BlissBlogs

Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual istic

Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic

Personal Lives On Display Reporting The News Personal Lives On Display

BlissBlogs

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

02Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14

Individualist ic

Personal Interest

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n Promotion

Real-Time Reporting Promotion of Newsroom Website Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting

BlissBlogs

BlissBlogs

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualist ic Crowdsourci ng

BlissBlogs

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual istic Journalisti c

Reporting The News Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Personal Interest Crowd Sourcing

BlissBlogs BlissBlogs

BlissBlogs

109

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

03Apr14 03Apr14 03Apr14

BlissBlogs

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

03Apr14 03Apr14 04Apr14 04Apr14 04Apr14

BlissBlogs

BlissBlogs

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

BlissBlogs

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

04Apr14 04Apr-

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

@SimonOstler @zuraidahCTV @CTVToronto. Make sure u let my mom through. She always says nice things about me. Ha. Me, Z and the floor crew vote "yes" to the glasses look for @DeniseCTV. Woulda been a fun talkback question. pic.twitter.com/OYLpYqlGTI RT Italy's boot, Sardinia, Sicily and Corsica as seen 300km up from the #ISS. #ESA #NASA https://www.flickr.com/photos/euro peanspaceagency/13602976083/in/p hotolist-mJ3NSp-mHDYgRmGvqor-mGeHG5-mGaNxgmG2yaK-mFoj2C-mFmqovmEDn68-mEEbyW-mExBLHmEvqpZ-mDLYJB-mD7C6YmD7C3w-mD7C5W-mD7BTJmGmr8R-mD7C3G-mD6v92mCqLre-mCqfN8-mCrRxf-mCqLrzmCqfLV-mCqeZK-mCrRoNmCrRpu-mCqMnx-mCmArTmCeidE-mCd85z-mC9LWVmCaRG5-mC9ggK-mB9dFPmA8ENr-mzxqLX-mzbCmpmytt8z-mxGvB2-mxBYuwmxtKSn-mxsAo4-mwSmbAmwSyiS-mwSQ64-mwJjW6mwHq9n-mwHHWC ... pic.twitter.com/usdGo6O8oK #Reporters notice things. And it always makes me nervous when I see cars of other(talented) journos at the Legislature as I leave. #scoop? Great seeing u again E. "@emozes: Nice to run @blissblogs @karmenwong & @nparnessCTV in my hood" Ont Liberals take credit 4 improving jobs numbers. Say better employment rate partly spurred by good gov tax policies pic.twitter.com/3PJK94ktvi RT @blissblogs Correlation does not equal causation. Ask them to provide causal link that they have verified. The end of this story GUARANTEED to make u smile a mile wide. Watch this kid charm the #Leafs AND PREDICT right score http://toronto.ctvnews.ca/video?play listId=1.1760342 ... RT How does #Ebola infection control work at Donka hospital in #Conakry, #Guinea? http://goo.gl/JKBKyK pic.twitter.co m/dXS38MKrWf RT@EarthshineAstro: Total Eclipse of the Moon April 14-15

Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual istic

Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Individualist ic

Personal Lives On Display Personal Lives On Display Personal Interest

Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n Conversatio n Individualize d Journalistic

Personal Lives on Display Personal Lives on Display Real-Time Reporting

Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Conversati on Opinion Based News

News Disseminatio n Individualize d

Reporting The News

Individual ized

Opinion Based

110

14 Paul Bliss BlissBlogs CTV Toronto 04Apr14 04Apr14 04Apr14 04Apr14 04Apr14 04Apr14 04Apr14 04Apr14

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

http://earthshineastronomy.ca/events /2014/4/15/total-eclipse-of-themoon-april-14-15 ..." RT Vote now on what our next spacesuit prototype will look like! 3 designs to choose from: http://go.nasa.gov/1iUn3pM #Z2 pi c.twitter.com/D4Vx9YGH2r I got 2 hold a meteorite @YorkU physics. Hvy like bowling ball. 93% iron. Fell Russia '47. Tx @JenZomederis @aggrey87 pic.twitter.com/0rFCDBdmwz @bdydbl. Was a blast.

Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic Individualist ic Individualize d Journalistic

News Opinion Based News Personal Lives On Display Personal Lives On Display Real-Time Reporting

BlissBlogs

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

BlissBlogs

BlissBlogs

Political war escalates. Ontario's Premier Kathleen Wynne has served PC Leader Tim Hudak & his Energy Critic Lisa MacLeod with libel notice. Premier's press sec tells me NO PUBLIC MONEY being used by Kathleen Wynne to sue PC Ldr Hudak & MPP Lisa MacLeod over gas plant accusations RT "@thadbrown7: Jim Kelly on jumbotron at Knicks game. pic.twitter.com/v3hr0FaEzN" #PrayersForJK Tres cool !!! "@EpicCosmos: Current activity on the Sun's southeastern limb to Earth-scale. pic.twitter.com/p6zp0amscr" Look who's on my TV. My talented friend @Patricia_J put this together 2 fight drunk driving. Well done. #arrivealive pic.twitter.com/oxfL0LlPpg Oh, you know ..just an April snow flurry. #winterthatwontend pic.twitter.com/QUVdj9SD79 RT #Afghanelection turnout at 7m out of estimated 12m eligible voters, election commission chief says http://bbc.in/1hrKySk While I'm quoted in this spirited @RyersonReview article, remarks near bottom by @robertbenzie r the prize http://www.rrj.ca/m8429/ #onpoli RT @SPACEdotcom:The famous blue formation of the Pleiades star cluster radiates beautifully. http://bit.ly/1lHm0fJ pic.twitter.co m/yOIkDA14Sk Premier Wynne promoting her Liberal vision in a health/education anncemnt in west Toronto. Says her party offers "a reasoned middle-

Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting

Individual ized Journalisti c Individual istic Individual ized Journalisti c Individual istic Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual istic

Personal Lives On Display Personal Interest Opinion Based News

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

05Apr14 05Apr14 06Apr14 06Apr14 07Apr14

Individualist ic News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic Individualist ic

Daily Chatter Reporting The News Opinion Based News Personal Interest

BlissBlogs

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n

Real-Time Reporting

111

path" Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss BlissBlogs CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto 07Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14 07Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 08Apr14 Ont spends $48 Billion/yr on health care. Premier Wynne warns- beware of political parties that will cut n slash education & health care "Tim Hudak & I both got our start in politics, thanks to Mike Harris," says Premier Wynne. She, to fight the PC agenda, Hudak to serve it. Ont to invest $150mil for tech in classrooms. And, this sure does snd like elxn speech. Long, considering it's not a crowd of party faithful Science is beautiful! "@AstroRM: Northern lights last night over Canada. pic.twitter.com/RFvCq59qmw" @AuroraMAX #explorecanada As Premier unveils plan to sign 20,000 Pan Am Games volunteers, a QPark committee is hours from probing questionable Games security contract Gonna put Libs on notice that if they tell media 8pm Friday of libel notice for PC Ldr, that we notice when they don't show us actual notice RT Govt House leader John Milloy wouldn't confirm that what was sent to Hudak/MacLeod on Friday was in fact, an official Libel Notice #ONpoli Premier's lawyer tells me, Notice of Libel does NOT get filed in court. It's strongly worded letter says M. Frieman. Notice sent 2 Hudak Fri Cool"@Juno_101: #Juno-Current Distance to Earth: 373 Million Km/h, Relative Speed: 160,050km/h, Communications Delay: 20 Minutes 46 Secs" RT Ohio and Pennsylvania, you have a total solar eclipse 10 years from today! More maps: http://buff.ly/R13AKs pic.twitter.co m/3dq5VJE2ID RT Weird 'UFO' Light on #Mars May Just Be a Shiny Rock, NASA Says http://oak.ctx.ly/r/w0qb pic.twitter.c om/zPbPlyVOMs RT 'Mystery' Light on Mars Spotted by Curiosity (Update) http://aeng.in/1g3jTz1 h/t @b0yle pic.twitter.com/mht0wAiBQT RT New York, VT, NH, Montreal, you have a total solar eclipse 10 years from today! More maps: http://buff.ly/R14GWF pic.twitter.c om/ULXD9QWUXs Journalisti c Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual istic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic Individualist ic Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting Opinion Based News Personal Interest

BlissBlogs

BlissBlogs

BlissBlogs

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualist ic

Real-Time Reporting

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

BlissBlogs

Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Opinion Based News Reporting The News

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

Journalisti c Individual istic

Real-Time Reporting Personal Interest

BlissBlogs

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Individual istic

Individualist ic

Personal Interest

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Individual istic

Individualist ic

Personal Interest

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

Individual istic Individual istic

Individualist ic Individualist ic

Personal Interest Personal Interest

BlissBlogs

112

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

14Apr14

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr-

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

BlissBlogs

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

BlissBlogs

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

BlissBlogs BlissBlogs

BlissBlogs

RT The iconic Boston bombing photo isn't about my legs ­ it's about a rescue | Jeff Bauman http://www.theguardian.com/comme ntisfree/2014/apr/14/bostonbombing-wheelchair-photo-oneyear-later ... RT Canada Revenue Agency says Social Insurance Numbers of about 900 taxpayers were stolen through the "Heartbleed Bug" computer vulnerability. atIvyCTV. Begs for a video of possessed private school kids with creepy eyes and 80s hair, doesn't it .. Ont's Privacy Commish slams cops 4 disclosing attemt-suicide info to American border/security agencies. Says practice "widespread" #cdnpoli Ont Privacy Commish urges end 2 "indiscriminate disclosure of info relating to ALL suicide attempts" to U-S security pic.twitter.com/LY0qTB3lL3 Canadians being urged to change passwords by Ontario's Privacy Commissioner following S.I.N #s security breach at CRA re: #HeartbleedVirus remier Kathleen Wynne about to unveil big transit & transit funding plan for GTHA & Ont. #Onpoli #TRBOT pic.twitter.com/xZYHfCFKF0 NEW- Premier Wynne unveils $29B plan to fund transit & break gridlock. $15B for GTHA & $14B for rest of Ont. Includes MAJOR GO expansion. BREAKING- Premier Wynne plans to use HST from fuel taxes plus 7.5 cents from current gas tx to fund transit. #Onpoli MORE-Premier Wynne promises electric train service EVERY 15 mins on all GO lines owned by Ont in 10yrs- calling it "GO Regional Express"! Premier throws down elxn gauntlet. Says if PCs or NDP don't partner with her govt to pass her transit plan in budget, she will go to voters RT Matthew Zhang has been located, and the #AmberAlert has been called off. NEW- Lawyer for former McGuinty Dpty Chief of Staff, Laura Miller, says she will be in Toronto to testify at QP gas plant committee May 8 NEW - The techie boyfriend of a top McGuinty staffer brought in to

Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n

Reporting The News

Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n Individualist ic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio

Reporting The News

Individual istic Journalisti c Journalisti c

Daily Chatter Real-Time Reporting Real-Time Reporting

Journalisti c

Reporting The News

Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting

Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting

Journalisti c Journalisti c

Reporting The News Real-Time Reporting

Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Opinion Based News Reporting The News Real-Time Reporting Reporting The News

113

14 Paul Bliss BlissBlogs CTV Toronto 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 14Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15-

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

BlissBlogs

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

delete gas plant emails will testify at QP committee via videoconf May 13 The lawyer for Peter Faist says of his client "Peter is looking forward to his appearance before the Committee". #gasplants #emailscandal RT Would you install solar panels on your roof? Government was paying big bucks for green energy but rates have been slashed. Still worth it? RT Wynne unveils aggressive transit expansion plan @blissblogs has more details on what could be in store http://bit.ly/RjXftM A classic. Recognize the "destination" in the alien time-place portal on this episode of #StarTrek TNG? pic.twitter.com/gLTDTf1Mg0 RT Maybe @akaWorf can bring some order to #toronto city hall pic.twitter.com/8olzmpwwnn picture via @blissblogs #TOpoli #StarTrek atsearexx. PVR. Watched it tonight.

n Journalisti c News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Promotion Real-Time Reporting

Journalisti c

Reporting The News

Journalisti c Individual istic

Promotion of own work Personal Interest

Individualist ic

Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n Individualist ic

Personal Lives On Display Personal Lives On Display Reporting The News

BlissBlogs

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

BlissBlogs

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul

BlissBlogs

CTV

RT Snow in #Toronto. Queen Victoria statue at Queen's Park dusted in white. Photo by @ctvnews George Stamou. pic.twitter.com/a1QgTDFsqe RT Great composite image of the #bloodmooneclipse from this morning. Photo by Spencer-Foto on Flickr. #astronomy pic.twitter.com/ulSYM8qvSF RT WRAP UP: Ukraine govt claims recapture of Kramatorsk airfield, self defence militia say 4 dead http://on.rt.com/1q9y34 pic.twitter.c om/urBvIEid2o RT Every newsroom at lunch is the same: People furiously shoveling food into their faces while staring at their computers. Cheers! "for the first time ever, Ontario wineries have option to remain open 4 business thru entire Easter holiday wknd" @WineCouncilOnt BREAKING- PC MPP Lisa McLeod says Premier Kathleen Wynne is suing her for $2million over allegations Wynne was involved in gas plant scandal More BREAKING - Ontario budget

Individual istic

Personal Interest

Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News

Reporting The News

Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Personal Lives On Display Opinion Based News Reporting The News

Journalisti

Reporting

114

Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss BlissBlogs

Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14 15Apr14

BlissBlogs

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

BlissBlogs

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

will come down May 1st ...as per leaked documents Tories paraded. #Onpoli #cdnpoli Reporters giving Finance Minister the gears over calling news conf at SAME time Ont's top civil servant testifies at gas plant committee. Tory MPP Lisa MacLeod furious over being sued for $2-million by Premier, for accusing Wynne of being involved in gas plant coverup. Ont NDP have no plans to bring down Wynne govt without first seeing the budget. NewDem Gilles Bisson says gotta fight "for folks back home" Tory MPP-"it's an insult" that the boyfriend of McGuinty's former dpty chief/staff wants to testify via videoconference. Wants P. Faist here RT On this day in 1912- RMS TITANIC hit an iceberg at 11.40pm off Newfoundland causing it to sink and kill 1500+ people pic.twitter.com/Al8w7XTjJi atAshleyCsanady Haha. They always remember what you wear. The details of the story ...not so much. :) RT Tmrw at 8AM @blissblogs will have the latest from Queen's Park. A budget date announced, Sousa under fire and Wynne suing MPP Lisa Macleod. atAshleyCsanady. Uh oh. Better watch my grammar. The pressure.. ! Hydro One's been spending $100smillions trying to upgrade transmission in Toronto. Another "main line" been on wish-list 4 a while #darkTO Speaking of transmission lines- new ones are now needed to feed power 2 west end cuz Libs killed gas plants in Mississauga/Oakville #darkto While I'm on transmission..Libs moved Mississauga & Oakville gas plants to Sarnia & Kingston--u know, where they need electricity #darkto To be fair, part of the reason ur #hydro bill rises is to upgrade transmission. Hydro One operates 30,000km of lines. #darkto #Onpoli Wasted millions."@TobyBarrettMPP: For 8 yrs now, native militants have

c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualist ic

The News Opinion Based News Real-Time Reporting

Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting

Journalisti c

Real-Time Reporting

Individual istic

Personal Interest

Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Promotion

Personal Lives On Display Promotion of own work Personal Lives On Display Reporting The News

BlissBlogs

Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Individualize d Journalistic Conversatio n

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Opinion Based News Opinion Based News Opinion Based News Conversati on

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

115

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

15Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

BlissBlogs

BlissBlogs

blocked wiring the Niagara to Middleport power towers # #Caledonia!" Electricity so taken for granted. "@davebutters: @blissblogs everyone wants100% reliability but not the $$ that come with it. Shortsighted" 1/2 NEW-Ontario combats #JennyMcCarthyEffect-updating immunization req'ments for 14/15 school yr. Adds 3 new mandatory immunizations&doses 2/2 Students to need proof immunization against whooping cough, meningococcal disease & for kids born post 2010.. chickenpox. #herdimmunity Happy days (finally) MT @allisonjones_cp: Ontario now puts court dockets online! http://www.ontariocourtdates.ca/def ault.aspx "Outrageously irresponsible" is how Ont's Health Min describes comments by daytimeTV star #JennyMcCarthy who says kids' vaccines r dangerous BREAKING - Hydro rate increase alert! Prices to rise 2.4% this summer as OEB approves hike of approx $2.83 per avg household starting May 1. MORE- Getting harder to save during "off-peak" hydro hrs. The Off-Peak price rises 0.3 cents, MidPeak up 0.3 cents, Peak goes up 0.6cents RT @blissblogs Annualizing the increase (twice per year increases) and looking just at the commodity portion of the bill, the increase is 7.2% The bills go up my pay stays the same! RT @amotherworld: @ErinLannan @blissblogs How can people afford to have a home these days? Seriously. RT @blissblogs makes me wonder why they don't give more incentive to those who are trying to use hydro during 'off-peak' hours! .@RobLearn I got the numbers from the sentence directly below the chart you tweeted. Now you can be sure. pic.twitter.com/USabuZJyL5 RT @RobLearn @blissblogs Press release of @OntEnergyBoard dilutes commodity cost increase w/ noncommodity cost components (e.g distribut'n)

Journalisti c

Conversatio n

Conversati on

Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualize d Journalistic News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Conversatio n

Reporting The News

Journalisti c

Reporting The News

Individual ized Journalisti c Journalisti c

Opinion Based News Real-Time Reporting

Journalisti c

Reporting The News

Journalisti c

Reporting The News

Journalisti c

Conversati on

Journalisti c

Conversatio n

Conversati on

Journalisti c Journalisti c Journalisti c

Conversatio n Conversatio n Conversatio n

Conversati on Conversati on Conversati on

116

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

16Apr14 16Apr14 16Apr14 17Apr14

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

18Apr14 18Apr14 18Apr14 18Apr14 18Apr14 18Apr14 18Apr14

BlissBlogs

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

BlissBlogs

BlissBlogs

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

NEW! Hydro One says blackout caused when high voltage line sagged & got 2 close 2 "structure" built UNDER the wires by Toronto Hydro #darkto NEW- 250,000 Toronto residents were in the dark last night cuz a Toronto Hydro pole was erected UNDER Hydro One high-voltage line #darkTO RT @tomadamsenergy @blissblogs @RobLearn @OntEnergyBoard It's 10.2% increase over 12 mnths ago other portions of bill likely to be same My iPhone image of Mars last night (R) compared to a Hubble image of the same region (L). https://www.flickr.com/photos/4113 3015@N00/13884168431/ ... pic.twitter.com/AhYe6Vp7XB @CTVToronto Amazing image. Our chopper crew delivers news and video you just don't see elsewhere. #CTVToronto The earliest Ontario will face general elxn if budget fails to pass is June 5. The latest is July 3, according to GovHouseLdrsOffice #onpoli The earliest date for Ont Budget Vote is May 7. The latest is June 2, according to GovHouseLdrsOffice. If if fails to pass= election time! RT Found! First Earth-Size Planet That Could Support Life http://oak.ctx.ly/r/xavw pic.twitter.c om/wReUETPAjS NEW- I have 1st look @ big, province-wide Lib TV ads, featuring @Kathleen_Wynne doing walking, talking attack on opposition policies #Onpoli RT Greetings to Manhattan. pic.twitter.com/cIYsrruOM5 Do you use Gmail? Your #emails are being scanned (in case you hadn't heard). Read this. Some still aren't aware. http://rt.com/usa/google-termsservice-scan-964/ ... RT BREAKING: U.S. Geological Survey says Mexico quake magnitude 7.5. -@AP RT Preliminary mag 7.5 #earthquake has occurred 39 km E of Petatlan, Guerrero, Mexico. http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquak es/eventpage/pt14108001#summary ... #terremoto

Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Conversatio n

Reporting The News

Journalisti c

Reporting The News

Journalisti c

Conversati on

Individual istic

Individualist ic

Personal Interest

Journalisti c Journalisti c

Promotion

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n Individualist ic Individualize d Journalistic Individualist ic News Disseminatio n

Promotion of Newsroom Website Reporting The News

Journalisti c Individual istic Individual ized Journalisti c Individual istic Journalisti c

Reporting The News Personal Interest Opinion Based News Personal Interest Reporting The News

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

18Apr14 18Apr14

Journalisti c Journalisti c

News Disseminatio n News Disseminatio n

Reporting The News Reporting The News

117

Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto

18Apr14 19Apr14 20Apr14 20Apr14 20Apr14 20Apr14

Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss Paul Bliss

BlissBlogs BlissBlogs BlissBlogs BlissBlogs BlissBlogs

CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto CTV Toronto

Ice melting on #LakeErie. Some might recognize ruins of "The Old Dance Hall" in Ft. Erie & Buffalo in bknd. #weather pic.twitter.com/kh4osGox33 Ummmmm - yeah, no. pic.twitter.com/QzXIkpSFRH Easter colours ! pic.twitter.com/SSke2USD7Y atChristinaParkNY @AudreyPuente #LiveLaughLove RT Incredible Ice Hotel, Sweden pic.twitter.com/zofU43E2ly RT Welcome, Christie Blatchford, to the world of government media (non)- relations. Farce doesn't describe it #cdnpoli http://fullcomment.nationalpost.com /2014/04/18/christie-blatchford-thegovernment-doesnt-answerquestions-about-its-militaryrecruiting-mess/ ...

Individual ized Journalisti c Individual istic Individual istic Individual istic Individual istic Individual ized Journalisti c

Individualize d Journalistic Individualist ic Individualist ic Individualist ic Individualist ic Individualize d Journalistic

Opinion Based News Personal Interest Private Life Daily Chatter Personal Interest Opinion Based News

118

