Reciprocal regulation of metabolic and stress sensors
Melissa Huestis, Sadia Rahmani, Warren W. Wakarchuk & Costin N. Antonescu
Department of Chemistry and Biology, Ryerson University, 350 Victoria Street, Toronto ON, Canada, M5B 2K3

Cancer cells use stress signalling pathways to support survival
STRESSOR
Poor tumor vascularization
Hypoxia

AMPK activity acutely increases O-GlcNAcylation
Panel A
A)

Reciprocal regulation of expression Panel A of AMPK by OGT
1 2 3 4 5 6 1- siControl 2- siOGT 3- siAMPK 4- siControl + TMG 5- siOGT + TMG 6- siAMPK +TMG

Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) Nutrient Deprivation

Oxidative Stress Metabolic Stress Genotoxic Stress AMPK regulates O-GlcNAcylation
(RF)

B)

O-GlcNAc does not impact AMPK
2.A 2.B C)

Chemotherapy or targeted therapies

D)

RESPONSE
Activation of stress signalling Cell Adaptation
(Drug resistance, etc)
Figure 1. ARPE-19 cells were treated with A-769662 (A7), 2deoxyglucose (2DG) and 5 M oligomycin (OG) and probed for global O-GlcNAc via western blotting. Shown are the mean  SE of 3 independent experiments (n=3). Figure 2. ARPE-19 cells were treated with Thiamet G (TMG) or 5-Thio-GlcNAc (5-Thio). Western blotting to probe for levels of A) O-GlcNAc and B) phosphorylated Acetyl-CoA carboxylase (PACC) was conducted and relative band intensities were quantified.

E)

Figure 3. ARPE-19 cells were transfected with OGT, AMPK or Con 7 (control) siRNA alone and with TMG and probed for A) total AMPK (AMPK-), B) O-GlcNAc Transferase (OGT), C) cellular O-GlcNAcylation, E) P-ACC and D) Actin via western blotting. Degree of OGT and AMPK knockdown was approximately 90 and 70%, respectively. *Data obtained from Sadia Rahmani, 2019

Working Model

Tumor Environment

The p38 stress response relies on AMPK activity
Panel B
CC = Compound C = AMPK inhibitor SB = SB-202190 = p38 inhibitor

Crucial stress sensors and their role in cells

A

SB +
SB +
SB +

Figure 4. ARPE-19 cells were treated with various inhibitors in the presence and absence of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). Western blot quantifications are graphically represented, and all data was normalized to levels of the loading control, clathrin heavy chain (CHC), measured.

Evidence of cross-talk has been previously established between these sensors, but little is known about their relationship during the cells stress response.

Panel C

Objective and Hypothesis
Overall Objective
Determine the degree of interplay, if any, between AMPK, p38 and OGT during the cells stress response.

p38 regulates OGT and overall O-GlcNAcylation levels during stress

 OGT and AMPK reciprocally regulate each other  p38 activation may solely depend on the presence of AMPK  p38 appears to increase O-GlcNAcylation during the stress response

Hypothesis

All stressors regulate each other simultaneously to ensure an appropriate response to cellular stress.

B

A

C

Upon induced stress, AMPK and p38 signaling pathways will together, or separately, reciprocally interact with OGT to aid in the re-establishment of homeostasis.

Future Directions
 Explore the relationship between O-GlcNAc hydrolase and AMPK.  Investigate the long-term effect of the O-GlcNAc modification on AMPK enzymatic activity.
SB +
SB + SB +

Figure 5. ARPE-19 cells were subject to various conditions and proteins were quantified from western blots. Quantifications are graphically represented, and all data was normalized to levels of the loading control, CHC, measured.

Acknowledgements

